- DEFINING THE MARKET: ENTITY AND PRODUCT CLASSIFICATIONS UNDER TITLE VII OF THE DODD-FRANK WALL STREET REFORM AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEFINING THE MARKET: ENTITY AND PRODUCT CLASSIFICATIONS UNDER TITLE
VII OF THE DODD-FRANK WALL STREET REFORM AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 31, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-7

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

65-892 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  PETER WELCH, Vermont
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          Northern Mariana Islands
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin

______

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director

Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel

Tamara Hinton, Communications Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Lucas, Hon. Frank D., a Representative in Congress from Oklahoma,
opening statement..............................................     1
Submitted letter.............................................    73
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     2

Witnesses

Gensler, Hon. Gary, Chairman, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, Washington, D.C....................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Submitted questions..........................................   159
Allison, James C., Gas and Power Risk Manager, North America,
ConocoPhillips, Houston, TX; on behalf of Working Group of
Commercial Energy Firms........................................    32
Prepared statement...........................................    34
Supplemenatry material.......................................    73
Cvrkel, Mark J., Chief Financial Officer, Susquehanna Bank,
Lititz, PA.....................................................    38
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Field, James M., Senior Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer, Deere & Company, Moline, IL...........................    42
Prepared statement...........................................    44
Submitted question...........................................   164
McMahon, Jr., Richard F., Vice President, Finance and Energy
Supply, Edison Electric Institute, Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of American Gas Association; Electric Power Supply Association.    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48
Trakimas, Ann E., Chief Operating Officer, CoBank, Greenwood
Village, CO; on behalf of Farm Credit Council..................    55
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Submitted question...........................................   165

DEFINING THE MARKET: ENTITY AND PRODUCT CLASSIFICATIONS UNDER TITLE

VII OF THE DODD-FRANK WALL STREET REFORM AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:14 p.m., in Room
1300, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Frank D. Lucas
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Lucas, Goodlatte, Johnson,
King, Neugebauer, Conaway, Fortenberry, Schmidt, Thompson,
Rooney, Stutzman, Gibbs, Austin Scott of Georgia, Fincher,
Tipton, Southerland, Crawford, Roby, DesJarlais, Gibson,
Hultgren, Hartzler, Schilling, Peterson, Holden, McIntyre,
Boswell, Baca, David Scott of Georgia, Cuellar, Costa, Kissell,
Owens, Courtney, Welch, Sewell, and McGovern.
Staff present: Tamara Hinton, John Konya, Kevin Kramp, Josh
Mathis, Ryan McKee, Matt Schertz, Debbie Smith, Liz
Friedlander, Clark Ogilvie, and Jamie Mitchell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK D. LUCAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM OKLAHOMA

The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture,
entitled, Defining the Market: Equity and Product
Classifications Under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act, will come to order.
Today the Committee will continue its efforts in a series
of hearings to review the implementation of the derivatives
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act. Already we
have heard from diverse market participants, from farmer
cooperatives to manufacturers to global financial institutions.
Rarely does Congress consider an issue that has an impact on
such diverse segments of the economy. That is why the oversight
role of this Committee is so important, and that is why I am
deeply concerned with the speed at which CFTC is crafting a new
regulatory regime for a marketplace that is important all the
way from the countryside to Wall Street, and for the U.S.
economy as a whole.
Under the current time frame, the CFTC can't possibly
comprehend the cumulative impact that over 40 proposed
regulations will have on the markets, on the economy, or
adequately evaluate and weigh the costs and the benefits of
each rule. With an economy that is still fragile and under a
directive from the American public that job growth should be
our top priority, we simply cannot impose a wave of new
regulations that are rushed and poorly vetted.
I have no doubt that today's hearing will identify
potential consequences of a rushed rulemaking process. Dodd-
Frank requires several new regulatory designations that will
define the market and, very importantly, shape the ability for
end-users across the country to affordably hedge their risk.
While Congress gave CFTC broad discretion in defining key
terms, it also directed the CFTC to provide exemptions where
appropriate, to avoid imposing unjustified and unnecessary
costs on market participants.
Yet, what we are seeing, and what we are going to hear
today, is that CFTC has proposed very broad, far-reaching
definitions, but very narrow interpretations of the exemptions
Congress authorized. The result of this approach will be a
spectrum of market participants subject to a new and sweeping
regulatory regime that far exceeds the risks those entities
pose to the financial system or to their counterparties.
One of Congress' principal objectives in Title VII was to
mitigate risk to the financial system and to prevent another
financial crisis. Yet, entities that do not come close to
threatening the financial stability and who had no role in the
financial crisis may be regulated in the same way that those
that do. That simply doesn't make sense, and that is not what
Congress intended.
Now we need to be cautious. The derivatives markets serve
an important risk mitigation role across the economy and we
cannot create significant economic disincentives to using those
markets, especially for end-users and smaller entities that can
least afford the cost of new regulation. We need to make sure
we are not eliminating these tools for commercial hedgers,
shifting more of the trading volume to the largest financial
players, or sending activity to our competitors overseas.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses today.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank D. Lucas, a Representative in Congress
from Oklahoma
Today, this Committee continues its series of hearings to review
the implementation of the derivatives provisions in the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform Act. Already, we've heard from diverse market
participants, from farmer cooperatives to manufacturers to global
financial institutions. Rarely does Congress consider an issue that has
an impact on such diverse segments of the economy.
That is why the oversight role of this Committee is so important.
And, that is why I'm deeply concerned at the speed with which the CFTC
is crafting a new regulatory regime for a marketplace that's important
from the countryside to Wall Street, and for the U.S. economy as a
whole.
Under the current timeframe, the CFTC can't possibly comprehend the
cumulative impact over 40 proposed regulations will have on the markets
and the economy, or adequately evaluate and weigh the costs and the
benefits for each rule. With an economy that is still fragile, and
under a directive from the American public that job growth should be
our top priority, we simply cannot impose a wave of new regulations
that are rushed and poorly vetted.
I have no doubt that today's hearing will identify potential
consequences of a rushed rulemaking process. Dodd-Frank requires
several new regulatory designations that will define the market, and
very importantly--shape the ability for end-users across the country to
affordably hedge their risks. And while Congress gave the CFTC broad
discretion in defining key terms, it also directed the CFTC to provide
exemptions where appropriate to avoid imposing unjustified and
unnecessary costs on market participants.
Yet what we're seeing, and what I think we're going to hear today,
is that the CFTC has proposed very broad and far-reaching definitions,
but very narrow interpretations of the exemptions Congress authorized.
The result of this approach will be a spectrum of market
participants subject to a new and sweeping regulatory regime that far
exceeds the risks those entities pose to the financial system or their
counterparties.
One of Congress' principal objectives in Title VII was to mitigate
risks to the financial system and to prevent another financial crisis.
Yet entities that do not come close to threatening financial stability
and who had no role in the financial crisis may be regulated in the
same way as those that do. That simply doesn't make sense, and it's not
what Congress intended.
We need to be cautious. The derivatives markets serve an important
risk mitigation role across the economy, and we cannot create
significant economic disincentives to using these markets--especially
for end-users and smaller entities that can least afford the costs of
new regulation. We need to make sure we're not eliminating these tools
for commercial hedgers, shifting more of the trading volume to the
largest financial players, or sending activity to our competitors
overseas.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today.

The Chairman. And with that, the chair would recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Peterson, for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
hearing. And Chairman Gensler, welcome back to the Committee.
We are here again reviewing the provisions of Title VII of
the Dodd-Frank Act. When writing this legislation, the
Committee's goal was to bring greater transparency and
accountability to the derivatives marketplace. For too long,
the over-the-counter swap market operated in darkness, and as a
consequence, the actions of some financial institutions
contributed to the worst recession our country has seen since
the Great Depression. The Dodd-Frank Act gave regulators new
tools to monitor derivatives trading. To accomplish this, we
had to identify the market activities and participants that
merited greater oversight.
However, we also worked very hard to ensure that those not
responsible for the financial collapse, such as end-users using
the market to mitigate risk, would not bear the burden of
further oversight. After all, as was mentioned, they weren't
the ones that got us into this mess in the first place.
Given that these markets have been hidden for so long, the
challenge was to distinguish the products and the persons to
which regulation should apply and to those to which it should
not. I have heard from a lot of folks their concerns about how
the CFTC proposed rules, or lack thereof, classifying certain
entities and products could potentially impact them. I am
sympathetic to those concerns, since they have been coming from
groups that were not responsible for the financial crisis. We
need to look closely at the situation before us to make sure
that this is not the case.
However, I am equally concerned that some of the big
financial firms whose irresponsible behavior Dodd-Frank seeks
to address are looking at ways to use the end-user concerns to
create loopholes for themselves. While I am not a big fan of
regulation, the requirements under Title VII are necessary to
ensure we don't get into another situation where the American
taxpayer has to bail out large financial firms.
I hope the second panel of witnesses will speak to how
their concerns can be addressed in a manner that precludes the
possibility of inadvertently creating a loophole that renders
the law obsolete.
Additionally, I would like to remind everyone that the
process of implementing a law has to have a starting point.
While not everybody may like where the CFTC is starting, these
are proposed rules, not final rules.
Interested parties, and even Members of Congress, have and
will continue to share their thoughts with the CFTC both in
person and through the comment process. I have some optimism
that at the end of the day, the resulting rules are going to be
acceptable. If they aren't, it will definitely be an area for
the Committee to address.
Again, I want to thank the chair for holding today's
hearing and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
The Chairman. Absolutely.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so the witnesses might begin
their testimony to ensure there is ample time.
With that, I would like to welcome our first witness to the
table, the Honorable Gary Gensler, Chairman of the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission in Washington, D.C., a gentleman who
has shown great patience in working with our schedule and
timing for the hearing.
Now, Chairman Gensler, we have a series of votes beginning.
I would ask perhaps with your agreement, you provide your
opening testimony and then we will break for our series of
votes and then return to begin the questioning, if that is
agreeable, Mr. Chairman.

STATEMENT OF HON. GARY GENSLER, CHAIRMAN,
COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Gensler. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and that is
certainly agreeable, anything that helps you do your work and
vote.
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee I thank you. Good afternoon.
I am pleased to testify on behalf of the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission regarding our progress thus far on a number
of rules you asked us to chat about. This is about the entity
and product definitions and the end-user exception.
The Dodd-Frank Act was actually very detailed with regard
to entity and product definitions as well as the exemption from
clearing for the end-users. But Congress did direct the CFTC
and the SEC, working together and jointly consulting with the
Federal Reserve, to further define these entity and product
definitions, though they were quite detailed in statute.
So the CFTC and SEC first put out what is called an
advanced notice of proposed rulemaking, a list of questions, in
essence. We received 80 comments, very helpful. Based on that
and based on the statute, in December, we put out a joint rule
on entity definitions. We received about 180 comments, some of
them coming in after the comment period. Even this hearing, in
essence, is a comment on those proposals, which will be very
helpful.
The proposed swap dealer definition closely followed the
criteria laid out by Congress. That criteria included whether
an entity makes a market in swaps or it holds itself out as a
swap dealer, is commonly referred to as a swap dealer,
regularly enters into swaps in the ordinary course of business.
I am actually reading statutory text. That is what Congress
said.
So we have tried to further give some guidance to the
market. Those 180 comments will be taken into consideration.
The final rule will change from the proposal based on those
comments.
The Dodd-Frank Act also defines something called a major
swap participant. It was really an entity that was not a swap
dealer but otherwise might prove to have systemic ramifications
if it failed. So we put in the proposed rule various numbers
and criteria trying to follow Congress' will that it would be a
very small handful. And, in fact, the major swap participant
category would be measured in the single digits. And so that
proposed rule is out and we are waiting to think through. We
are not going to move forward until we can summarize all the
comments, we can get Commissioner input, other regulatory input
and so forth.
We also put out a rule in December on the end-user
exception. The Dodd-Frank Act is very clear, the intent of
Congress is very clear, that if you are a nonfinancial entity
hedging a commercial risk, you don't have to use a
clearinghouse.
We have also said that even though we have not yet put out
a rule on margin and capital; that when we do so, we are going
to follow Congressional intent there as well, and the same
nonfinancial end-users will not have to post or receive margin.
I just want to cover that point because I know it is an
important one.
The proposed rule went out in December. We have gotten
1,300 comments on that. It will take us a little longer to
summarize those comments, but I think they are very helpful.
Last, I know you wanted me to chat a little bit about
product definitions. Based upon the 80 comments to that
advanced notice of proposed rulemaking, the SEC and CFTC are
working on a product definition rule. The statute is very
clear. Interest rate swaps, currency swaps, a swap, credit
default swaps and so forth, these are swaps. But we are sorting
through comments to make sure that people understand, as
Congress intended, that insurance is not a swap, for instance,
or commercial loans are not swaps. And very importantly to the
community that you all oversee, that forwards and options
embedded in forwards, just as they have been excluded from the
definition of futures for many, many decades, they are also to
be excluded from the definition of swap. And this is a very
important point to the agriculture community and the energy
community. And we will put that together in this proposal, but
consistent with what the Congress has done.
I thought I would, for one moment, just say that on timing,
we know that the Congress did say that we were supposed to
complete this task in 360 days. But we are right now at a
pause. We are analyzing all the comments.
We have two important rules still to propose: margin and
capital and the product definitions. We are not moving forward
on any final rules until we adequately summarize all the
comments, get Commissioner feedback, get regulatory feedback.
So, realistically we will start doing some final rules this
spring. But the final rules will fall well into the Fall of
this year. We are human; even that may change. But we are
committed not to do anything until we actually can summarize
the comments, summarize the cost-benefit analyses, get the
feedback that is so important, and move forward.
Congress did give us some authorities on implementation
phasing. Phasing of the effective dates is really important as
well, to look at the whole mosaic of rules so that we can lower
the cumulative cost. A rule might be finalized this summer, but
you gave us the latitude that it might not have an effective
date until much later. And we are looking at having effective
dates for some of the rules to only go effective after other
rules are effective; for instance, until a product definition
rule is finalized, maybe some other rules shouldn't be
effective. That would be one example. Or that for clearing and
other transaction mandates, that they happen for the swap
dealers early on, and then other market participants, hedge
funds and the like and asset managers maybe a little later. Of
course, there is no clearing mandate on the true end-users, the
commercial end-users.
So with that I would be happy to take any questions after
your break to go take a vote.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gensler follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Gary Gensler, Chairman, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.
Good morning, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members
of the Committee. I thank you for inviting me to today's hearing on the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission's (CFTC) progress thus far on
rules relating to entity and product definitions under Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. I am pleased
to testify on behalf of the CFTC. I also thank my fellow Commissioners
for their hard work and commitment on implementing the legislation.
The Dodd-Frank Act for the first time brought oversight to the
swaps market. By bringing comprehensive regulation to swap dealers and
mandating that standardized swaps be brought to clearing and
transparent trading, the Dodd-Frank Act helps lower risk to the
American public and bring transparency, openness and competition to
these markets.
The Dodd-Frank Act was very detailed with regard to entity and
product definitions as well as the exception from clearing for
nonfinancial end-users. Congress did direct the CFTC, however, working
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and in consultation
with the Federal Reserve, to further define those entities and
products. The Dodd-Frank Act further provides the CFTC with authority
to write rules with regard to the nonfinancial end-user clearing
exception.
This afternoon I will discuss the joint rule on entity definitions
that was proposed last fall, the CFTC's and SEC's work to propose a
product definitions rulemaking and the CFTC's proposed rule with regard
to the nonfinancial end-user exception from clearing. I also will
briefly discuss the CFTC's rule-writing process and authority to phase
effective dates of final rules. The CFTC and the SEC jointly released
an advance notice of proposed rulemaking in September to seek public
comment on entity and product definitions. Those comments informed both
agencies as we worked to propose a joint rule on entity definitions and
as we continue to work on a product definitions proposed rulemaking.
Entity Definitions Rulemaking
The Dodd-Frank Act defined two categories of market participants
that would be subject to comprehensive regulation by the CFTC: swap
dealers and major swap participants. This comprehensive regulation
includes capital and margin requirements, business conduct standards
and record-keeping and reporting requirements.
On December 1, 2010, the CFTC proposed a rule jointly with the SEC
to fulfill Congress's direction to further define the terms ``swap
dealer,'' ``major swap participant,'' ``security-based swap dealer,''
``security-based major swap participant'' and ``eligible contract
participant.'' The comment period ran through February 22, 2011. There
are presently 180 comments in the comment file, including those that
were received after the comment period closed. The Commission is
considering all of these comments.
The proposed swap dealer definition closely follows the criteria
laid out by Congress. These criteria include whether an entity makes a
market in swaps, holds itself out as a swap dealer, is commonly
referred to as a swap dealer or regularly enters into swaps in the
ordinary course of business.
The proposed rule identified characteristics to be considered in
determining whether persons are swap dealers, including whether they
tend to accommodate demand for swaps from other parties; are generally
available to enter into swaps to facilitate other parties' interest;
tend not to request that other parties propose the terms of swaps; tend
to enter into swaps on their own standard terms or on terms they
arrange in response to other parties' interest; and tend to be able to
arrange customized terms for swaps upon request, or to create new types
of swaps at their own initiative.
The Dodd-Frank Act and the proposed joint rule provide an exclusion
for an insured depository institution ``to the extent it offers to
enter into a swap with a customer in connection with originating a loan
with that customer.'' The exclusion in the proposed rule would apply to
swaps that are connected to the financial terms of the loan itself.
The Dodd-Frank Act and the Commissions' joint proposed rule provide
an exemption for a person who ``engages in a de minimis quantity of
swap dealing in connection with transactions with or on behalf of its
customers.''
The Dodd-Frank Act also defined another category of market
participants that would be subject to comprehensive regulation, called
major swap participants. These entities were defined as those that are
not otherwise swap dealers and whose failure would have systemic
ramification given their substantial participation in the swaps market.
The major swap participant definition relies on Congress's three-
prong test. In each of the three prongs, the Dodd-Frank Act spoke to an
entity that has a substantial position in swaps or substantial
counterparty exposure. The proposed rule focuses on net
uncollateralized current exposure and potential future exposure.
Therefore, it takes into consideration entities' uncleared versus
cleared swaps as well as any netting or collateral arrangements that
they may have with their counterparties.
Under the statute and the proposed rule, the major swap participant
category is very clearly limited only to those non-swap dealer entities
that have risk large enough to pose a threat to the U.S. financial
system. It is likely that, under the joint proposed rule, this category
will include only a handful of entities.
The joint proposed rule includes two changes to the definition of
eligible contract participant (ECP). First, the proposed rule
explicitly includes swap dealers and major swap participants within the
definition of ECP. Second, the rule proposes clarifications to how
certain commodity pools use retail foreign exchange products. These
commodity pools must meet certain specific requirements of the current
ECP definition.
Product Definitions
The Dodd-Frank Act was very specific in defining derivatives
products that will be required to be regulated. The Act covers the
entire swaps marketplace--both bilateral and cleared--and the entire
product suite, including interest rate swaps, currency swaps, commodity
swaps, equity swaps and credit default swaps.
The CFTC is working closely with the SEC on a proposed rule to
further define swaps, security-based swaps, mixed swaps and security-
based swap agreements, which are defined terms in the Dodd-Frank Act.
We hope to jointly propose the products definitions rule in the near
future.
In preparing the proposed rule, staff has been working to address
the more than 80 comments that were submitted by the public in response
to the joint advance notice of proposed rulemaking on definitions. Many
of the commenters asked that the Commissions specifically provide
guidance on what is not a swap or security-based swap.
Though staff is yet to make a formal recommendation to the two
Commissions, I would like to address some thoughts on three areas.
Under the Commodity Exchange Act, the CFTC does not regulate
forward contracts. Over the decades, there has been a series of orders,
interpretations and cases that market participants have come to rely
upon regarding the exception from futures regulation for forwards and
forwards with embedded options. Consistent with that history, the Dodd-
Frank Act excluded from the definition of swaps ``any sale of a
nonfinancial commodity or security for deferred shipment or delivery,
so long as the transaction is intended to be physically settled.'' I
believe it would be appropriate to interpret that exclusion in a manner
that is consistent with the Commission's previous history of the
forward exclusion from futures regulation, including the Commission's
treatment of bookouts.
Further, commenters have expressed the view that Congress did not
intend that the swap definition include state or federally regulated
insurance products that are provided by regulated insurance companies.
The staffs of the Commissions are working to address these comments in
a way that clarifies what products are insurance and therefore would
not be considered swaps. In addition, commenters have suggested that
the Commissions clarify that certain consumer and commercial
arrangements that historically have not been considered swaps, such as
consumer mortgage rate locks, contracts to lock the price of home
heating oil and contracts relating to inventory or equipment, also
should not be considered within the swap definition. The staffs of the
Commissions also are working to address these comments in a way that
clarifies that these products are not swaps.
End-User Exception
A central component of the Dodd-Frank Act is its provision to lower
risk in the financial system by generally requiring the clearing of
standardized swaps through regulated clearinghouses. Central clearing
has been a feature of the U.S. futures markets since the late-19th
century. Clearinghouses have functioned both in clear skies and during
stormy times--through the Great Depression, numerous bank failures, two
world wars and the 2008 financial crisis--to lower risk to the economy.
Congress excepted swaps transactions involving nonfinancial end-users
from the clearing requirement because they do not pose the same risk as
transactions between two financial entities.
The CFTC proposed a rule on December 9, 2010 relating to the end-
user exception. We have received 1,039 comments in response to the
proposal. In essence, the proposal says that, if a nonfinancial company
is using a swap to hedge an asset, liability, input or service that it
currently has or uses or anticipates having or using, it would qualify
for the end-user exception. In addition, the proposal says that if a
swap meets generally accepted accounting principles as a hedge or if it
is used for bona fide hedging, then the transaction would qualify for
the end-user exception. Non-financial entities would be able to hedge
interest rate risk, currency risk, physical commodity risk or other
types of risk.
The proposed rule does, however, say that if an entity is taking a
position to speculate, the transaction would not qualify for the end-
user exception.
The Dodd-Frank recognized that swaps transactions involving
nonfinancial end-users do not pose the same risk as transactions
between two financial entities. Thus, the CFTC does not intend to
impose margin requirements with regard to these transactions.
CFTC Rule-Writing Process
At this point in the process, the CFTC has come to a natural pause
as we have now promulgated proposals in most of the areas required by
the Dodd-Frank Act. As we receive comments from the public, we are
looking at the whole mosaic of rules and how they interrelate. We will
begin considering final rules only after staff can analyze, summarize
and consider public comments, after the Commissioners are able to
discuss the comments and provide direction to staff, and after the
Commission consults with fellow regulators on the rules. We hope to
move forward in the spring, summer and fall with final rules.
Phasing of Implementation
The Dodd-Frank Act gave the CFTC flexibility as to setting
implementation or effective dates of the rules to implement the Dodd-
Frank Act. For example, even if we finish finalizing rules in a
particular order, that doesn't mean that the rules will be required to
become effective in that order. Effective dates and implementation
schedules for certain rules may be conditioned upon other rules being
finalized, their effective dates and the associated implementation
schedules. For instance, the effective dates of some final rules may
come only after the CFTC and SEC jointly finalize the entity or product
definitions rules.
The Commission has the authority to phase implementation dates
based upon a number of factors, including asset class, type of market
participant and whether the requirement would apply to market
platforms, like clearinghouses, or to specific transactions, such as
real time reporting. For example: a rule might become effective for one
asset class or one group of market participants before it is effective
for other asset classes or other groups of market participants. We are
looking to phase in implementation, considering the whole mosaic of
rules. We look forward to hearing from market participants and
regulators, both in the U.S. and abroad, regarding the phasing of
implementation.
Regardless of the eventual effective dates of the swaps rules, to
provide regulatory certainty to the market, rules relating to mandatory
clearing, real time reporting, the trading requirement, margin and
business conduct standards will apply only prospectively to those
transactions that are executed after the rules go into effect.
Conclusion
I again thank you again for inviting me to testify today. I'd be
happy to take questions.

The Chairman. Thank you, Chairman Gensler, and the
Committee now stands in recess until the conclusion of these
two votes.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. The Committee will reconvene. A number of our
colleagues are still proceeding back from the floor. They will
be here shortly and join us in a timely fashion.
With that, the Chairman having concluded his opening
statement, we will now turn to questions, and it gives me the
great honor and privilege of beginning.
Mr. Chairman, in a recent speech, you put forth a timetable
for the finalization of the rules that would have them
completed by early fall. No similar indication has come from
the Securities and Exchange Commission. Do you intend to move
forward, Mr. Chairman, with the final rules even if the SEC is
not on your timetable?
Mr. Gensler. We have been working very closely with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. And, in fact, our staffs
even had a meeting yesterday about some of those schedules,
both sequencing final rules and then implementation and phasing
of the rules into the effective dates. Where we have joint
rules, naturally we would work together with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Their agenda is much busier than ours, so
we might finalize some rules before they do because they have a
lot of other topics they are dealing with. But what we are
trying to do in working with them is to align the effective
dates and the phasing in of these in a consistent manner.
The Chairman. Let's talk for a moment, Chairman, about
the--in your testimony you noted you had received 180 comments
on the proposed definitions. And I would like to highlight some
of those comments and then give you a chance to respond.
From the Coalition of Derivative End-Users, ``The
Commission's interpretation of the swap dealer and security-
based swap dealer definitions could sweep a large number of
derivative end-users into these categories.''
Another quote from a letter signed by the Farm Bureau, the
Soybean Association, the Wheat Growers, the National
Cattlemen's Beef Association, the Corn Growers, the Farmers
Cooperatives, the Grain and Feed Association, the Milk and Pork
Producers: ``We are concerned that the proposed definition of
swap dealer is overly broad and would capture entities that
were never intended by Congress to be regulated as swap
dealers. If regulatory requirements intended for large
financial firms are applied to those that offer risk management
products to farmers, those tools would become less available
and more expensive.''
And then one final quote, and then your response, of
course, Chairman, from the National Association of Regulatory
Utility Commissioners, ``We are concerned that if regulated
utilities are swept into the swap dealer definition, this will
result in unnecessary increases in consumer cost and reduce the
capital available for essential investments''.
Chairman, can you respond to these concerns from the
comments?
Mr. Gensler. The 180 comment letters are very helpful. We
are trying to summarize them now. They have been in for a few
weeks now. And you are correct on those three comment letters.
If I might just take the middle one as an example, the farm
cooperatives, we have been working very closely and meeting
with a number of the different cooperatives. We are hoping to
have additional meetings with them. Whether it be--because of
the very nature of these farm cooperatives as they deal almost
exclusively with their members, and in some cases how they
almost act as the farmers themselves, on their behalf, to get
the feed and grain, and, in this case, risk management done--we
are seeking a way to think through with them under the statute
and consistent with what Congress did, this swap dealer
definition. I think that we are working along with them to try
to take those comments in line.
With regard to the energy participants--and they were in
the first and the third category--tens of thousands of people
use these products and need to use these products as end-users,
and they are not swap dealers. There may be some handful of
energy companies that actually do provide services very similar
to Wall Street, and they may be swap dealers as Congress has
defined it. But we are working closely with energy companies,
we even have a meeting tomorrow with a group of energy
companies, again on this very topic, the swap dealer
definition.
The Chairman. But you would acknowledge that the concerns
brought up by these three comments of the 180 comments that you
mentioned in your testimony, there is the potential, then, for
some of these entities to be defined as swap dealer, and their
concerns are legitimate.
Mr. Gensler. Well, it depends on their activities, because
Congress had four tests in the statute about what is a swap
dealer. We have given some further clarification on that, but
it is really the test of whether you are making markets in
swaps, whether it be interest rate swaps or oil swaps, if you
are making a market in these swaps, and if you are known in the
trade as dealing in these swaps and the like. I think that that
is not a large group of companies, but there are companies that
we are working very closely with and hearing their concerns.
And we are not going to move forward on a final rule until we
can adequately hear from them and work through this with our
Commission.
The Chairman. Chairman Gensler, before my time expires,
when should we anticipate the proposed rule on margin and
capital?
Mr. Gensler. I would anticipate in the next few weeks. This
is one that we have been working very closely with the bank
regulators as well, and the statute says, ``To the greatest
extent possible''--but it might have said to the maximal extent
possible we are supposed to be consistent. So we are looking to
try to do this in mid-April.
The Chairman. So then, when I follow that with a question
along the line of what you have just addressed, will the rules
proposed by CFTC and the Fed be similar in nature, your
response would be?
Mr. Gensler. Yes.  Yes. Not identical, because we also
have--and this is important--we have nonbank parties that might
be dealers and they might even be nonfinancial entities, and so
we have been really sorting through this in a way so that we
don't just apply bank capital rules to companies that might be
nonbanks.
The Chairman. You have made helpful comments, but you don't
intend to apply margin transactions to transactions involving
nonfinancial end-users. If the Fed does propose to impose
margin transactions involving nonfinancial end-users, how will
the agencies resolve that inconsistency?
Mr. Gensler. I can't speak for the Federal Reserve, but I
can speak for the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. We are
not going to have a rule proposed that either requires a swap
dealer to pay or collect margin, either direction, from these
nonfinancial end-users. We think that is consistent with what
Congress directed us.
The Chairman. My time has expired. I now turn to the
Ranking Member for his questions.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gensler, welcome back again. The first question I
have is, have you watched the movie Inside Job?
Mr. Gensler. I am under oath, so I have to say no, I have
not had the opportunity to see it.
Mr. Peterson. I was hoping we could get a movie review
here, but you need to watch it.
Mr. Gensler. All right. I will commit to you to watch it
before I appear to testify before you the next time. And I will
try to open my statement with a review.
Mr. Peterson. I imagine you have been a little busy.
Some of the witnesses in the next panel will ask Congress
to push back the implementation date now scheduled for mid-
July, because they believe that you need more time to consider
views, and they need more time to see the whole picture of the
new regulatory framework.
Do you need more time?
Mr. Gensler. I don't think Congress needs to push back the
date, but we are going to take more time. We are not going to
move forward with these final rules and finish them all by
July. We have already proposed 28 of the topic areas, but for
two very important topic areas we have yet to propose, so we
would not finalize those, at the earliest, until this fall. And
you have already given us great latitude to phase the
implementation dates.
But, the regulatory framework is largely out there, and it
helps lower regulatory uncertainty that people see this whole
mosaic. And they are commenting on it, obviously, right now.
Mr. Peterson. That was my other question. So you think that
the flexibility is there for you to do this in the right way
and----
Mr. Gensler. Yes. I am told by General Counsel of the CFTC
that you all won't have me sent to jail if we miss the July
deadline; maybe for other reasons, but not that.
Mr. Peterson. And on the uncertainty issue, if Congress did
push back this date with legislation, how much will this impact
the regulatory uncertainty? Can you speculate about that?
Mr. Gensler. Well, we have heard from many commenters about
the specifics, but a broad overview as people want us to get on
with--thoughtfully, just thoughtfully--get on with the job and
then give them time to implement, and Congress gave us a lot of
latitude to give time to implement.
But there was a crisis in 2008, and there also are a lot of
people that want to bring greater transparency to the market,
and the core of the statute is to bring greater transparency to
these markets.
Mr. Peterson. We have heard many complaints about the
Commission not putting forth its proposed further definition of
several terms, including swap and mixed swap. Congress directed
you to further define these terms in conjunction with the SEC.
I think you maybe touched on this a little bit, but how is that
working with the SEC in terms of are you able to--are they
bogging you down, or is that----
Mr. Gensler. Let me say it has been an interesting process.
But it is constructive. We are getting very close. I think that
we are--I would say probably within 6 weeks that we will have
something to propose. The most important thing, we had a lot of
people commenting, and they wanted further clarification that
insurance wasn't a swap. Well, we didn't think it was, but you
have to write that all up--or that commercial loans aren't
swaps--we had to write that all up--and forwards, and this is
very important to the agriculture community, that forwards
aren't swaps, just like they aren't futures. And I know you had
a colloquy on this on the floor, I think other Members did, and
we are following those colloquies and so forth.
Mr. Peterson. Are the disagreements between the agencies
the cause for this delay or is that what--you say it is an
interesting process. Is it just you are not, you guys, there is
just not agreement between you and the SEC?
Mr. Gensler. We are now down to one small issue in a
document that is over 100 pages long. So I am focusing forward.
A lot of the delay has been that the 80 comments that came in
asked for a lot of bright line tests and clarifications on
these insurance issues, these forward issues, and these
commercial loan issues. People asked questions on some very
specific issues that we are trying to provide guidance on.
Mr. Peterson. I think I recall that there was--this was
something that kind of got in there at the end--but I think
initially our position was that you were going to make this
definition by yourself, and not the SEC. So I assume the
answer, if we would have stuck with that and if it was you, you
would have been given the responsibility for defining these
terms, it would probably be done by now.
Mr. Gensler. Well, you are kind to compliment us like that.
But, it is going to be a very strong product and it is
benefited by the SEC and CFTC sorting it through together. So
it has taken a little longer, but it will be hopefully a good
product and it will benefit from hundreds of public comments as
well.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me preface my comments, Mr. Gensler, by saying there is
a relatively small number of people I would suggest who truly
understand the nuances and the details of not only this bill
but of its progeny. I, quite frankly, am not one of them, so
you will forgive me if I ask questions that appear to be a
little amateurish, but I will do the best I can here.
The first is, speaking as a Member of Congress, when we
enacted this legislation a bit ago, I don't think anybody
intended that end-users would be designated as swap dealers.
Under your proposed definition, is it possible for an end-
user to be a swap dealer?
Mr. Gensler. I don't think that an end-user will be a swap
dealer. But there may be some nonbanks that are swap dealers,
and Congress anticipated that because it gave the CFTC some
authority over those, but it will be a very small number.
Mr. Johnson. You also in the past and otherwise have
focused--and it is good--on the de minimis exception of the
swap dealer definition. And you have also indicated that you
are receiving and have received public comment since you last
testified.
I can't speak for other Members of the Committee, but I
don't think the Committee has heard from any entity that would
actually qualify for the de minimis exception. Does that impact
your thought and your analysis of this definition and the
issue?
Mr. Gensler. We did get comments. Congress asked us to have
a de minimis exception. We made a proposal. It had three tests
to it. I suspect, just as with many things, it will change;
that the final rule will be reflective of many of the comments
on the de minimis. This is particularly important in the farm
co-op area. A number of the farm cooperatives have raised this
and we are looking at that very closely.
Mr. Johnson. A lot of us, in fact a majority of Members of
this Committee, represent districts that have a lot of small or
mid-sized banks. Is it your intention, as you look forward, to
exempt those small farm credit banks and credit unions,
community banks, from the mandatory clearing requirement, as we
authorized you to do?
Mr. Gensler. Congress did ask us to consider it. We asked
the public for some comments. We received about 15 comments on
that, and so what we are doing now is working with the bank
regulators, the Farm Credit Administration--I saw Russell here
earlier with Lee Strom and his folks, and Debbie Matz over at
the credit union. So we are working with them and sorting this
through and looking to see how to best fulfill what Congress
asked us to do.
Mr. Johnson. Just anticipating, without knowing that the
second panel, very distinguished individuals like yourself, are
going to have some significant concerns about their designation
as swap dealers, specifically the Farm Credit Bank, the
community bank. As you were here at the last Committee meeting,
and I am quoting you as best I can, you indicated that the
small--again, I am quoting specifically now, ``The small
entities, by and large, are not swap dealers. There may be one
or two exceptions; I doubt many of them are swap dealers.'' Is
that still your attitude?
Mr. Gensler. It is still my understanding. I am not--there
may be some out there, but I am not aware of community banks
that have concerns--they haven't knocked on our door, and they
have been focused, as your earlier question, on the clearing
exception. But I haven't heard many community banks come in.
And in fact, Congress provided something in the statute
explicitly, that if you are doing swaps in connection with
originating a loan, just because you were doing a swap in
connection with originating a loan, that does not make you a
swap dealer. And it is something we included in our proposed
rule in December. We have gotten some very thoughtful comments
on the specificity of that exclusion, and like many things, we
will probably change a little bit because of those comments.
Mr. Johnson. Let me just conclude because my time is
running short here. Let me just conclude by making an
observation more than a question.
Oftentimes we enact legislation that is implemented very
differently than we intended it to be implemented. Quite
frankly, sometimes we enact legislation that gets implemented
the way we wrote the language of the bill, but not our
intention.
There is a lot of impact that this legislation and your
Commission is going to have on the future of the country and
certainly of rural America. And I would just urge you to use
good common sense, practicality, and good business sense in how
you implement; because if you don't, the ramifications of what
we did and what you do are going to be felt for a long, long
time.
Mr. Gensler. I appreciate that and I will try to do my best
to follow that guideline.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. And the
chair now recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr.
Courtney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you
Chairman Gensler for your testimony today. I think all your
comments about the fact that we have to be smart about
implementing the Wall Street Reform Act are to me just common
sense. And I don't envy your job. This is a big task ahead of
you. But on the other hand, it is also important to remember
that not acting swiftly enough, aside from exposing us to what
happened in 2008, frankly, there are things happening out there
in the economy right now where not acting, is already causing
real trouble.
And I would just again focus on energy contracts right now,
which again the timeline has slipped in terms of limiting
position limits on energy contracts.
We have a situation, I am going to give you a really small
example, but I think it is connected to this. In New London
County, Connecticut, right now oil dealers are refusing to do
any lock-in contracts for next winter's home heating oil,
because the market right now is just completely out of control.
And these are guys who follow this stuff like a box score.
Every day they follow what is going on in Cushing, Oklahoma,
and I am just going to read you a quote from an oil dealer,
Wilcox Fuel, Dave Foster: ``We don't have a clue anymore. It is
really driven by media news and Wall Street and it is
disconnected from supply and demand.''
They are, again, are calling folks like me and they just
are apoplectic about the fact that we have not recognized that
there are forces in the market there that have nothing to do
with them being able to run a real business. And so I just want
to share that with you, that there are folks out there, they
are not asking me about when are these rules going to be
issued; they are asking me when are these rules going to be
enforced.
And I would like, first, to give you an opportunity to give
us an update in terms of where you are with that. Again, this
affects consumer confidence all through the economy, by the
way. I think this is bigger than New London County.
Mr. Gensler. If I am allowed to, this is very much like
what Congressman Johnson was saying, maybe from a different
perspective. I think that what Congress has done is basically
said this very large market, this swaps market, that is seven
times the size of the futures market, should have the
transparency, and so that the public, that fuel oil company in
Connecticut, or anyone in rural America could have the
confidence in these markets. Because at the core, if they don't
have confidence in the markets, they might not use them as
much.
These products are actually critical to our economy. They
are critical to lock in a price and gain certainty so you can
focus on what you are good at in your business, whether it is
planting the crops or buying the oil or refining the oil, or
just being a retailer.
Mr. Courtney. The irony is that these are the guys for whom
this market was supposed to operate so they could hedge a risk
and actually do a long-term contract and use it.
Mr. Gensler. So realistically, if we are able to finish the
rule sometime this fall--and we might slip from that too--but
if we are able to, this marketplace will start to get more
transparency in 2012. It won't all happen at once, because we
do plan to use the authority you gave us to phase this. There
will be some phasing-in on this.
Mr. Courtney. Again, there are folks that are really
looking to you, frankly, very seriously for assistance.
The other point I just want to make real quick. My other
committee is Armed Services. Secretary Mabus of the Navy was
testifying before us the other day, and he pointed out that
every $10 increase in a barrel of oil costs the U.S. Navy's
annual fuel bill $300 million. Now society in general is
calculating that speculation accounts for $20 of the price per
barrel. I don't know if that is right or wrong, but I just
throw that out there. It is a fairly credible source.
When we look at your budget and what is being proposed in
terms of the H.R. 1 and the savings just to the Navy--Air Force
uses even more fuel. Stabilizing in a rational market, fuel
costs is not just for consumers out there, it is also for the
taxpayer. And, again, we should hopefully put that in
perspective about the importance of your agency and its
mission.
Mr. Gensler. I thank you. Our $168 million budget and what
the President asked for in this year's budget of $261 million,
or next year's budget of $308 million, I think is a good
investment to the American public. I know it is a hard thing to
ask for more money, but I know it is a good investment.
Mr. Courtney. Well we are going to pay for it, again in our
DOD costs, which is the number one consumer of fossil fuels in
the world, if we don't have a market that actually functions
the way they can count on. With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
turns to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Conaway, to be
recognized for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gensler, welcome. Given the extensive comments on
the swap dealer definition, do you have any intention of re-
proposing that rule before you go final with it in order to
make sure you get it right?
Mr. Gensler. We are taking those comments in. We are going
to be working with the Securities and Exchange Commission and
our goal is to try to finalize this amongst one of the earlier
rules, because a great many people in the market look for that.
Again, Congress was very detailed in what a swap dealer was. We
will modify----
Mr. Conaway. On the four tests, Mr. Gensler, do you have to
beat all four tests? Because the last one says if you are just
dealing, if you enter into swap transactions of a certain
volume that captures you as a dealer. Is that your attitude
that--we had a milk co-op sit there last time, after you left,
and said they fall under the definition. And they simply do
swap-like--some dealer-like stuff for their members. And so if
the four tests include just doing it on behalf of yourself and
your members, how do you get out from under the swap?
Mr. Gensler. You are right. The Congressional statute was
an or not an and and it is the fourth test. You are correct, it
has this term about in the ordinary business or something. And
so then we were trying to give some more meaning to that, to
limit it in a sense, to give more clarity to that. But we have
continued to meet with the farm co-ops, not just in dairy but
in grain as well, because I think that----
Mr. Conaway. The idea, though, just to make sure you get it
right. You mentioned earlier in the conversation that you are
going to implement these rules in over a period of time. Will
you expose that implementation scheme that you put in place, as
you understand how these things roll out, for public comment to
see that you have the wisdom of the collective group? I know
that would be fully under your authority, but it would make
some sense to me if you would expose that implementation scheme
to the general public for some period of comment so that we
will have a chance to----
Mr. Gensler. That is something we are looking at. In each
of our rules, we have asked for implementation phasing--or
implementation dates from people. We have had a lot of people
come in. We are looking at whether to have some public
roundtables or, as you say, exploring how best to expose it.
Mr. Conaway. I do think it would be helpful for all of us
to see what your team had proposed from an implementation issue
to make sure that there wasn't something that you all are blind
to that the rest of us might see.
We had some conversation the last time we were here about
the cost-benefit analysis that you do, either under the CMA Act
or under the President's Executive Order and all that kind of
good stuff, but in one of your recent rulemakings on the cost-
benefit, the statement was: For costs the Commission has
determined that the cost to market participants and the public,
if not adopted, are substantial. But then on the benefits you
said: The Commission is determined that the benefits of the
proposed rule are many and substantial.
Pretty casual swipe at a really important piece. Now many
laws where agencies, not just yours, but other agencies who
have done a cavalier approach to cost-benefit analysis, have
been challenged in court. Can you help us understand that there
is more depth to the cost-benefit analysis under these rules
than just they are substantial, and if we don't do them or if
we do do them, pretty cavalier comments just on the way you
phrased it.
Mr. Gensler. Well, one of the best ways of getting comments
from the public is a hearing. And each of our teams summarizing
public comments, one of the things they are specifically doing
is summarizing all of the cost-benefit comments from the
public, so that the Commissioners can take those into
consideration, and whether it be qualitative or quantitative,
that we can include that before we go to any final rule, and as
you say, to include anything that we have heard from the public
with that regard.
Mr. Conaway. There are some pretty dramatic differences
between your cost--your expected cost to participants and folks
that deal--in what they themselves see under these proposed
rules. So making sure that we have not done something that
costs way too much money versus the benefit that we get, would
be helpful.
And one final comment. As you roll out this entire scheme
when we get it in place, can we do an interim final rule for
the whole package so that the industry, the participants,
everyone can see how all of this matrix of new regulations fit
together to make sure we get it right? I understand going at it
a piece at a time, but it seems to me beneficial to the agency,
as well as those who try to comply with your rules, if they saw
the whole matrix at some final point, it would still allow for
some fine-tuning, so to speak.
Mr. Gensler. We have nearly completed all the proposals.
There are these two that I think will be out to the public,
capital and margin, hopefully in the next few weeks, and the
product definition may be a few weeks after that. We don't plan
to move on any final rules in April. There may be some very
noncontroversial, small rules that we start to move on in May.
We have the discretion to continue to take public comment and
include it in public comment files, and have done so. We have
used that discretion very liberally.
This meeting right here, this Committee meeting, will be
part of our public comment file as well. So the mosaic will be
out there really before we move on final rules of any
substance.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Holden.
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gensler, it is nice to see you again. I had two
issues I wanted to raise, but you more or less have addressed
them; so I will just make a couple of comments about agreeing
with my colleagues that we are, on this Committee, hearing a
great deal from the agriculture sector and the energy sector,
particularly public utilities, about the definition. So I am
glad to hear you are going to be working with them.
And following up on Mr. Johnson's comments about the
exemption for small banks, Farm Credit System, and credit
unions, I would just encourage you to stay engaged and listen
to their concerns, because it is my understanding that the
overwhelming majority, over 90 percent of the swap dealing, is
in the hands of 25 entities or fewer. So you will have to be
very careful with smaller banks.
As a matter of fact, on the next panel, Mr. Cvrkel from
Susquehanna Bank, headquartered in Pennsylvania, will be
testifying. It is a bank of about $14 billion in assets, I
believe, and I will ask him when he is testifying or taking
questions. In the last 3 or 4 years, they have only done about
54 swaps compared to the overwhelming majority. I think you
need to be careful that these are useful instruments in smaller
banks and other entities, but at the same time if we are too
burdensome on them, they are not going to participate.
So I just would encourage you to stay at the table and
listen to what they have to say. Thank you. I yield back. Do
you want to comment?
Mr. Gensler. No. I appreciate the comment. I read the
testimony and look forward to working not just with Susquehanna
but many banks of similar ilk.
Mr. Holden. Well, this is a Pennsylvania interest here.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair turns to the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gensler, thank you for being here. Yesterday you
and I talked--just a while ago, one of your cohorts, Ms.
Sommers, testified before my hearing that I had on the
Financial Services Committee. She said some things that were
very concerning to me. Kind of one of the things that she
alluded to here, she says that we are voting on proposals
containing a very short, boilerplate, cost-benefit analysis
section. And she referred to the President's Executive Order,
although it does not apply to your agency, and taking into
account both quantitative and qualitative issues and the cost
and the benefits of those. And one of the things that she
brought up was an interesting point, is that when you do a
better job of those cost-benefit analyses, and as you quantify
those various proposed regulations and you put numbers onto
them, that she feels like, she said, that she thinks
Commissioners make better decisions. I think we would all agree
that that would be hopefully the goal of every agency is that
when we put people to serve in the capacity of Commissioners,
that they avail themselves of every opportunity to make the
best decisions.
And as I didn't get to hear all of my friend from Texas'
testimony, but what we are talking about with Dodd-Frank is we
are not talking about just a little tweaking here of the
financial markets.
We are talking about a major change in those financial
markets and maybe even influencing the way capital moves and
how capital is priced and how capital is distributed in this
country, which equates to jobs. Basically, the way we create
jobs in this country is people have an idea and they find the
capital to do that, or they have a business and they expand it.
And these markets have become a very effective tool for many of
the people that use them. They have created jobs and they have
created more certainty in their companies.
And so I am a little concerned. What would be your response
to Ms. Sommers' response, that you all aren't doing a good job
over there doing your cost-benefit analysis?
Mr. Gensler. I am very proud of the work of the staff and
the five Commissioners. We are in compliance with the
Commodities and Exchange Act, section 15(a), which Commissioner
Sommers also said yesterday, and we are looking very closely at
the comments that people have put forward on cost-benefit
analysis. I can assure you we are not going to move forward on
final rules until they are summarized and Commissioners get to
deliberate with each other about that and with the staff.
I think that what the Dodd-Frank Act does at its core is it
brings transparency to these markets and lowers risk in these
markets, and competition and open competition in these markets
will lower some of the barriers to entry to many banks. If a
small bank wanted to actually enter the market in a way, right
now this is a highly concentrated market where the information
advantages are more towards the financial community in New York
than to the tens of thousands of users, whether they be in
Texas, my home State of Maryland or elsewhere.
And I think you all in passing the Act tried to tip that
balance a little bit to most of the corporations that use these
products.
Mr. Neugebauer. I don't think she said that you weren't in
compliance, but she said compliance is, to that particular
section, is a relatively interpretive term. You can be in
compliance or you can do a good job. I think what she was
saying is that somehow within the agency, you all have come to
the conclusion, hey, we are complying with that section.
But, as she said, as complicated and as important as many
of these things are and with the speed with which they are
coming out, that there is really not any way that the kind of
comprehensive analysis that should be done for the potential
impact and the consequences that these changes could make on
the market. And as you say, I don't think anybody here
disagrees with the fact that markets should operate with
integrity and transparency.
But many of the rules that you are putting out will
actually determine the people who can use some of these tools
and how they can use them, and whether they can afford to use
them and whether those tools continue to be advantageous to
their organization.
And so I would just say that I think Mr. Bachus and I wrote
all of you a letter here recently and said, Do you know what?
We are not interested in speed here. We are interested in doing
the right thing.
And if a lot of people think that Dodd-Frank is the right
thing to do, I think all those same people who voted for it
would probably also, without speaking on their behalf, would
say, yes, we voted for it but we hope it does what we intended
for it to do. We hope that the consequences and the outcome has
been measured, and we know what we are getting before we go
down that road. And some people say, well, Mr. Frank said
today, ``Well, we will fix it if we made a mistake.''
The problem is when you start changing the behavior in a
lot of these markets, then going back and trying to, ``fix
it,'' has even more dire consequences than taking a little
extra time to make sure that we get this right.
And so what you are going to continue to hear from me is
that I am concerned about the speed, I am concerned about the
sequence, and I am certainly concerned about the analysis and
thought that is going in in this rulemaking process.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now turns to the gentlelady from Alabama, Ms.
Sewell, and recognizes her for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you so much.
First, welcome, Mr. Chairman. I admire what you are doing
and really feel that the Commission has been charged with a
very special duty, and I know it is to get it done in a timely
fashion is what we all want, as well as to be fair.
I have one question really. Where are you in the decision
making process when it comes to determining whether to exempt
the Farm Credit System institutions from the definition of end-
user?
Mr. Gensler. We asked the public for some comments. We
received about 15 comments on this. And now we are working with
the Farm Credit Administration, as well as the banking
regulators and the credit union folks, as to how to piece this
together.
If we were to move forward, we would have to do a proposal
under the statute and get further public comments on that. But
right now we are in--similar to the rules, we are sort of
taking the comments that we received and are working with the
other regulators on how to craft something.
Ms. Sewell. Where do you think you will come out on that?
Mr. Gensler. I don't want to get ahead of the process and
my fellow Commissioners. But we take seriously what Congress
said, that we shall consider this, so I take it seriously in
the entire statute, but this was the direction from Congress.
Ms. Sewell. Absolutely. Thank you. I yield back the rest of
my time.
The Chairman. The chair now turns to the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Goodlatte, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Goodlatte. Except I am going to stay in Virginia.
The Chairman. Virginia. Virginia. Very good point.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for
holding this hearing. And, Mr. Gensler, I thank you for
participating today.
I understand that my colleague, Mr. Peterson, asked you if
you had seen the movie, Inside Job. And you said you hadn't
seen it yet. I recommend you see it.
And let me just ask you a question about my main concern
here, why I voted against Dodd-Frank, and why I am concerned
about where you are headed. I think that what we should be
doing is clearly defining what you can and can't do and
throwing the book at the bad guys who do what they are told
they can't do, and not going into the amount of regulations
that you are imposing on people who are trying to conduct a
legitimate business and making it all that more difficult to do
that.
So my first question is, one of the things revealed in that
interesting documentary is the fact that apparently a number of
the major investment banking firms sold various derivatives to
their customers at the same time they were betting against
their customers themselves.
What can you tell us about that? And what is being done to
cure that?
Mr. Gensler. Your question and much of what happened in
that was in credit default swaps. Some of that jurisdiction
will be at the Securities and Exchange Commission, but I will
speak more broadly. Because what Congress gave the Securities
and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission is new authorities on anti-manipulation and to
protect the markets from abusive practices. And I don't know
how the Securities and Exchange Commission will deal with that
on these single name and these basket of credit default swaps
where a lot of that, you are right, occurred.
What we are doing at the CFTC is we have proposed a new
anti-manipulation standard which is consistent with what
Congress did. Congress gave us a new anti-manipulation
standard, and that is out for comment. We would like to
finalize that to make sure that we can pursue actions in this
marketplace.
Mr. Goodlatte. One of the issues that--I don't know how
related to that is--but attempting to cure some of this is--the
categories of swap dealer and major swap participant are
mutually exclusive. If an entity is a swap dealer, that entity
may not be a major swap participant. This makes sense, because
swap dealers are the sell-side of swaps and major swap
participants are the buy-side, basically the largest customers.
Sellers and buyers should not be in the same regulatory
category, and Dodd-Frank appropriately provides for that.
Do your regulatory proposals take this basic difference
into account?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. I would think that there would be only,
at most, a handful of major swap participants; that somebody
who is not a swap dealer, but yet for some reason is so large
or substantial--is what Congress used the term--that their
failure would have a systemic effect on the economy.
And I should say on your first question, we do also have
authorities on business conduct standards for selling swaps to
pension funds and municipalities. And Congress asked us to be
very focused on the sales practices in that regard as well.
Mr. Goodlatte. I know that some have expressed concerns
that swap dealers and major swap participants will be regulated
the same. Do you propose to regulate them the same, even though
one is the seller and one is the buyer? And why should buyers
and sellers be subject to the same sales practice rules, when
the buyers are not indeed sellers?
Mr. Gensler. You raise a very good question, and I am going
to go back and think about that and ask about that on the sales
practices. But the basic answer is because the statute did not
differentiate between the two. Once one is designated a major
swap participant, one of these handful of companies that are so
large, the statute just regulates them the same. But you raise
a very good question about sales practices.
Mr. Goodlatte. So are you suggesting that we need to take
further legislative action because your hands are tied; or are
you able to make a difference there?
Mr. Gensler. Could I get back to you on that in terms of
the sales practices for major swap participants?
Mr. Goodlatte. My time is limited, so let me go on to
another question.
I have heard from some businesses that they are uncertain
about how they will be designated and which rulemaking will
apply to them. Is there any documentation that provides various
market entities, and specifically end-users, guidance regarding
which of the various rulemakings are applicable to them?
Mr. Gensler. Well, for the vast majority of end-users, they
are not going to be swap dealers, they are not going to have to
use a clearinghouse unless they choose to, and they will
benefit from the transparency in the marketplace. There will be
changes in the marketplace, of course, because the financial
companies will be using these clearinghouses, but they will be
out of it.
Mr. Goodlatte. With the leave of the Chairman, I will ask
you one more question.
I am concerned that the CFTC is putting out rules piecemeal
for comment. Many of these regulations are highly
interdependent, and I am concerned that we will not get to see
the full picture of how they work together or a meaningful
analysis of the cost and the impact of the regulations. Would
you be willing to put forward a full package of proposed
regulations for comment before they are all adopted, or at
least put them in packages so that we and market participants
are able to fully appreciate their cost and their impact?
Mr. Gensler. I think, actually, that is nearly what we have
done. We haven't finalized anything and we have two major rules
left, which we will probably do in the next 4 to 6 weeks.
Mr. Goodlatte. Will those rules be out and evaluated before
the first rules you issued take effect?
Mr. Gensler. Yes.
Mr. Goodlatte. That is helpful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
The Chairman. With that, the gentleman's time has expired.
The chair will now try in a more accurate fashion to turn to
the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Boswell, and recognize him for his
5 minutes.
Mr. Boswell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just briefly, I wasn't here for all that you have been
through already, but thank you for coming. You have a big job.
And I am wondering if you want to comment on are we giving you
the tools to do what you have to do. Have you got the tools to
follow through?
Mr. Gensler. Well, you are kind to ask. We have the tools
to write the rules and excellent staff, but we do not have the
tools to oversee the market. We have estimated that we need
about 45 percent more people to oversee a market that is seven
times the size of what we----
Mr. Boswell. We have talked about this before. Can you give
us some kind of a figure--dollars, number of people?
Mr. Gensler. The President has put forward a budget of $308
million for our agency for 2012, and $261 million for this
year. We are currently funded at $168 million. In terms of
people, we have about 675 people now, and the President has put
forward 983 people.
We only spend $31 million on technology a year. We have
asked to go up to about double that. That is less than about 1
day of technology spending for some of the biggest Wall Street
banks.
Mr. Boswell. So what happens if we are going to have to--
you can't do the job, you don't have the tools, you don't have
the personnel if we continue with this; or do we back off and
we don't do the regulation, or what happens?
Mr. Gensler. I think the challenge for the agency is if we
even kept flat on funding, is that we will have to shift
resources that currently oversee the futures market, or even
agricultural futures and energy futures, over to some of these
financial swaps. The mission is, right now, far broader. The
market is seven times its size and far more complex. And so we
will not be able to pursue the Ponzi schemes. We will not be
able to promote the transparency in the markets that I think
the public deserves.
Mr. Boswell. Well, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman, in just
a moment. But it just seems to me like we have to lay this out
in broad daylight and decide what we want to do with it,
whether we are going to give up the oversight, or whatever. I
don't know. I don't envy your job here. I am not sure what we
are going to do.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now turns to the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs.
Schmidt, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Gensler, for coming.
I want to focus a little bit on farm credit and community
banks. Is it your intention to extend the insured deposit
institution's swaps in connection with loans exemption to the
farm credit banks?
Mr. Gensler. I know that a number of comment letters have
come in on this. The statute speaks of insured depository
institutions and did not speak in a broader way, so I am
familiar with the comments that have come in. I know that our
staff and General Counsel's office is taking a close look at it
because the statute actually just uses the term insured deposit
institutions.
Mrs. Schmidt. So you don't know how you are going to handle
that?
Mr. Gensler. I don't know. I am apprised of it. I know that
staff is looking very closely at it.
Mrs. Schmidt. Because I believe during the last hearing
when you appeared before the Committee, you were asked about
small banks and farm credit institutions. And I believe you
said that the small entities, by and large, are not swap
dealers; there may be one or two exceptions. And you further
said you couldn't speak for thousands. And then you said, I
doubt that many of them are swap dealers.
And in light of the fact that we have a farm credit bank
and a community bank here today that have expressed concerns in
their testimony--or will be expressing concerns, because we
have received the written testimony--about being designated as
swap dealer, what would you say in light of that response?
Mr. Gensler. My answer was trying to answer a question
about banks smaller than $10 billion. I think the banks you are
hearing from today are $14 billion and maybe--I am sure they
can tell you how large, $50 or $60 billion.
Mrs. Schmidt. You think $14 billion is a large bank?
Mr. Gensler. Congress actually defined it in the statute.
They used the term small bank, and then right below it it said
$10 billion or less. So I was using a Congressional term.
Mrs. Schmidt. So do you think we should change that
benchmark?
Mr. Gensler. I am just using it----
Mrs. Schmidt. Because, sir, I come from a banking
background, and $14 billion is not a large bank. I don't know
why $10 billion was the threshold. That would be a very small
bank, in my opinion, but it is certainly not a large bank. So
should we change the benchmark, the definition?
Mr. Gensler. I think the statute is a strong statute; I am
not asking Congress for any changes.
Mrs. Schmidt. Okay. And then I just want to go back to the
swap issue. We have heard concerns, and I know you have
received public comments, that active trading in the swap
market by itself could make an entity a swap dealer. Is that
your intention?
Mr. Gensler. What we have put forward is a rule that
further defines what Congress laid out, four provisions for
what a swap dealer is, and so we are taking those comments in.
But the statutory language was, ``if you make a market in
swaps, or you are commonly known as a `swap'.''
And then the fourth prong, which was one that talked about
in the ordinary course, is where we thought there was some need
for further definition. But in essence, if you are
accommodating demand or facilitating customers in swaps, it
would be sort of part of the facts and circumstances.
Mrs. Schmidt. So again, back to this Act that you are now
trying to implement rulemaking on, it appears there is a lot
more ambiguity or questions that arise from the Act itself, and
maybe we should revisit the Act.
Let me go on again. In the definition of security-based
swap dealer, the SEC plans to adopt their dealer trade
distinction with respect to who must register as a security-
based swap dealer. The CFTC appears to have rejected this
distinction for the swap dealer definition, and now again there
seems to be some sort of tension. Can you clarify this?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. We did not, as our markets are different.
They have in that definition, that dealer and trader
definition, they talk about inventory and the like; inventory
of securities, which is not easily or readily adaptable to the
interest rate swap market; what is the inventory of interest
rates, for instance? Or even, for instance, in the oil markets,
which is not like an inventory of securities. So there are some
challenges just because of the specificity in their rule.
Mrs. Schmidt. I yield back, but----
Mr. Holden. Will the gentlewoman yield on her point about
$10 billion for me to ask the Chairman a question?
Mrs. Schmidt. Yes, please.
Mr. Holden. I thank the gentlewoman.
Chairman, you do have the authority to exempt above $10
billion, correct? It is just below $10 billion you must?
Mr. Gensler. Again, as I understand, the statute asked us
that we shall consider exempting from the clearing requirement
the small banks, and then it lists banks under $10 billion,
credit unions under $10 billion, and of course farm credit
institutions under $10 billion.
Mr. Holden. But you have the authority above $10 billion as
well.
Mr. Gensler. I am just speaking to what--I mean, Congress
directed us to take this up. We are taking it up right now,
working with the institutions. I believe that the
Congresswoman's question about swap dealers, what I said
earlier and I will say now, I am not aware of institutions less
than $10 billion. There may be some out there, but I am not
aware of them. They haven't been knocking on our doors, that
say they would be a swap dealer or anything like that.
Mrs. Schmidt. May I have just an additional 30 seconds?
The Chairman. The gentlelady reclaims her time. The
gentlelady has an additional 30 seconds.
Mrs. Schmidt. Sir, you said that $10 billion was the
threshold. I believe you said it is a suggestion, not an
absolute benchmark of $10 billion. And I believe you have the
authority to go above that, the way this law was written.
So, again, there is a lot of ambiguity in this Act, but $10
billion was not the absolute benchmark. You could go above that
to $14 or $15 billion.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Costa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to first kind of revisit a subject that we discussed
the last time you testified, as it related to the potential of
regulating of foreign currency swaps. My understanding is that
the Secretary of the Treasury is considering or leaning toward
a decision that foreign currency swaps should be regulated. We
are all following very closely what is happening with the Euro
and a number of countries within the EU, and of course
situations with China and other foreign currencies that
obviously impact our trade.
And so I guess my question, my first question, is what
impact would such a decision have, if any, on producing a
definition of a swap, or any other rulemaking that is already
underway, if we start to regulate foreign currency swaps?
Mr. Gensler. I think we have contemplated that in our
rulemaking and are contemplating it in the product side as
well, that Congress gave the Secretary the determination; he
could determine that foreign currency swaps are out, but we
have sort of contemplated that in our rulemaking.
Mr. Costa. Can that occur on a separate track?
Mr. Gensler. I believe it can in terms of our rulemaking.
We would take it into consideration in terms of phasing
implementation. For instance, there is not a swap data
repository for foreign currency right now. There are swap data
repositories, for instance, in credit default swaps. That is
one of the things we are taking into consideration. It might
just take more time to stand up, for instance, some of the
infrastructure.
Mr. Costa. Can you tell us this afternoon, at this time,
what you think you are going to do?
Mr. Gensler. Well, it is the Secretary of the Treasury's
determination.
Mr. Costa. I understand.
Mr. Gensler. No. I don't believe it would be prudent for
me----
Mr. Costa. Not before its time, right?
Mr. Gensler. It wouldn't be prudent for me to----
Mr. Costa. Following up on Mr. Boswell's line of
questioning on resources, under the Dodd-Frank law there are a
host of issues that we have discussed here this afternoon, from
applications for new swap execution facilities, designated
clearing organizations and swap data repositories, swaps to see
if clearing mandates should apply, requests for exemptions to
the law's provisions, and other requests from the business
community.
You made a comment earlier on your current resources
available and your fine staff and what your capabilities are
today. When you go down that list that I just stated, what gets
included or excluded based upon how much your budget is?
Mr. Gensler. It really depends on where the budget is. If
we were cut, a lot of it goes away; we can't even oversee the
futures market much. If we just stay flat, we will have to
start reallocating people. We did have a very real crisis in
2008. These markets are not as transparent as Congress has
wished them to be. We would be relying on the markets to be
complying with Dodd-Frank, but we wouldn't be able to actually
examine for it and oversee the markets with regard to swaps, as
you have directed us to.
Mr. Costa. Well, to use a medical terminology, first, do no
harm, when a surgeon is in ER, on a serious case they triage,
and so they deal with the most urgent matters first. So on that
list, I assume that when you do get a chance to sit down on a
Friday afternoon with your staff and figure out, now that we
have these rules almost presented and we are moving to the next
stage, where are your priorities going to be?
Mr. Gensler. Well, the biggest priority is to increase our
technology budget so we can aggregate the data and actually
make it public. We have proudly put out, every Friday,
Commitments of Traders Report in the futures market. We would
like to do something similar in the swaps market if we could
actually have the technology and aggregate data.
For the hundreds of applications that will come in, we
would like to be responsive. We would like to have a
professional on the end of the phone to answer the questions
and try to walk people through some very new rules and give
them regulatory guidance. I don't see how we will be able to do
that.
Mr. Costa. So if you get the President's full request, you
can do all of the above?
Mr. Gensler. I think that if we get the President's full
request we can grow into it, and it will take a couple of years
to grow into it. But, yes, the President's request helps us
grow into these responsibilities.
Mr. Costa. And if you get half of it or something less, you
will have to do the prioritization.
Mr. Gensler. That is correct. That is correct. And if we
are cut from where we are now, at some point I would have to
tell this Committee we could not fulfill our mission. We
certainly could not fulfill it if we were cut back to 2008
funding levels.
Mr. Costa. Well, I think that needs to be clear. And you
should also tell this Committee if it is something less, half
or less, what you can do and what you can't do. I think that is
an area--when you try to create an expectation for a
transparency level and for all elements of these derivatives, I
just think people need to know what they can expect and what
they can't.
Mr. Gensler. Part of the investment in an agency like ours
is it is like investing, and you don't know when--to use your
medical analogy, it is like the doctor saying, ``Stay on a diet
and maybe don't smoke or something.''
I can't tell you that in 2012 there will be a crisis. But
we know in 2008 there was a crisis and swaps were part of it.
And Congress reacted appropriately. We are trying to implement
the law consistent with the intent, but if we don't oversee
this market, the American public is prone to risk.
Mr. Costa. I would like to quickly, before my time expires,
move over to another area. You touched upon it, Mr. Conaway
touched upon it. When we are dealing with some of the various
commodities, whether we talk about wheat, soybean, milk,
others--anecdotally, and I have nothing to base this on because
I don't deal with these trades, but I get complaints from a lot
of my farmers that there is a lack of transparency, there is a
lack of activity, that it seems to be an in-house game.
It is hard from my perspective to really determine whether
or not these anecdotal stories really--to what degree they are
accurate. Have you got any sense, based upon getting back to
the whole purpose on why this was created, going back to the
1930s--not the exotic sorts of mechanisms that you deal with
today--but getting back to what is important out on the farm to
see what is going on in Chicago and see what is going on
elsewhere for our farmers and ranchers?
Mr. Gensler. Well, hedgers meet speculators in a
marketplace. If a farmer needs to lock in a price at harvest
time, it is usually a speculator on the other side of that
transaction.
But it is true that over the decades that the markets have
been--the percent has gone up that are financial actors or
speculators in that marketplace. And it is why people want the
transparency, so they can still have the confidence that the
price they get for their corn or wheat or soy or milk, as you
said, is actually reflective of supply and demand, and that
there is integrity in the market.
Mr. Costa. A lot of my dairymen complain, they just think
there is a total lack of transparency, that it is an in-house
deal, and they have little way to really get a sense that
prices aren't set without their ability to have the input.
Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now turns to the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Tipton, to be recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Gensler, for being here.
I just have a few questions that I would like to get some
clarification on.
You commented earlier that you are seeking to work with the
various entities in terms of some of the resolution in regards
to the rulemaking. Can you describe what it means to be working
with them? Is it just taking the comment; they put out an idea
and you say, well, here is the problem? Is there that give-and-
take going back and forth, or is it just receiving comment; we
will consider it and we will make up our own mind.
Mr. Gensler. If I might, there is some of both. We have had
well over 600 meetings. I had one on the end here with the good
gentleman at ConocoPhillips that is about to testify that we
will put on our website as well. So he will be able to answer
you whether there was give-and-take, but it is some of both, if
I want to be----
Mr. Tipton. Well, I appreciate that. I guess one of the big
concerns that I always have--small business guy--and we are
probably hearing that in terms of an underlying theme through
some of the questioning that is going on--is really some of the
cost-benefit analysis that is really going in that. Can you
describe for me how you approached cost-benefit analysis in
this process?
Mr. Gensler. Many years ago in our statute a section you
will hear about, it is called 15(a) was added, and it has five
criteria, five characteristics we have to look at. And it talks
about the integrity of the market and the price discovery
function and the lowering of risk. So it is around those things
that somewhat inherently are qualitative. Commenters have come
in with some quantitative figures as well. And so we try to
take all of that into consideration.
One thing for me, as one Commissioner, is trying to find
what Congress asks us to do in a way that lessens the burden or
cumulative cost, because there are things in the statute that
will cost money, that is true. But then there is a way to find
a least-cost way, or find a way that we can spread it out and
have it phased in terms of implementation, to take into
consideration the cost as well.
Mr. Tipton. Can you maybe just tie that in just a little
closer here? Like an electric utility, as a swaps dealer being
designated, how are you going to approach the cost-benefit
analysis on that?
Mr. Gensler. The swap dealer definition is very precise in
the statute. So many electric utilities wouldn't be; but if
they were, then it is really trying to walk through with them
what are the capital margining requirements--because we are
supposed to set the capital and margin regime for these
nonbanks. And it doesn't have to be the same as the banks. The
statute says that to the maximum extent practical we have to be
consistent, but it didn't say we have to be the same.
It is walking through the business conduct standards and
how they might apply to some of these nonbank swap dealers,
whether it is phasing the timing or whether they apply
differently, to try to walk that through.
Mr. Tipton. It sounds a little iffy to me in terms of
setting some of those capital requirements. It just sounds a
little iffy to me in terms of how you are trying to define
those capital requirements for entities that are nonbanks.
Mr. Gensler. Well, one of the challenges is that those
capital rules have been done for banks, insurance companies,
broker-dealers, and so Congress gave us a task and it was
specific to nonbanks. We are hoping to propose that in the next
few weeks. We are very much looking forward to public comment
on it, because we will be assisted by that public comment. We
have already been assisted by many of the meetings we have had
with industry people.
Mr. Tipton. Okay. And I appreciate that assistance.
I want to go back to an earlier question that was raised in
regards to the packaging, the entire package. Did I understand
you correctly that you are willing to be able to bring that
back as a package for comment? Because I deeply respect the
comments of do no harm, and unintended consequences.
Mr. Gensler. Well, I just want to be precise. We have
already put out rules on 28 of the 30 topic areas. There are
two significant ones. There is capital and margin, there is a
product definition, which will be out in a number of weeks. We
don't intend to move on any final rules in April. So the mosaic
is largely out there and will be, in essence, out there before
we move on any major rule. There might be one or two very small
rules that we move on--an example is the definition of
agricultural commodity. This is one rule we might move on
early, but it is not the same category.
Mr. Tipton. I guess my point on this is it is not so much
how I am viewing it as mosaic, as impressionistic art. When we
are up close, we aren't really seeing it, it is coming in in
little bits and pieces; when we step back, we see the whole
picture. Being able to come back in and revisit these, once we
then have that interaction with industry, the actual impacts
that are going to be there.
Mr. Gensler. We have used the discretion we have under the
Administrative Procedures Act to continue to consider comments,
just like this hearing is a comment. And we have gotten many
comments we have put in even after it is out there.
With all respect, industry does know Dodd-Frank is a full
mosaic itself, and now we are almost there; that we have
finalized this proposal stage, and then we will move to the
finalization stage.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Gensler.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair turns to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Thompson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gensler, thank you for being here and for your
testimony.
My question has to do with the National Futures
Association's petition to the CFTC to narrow the Rule 4.5
exemptions provided in mutual funds, among others, from the
definition of the commodity pool operator. Now, the petition
was based on the activities of three firms, yet your recent
Rule 4.5 proposal would capture large swaps of mutual funds and
subject them to duplicative and potentially conflicting CFTC
regulation, when mutual funds are already highly regulated by
the SEC.
Now this rule proposal seemed to have nothing to do with
Dodd-Frank. And at a time when the CFTC has extensive new
responsibilities under Dodd-Frank and is before Congress asking
for additional financial resources to meet its new regulatory
burden, why would the CFTC attempt to drastically expand its
regulatory jurisdiction and extensive new responsibilities over
mutual funds when the SEC already regulates this?
Mr. Gensler. We have for decades regulated or overseen
something called, ``commodity pool operators.'' The public
might just call them hedge funds, or the public might call them
money managers and so forth. Commodity pool operators pool
money and invest in futures. They can invest in other things.
The SEC, for the first time in the Dodd-Frank Act, has
reporting for hedge funds. Some of those hedge funds are also
commodity pool operators. So the statute actually said we
should do a joint rule with the Securities and Exchange
Commission on information that would go to the SEC.
So we did choose to propose that joint rule in January. We
did a sister rule--the one I think to which you are referring--
on commodity pools that wouldn't necessarily be reporting to
the SEC, to try to align that with what we are doing in that
joint rule at the SEC. So that is why we took it off, because
of Congress' mandate on this joint rule and trying to align
some of that which we have done in these commodity pools. But I
would be glad to come and see you one on one, and try to dig
more into some of these issues, because I have to remind myself
of all the details of each rule too.
Mr. Thompson. Well, Chairman Gensler, I appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Conaway. Would the gentleman yield his minute for one
follow-up?
The Chairman. The gentleman--yes.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. Gensler, does the Administrative
Procedures Act have any kind of a bright line requirement as to
major changes to a proposed rule that would in effect require
you to re-propose it; or is that fully within your discretion
as to how much change drives going from proposed to final
versus a re-proposal?
Mr. Gensler. I think you are probably beyond my personal
knowledge base and I have to ask my General Counsel.
Mr. Conaway. If you wouldn't mind providing that for the
record.
Mr. Gensler. What I am led to believe is if we are
proposing something completely new, it hasn't been considered,
it is not questioned and so forth, we might need to re-propose.
But if we have laid out enough predicate, enough in the
proposal, we don't need to re-propose. And often what is
happening is we are getting comments from people that want us
to narrow something and so forth.
I am just being handed a note, it says, ``If it is a
logical outgrowth''--those are the key words--``a logical
outgrowth of the proposal.''
Mr. Conaway. So there is some standard by which to judge
what you would go final with, as to whether or not you would go
final or re-propose?
Mr. Gensler. Yes.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
And as the Chairman of the CFTC would know, there are
sometimes, anymore, not a lot of pleasures that go with being
Chairman of anything. But in my regard, I have the ability to
control the time and I have a couple more questions for you,
sir, if you don't mind. That is one of the few pleasures of
this job these days.
As you know, Chairman Gensler, I recently joined Chairman
Bachus and Chairman Kline in writing you and Chairman Schapiro
and Secretary Solis about the potential conflict among the
three agencies' regulatory proposals that could be detrimental
to pension plans. Swaps are an important risk management tool
for pension plans, and we need to take every caution not to
jeopardize the benefits they provide to ensuring the retirement
security of millions of Americans. In fact, when you appeared
before the Committee last, you were asked if CFTC would take
every precaution not to impose significant and additional new
costs on pension funds. And you said, ``Well, I think we are.''
Yet shortly thereafter, we heard testimony from the
American Benefits Council that the business conduct standards
rules proposed by CFTC conflict with the DOL rule to the point
that they would require a swap dealer to perform an illegal
action or refrain from entering into a swap with a plan. In
short, this would make it impossible for pensions to engage in
swaps at all.
If the business conduct standards are finalized before this
conflict is clearly and officially resolved, there would be
significant and potentially harmful consequences for our
pension system. Can you assure me that this conflict will be
publicly resolved before the business conduct standards are
finalized?
Mr. Gensler. We have been meeting with the Department of
Labor to harmonize the two. So to Congressman Tipton, who asked
me earlier about how we are working together, this one we are
really working together with the Department of Labor. I think
they are going to be able to assist us and assist this
Committee to harmonize that our business conduct standards,
which Congress in essence said--the key to this, Mr. Chairman,
is that Congress said that swap dealers have to, on a daily
basis, value the swaps with their counterparties. Just because
they value that swap on the other side's pension fund shouldn't
make them a fiduciary.
And we are working with the Department of Labor to ensure
that this Congressional mandate that we embedded in our
business conduct doesn't somehow make somebody, solely because
of that, a fiduciary under this Department of Labor rule. So we
are working to harmonize it and get clear input from the
Department of Labor that we can share publicly.
The Chairman. Thank you.
One other question. You recently traveled to Europe and
spoke publicly about the need for international cooperation.
Specifically you said, ``Effective reform cannot be achieved by
one nation alone.'' You also stated before this Committee that
you are working very closely with foreign regulators to ensure
as best we can--another quote again--``that we are consistent
in our regulatory treatment.''
In addition, you made remarks in Europe that it was
important for them to pursue reforms that were consistent with
Dodd-Frank in order for CFTC to recognize comparable regulatory
regimes.
And I would like to submit for the record a copy of a
letter submitted to the CFTC by the Financial Services
Authority in the U.K. Seeing no objection, so ordered.
[The document referred to is located on p. 73.]
The Chairman. In the letter, the FSA expresses concern that
CFTC's proposal to set a $50 million cap on the amount of
capital clearinghouses can require of potential clearing
members could actually increase risk to the system.
So I guess, Chairman, can you respond to the concerns
expressed from a foreign regulator that your proposal would
inject more risk into the system?
Mr. Gensler. I am familiar with the letter. I think that
currently the clearinghouses in the futures industry are well
managed and they do not have the limits in the swap market. The
swap marketplace, frankly, has been an exclusionary practice
where they say you have to have $5 billion of capital or $1
trillion of swaps before you are a member of the clearinghouse.
We proposed in December that there be different limits,
that it foster competition and not just be exclusively these
large swap dealers. And we will take into consideration the
FSA's letter, we will take it into consideration like all other
letters. But what we think Congress was trying to do was have
open access to this clearing and open access to these markets,
and not have it so exclusive as it has been today.
The Chairman. And I am going to be brave with the time and
ask one more question: Where else are there significant
differences between your approach and the approach under
consideration in Europe?
Mr. Gensler. Europe is moving forward. In their European
Parliament I was honored to be in front of a committee--the
Economic Committee of the European Parliament. They are likely
to move forward this summer on clearing, on the dealer regime,
on data repositories. And it is not going to be identical, but
it is quite similar.
Their timing on the real-time reporting and on the
transparency that is brought forward in trading platforms
called swap execution facilities, they are taking up in a
reform later in the fall. And just as any legislative process,
when something is a little later, it is a little less certain.
They are committed to try to get their implementing rules done
by next summer, the summer of 2012.
The Chairman. With that, the time for questions has
expired. I wish to thank the Chairman of the CFTC once again
for his time and his patience, and note that I am quite
confident we will have several more visits before this year is
over.
Mr. Gensler. I look forward to it. I think these are
helpful.
The Chairman. Absolutely, Chairman Gensler. Thank you.
I would like to now welcome our second panel of witnesses
to the table as they prepare for their testimony.
Mr. James C. Allison, Gas and Power Risk Manager, North
America, ConocoPhillips, on behalf of the Working Group of
Commercial Energy Firms, Houston, Texas.
Mr. Mark J. Cvrkel, Chief Financial Officer of Susquehanna
Bank, Lititz, Pennsylvania.
Mr. James M. Fields, Senior Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer, Deere & Company, Moline, Illinois.
Mr. Richard J. McMahon, Vice President, Finance and Energy
Supply, Edison Electric Institute Washington, D.C.
Ms. Ann Trakimas, Chief Operating Officer, CoBank, on
behalf of the Farm Credit Council, Greenwood Village, Colorado.
Whenever you are ready, Mr. Allison, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF JAMES C. ALLISON, GAS AND POWER RISK MANAGER,
NORTH AMERICA, ConocoPhilliips, HOUSTON, TX; ON BEHALF OF
WORKING GROUP OF COMMERCIAL ENERGY FIRMS

Mr. Allison. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson,
Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to discuss
certain key implementation issues regarding Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act.
I am Jim Allison, North American Gas and Power Risk Manager
for ConocoPhillips. I am appearing today on behalf of the
Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms. The Working Group is
a diverse group of commercial energy firms whose primary
business activity is the physical delivery of energy
commodities to others.
My testimony today reflects the positions of the Working
Group. It does not necessarily reflect the positions of
ConocoPhillips or any individual member of the Working Group.
My oral comments are a summarization of the written testimony,
and I would like, if the Committee will allow me, to have that
be part of the record.
The Working Group supports the policy goals of the Dodd-
Frank Act, but is concerned that several of the CFTC's proposed
rules will have significant unintended consequences. These
include concentration of commodity market activity among large
financial dealers--many of which have been considered too big
to fail--increased market volatility, increased liquidity risk,
increased cost for commercial firms and regulations that will
ultimately lead to higher costs for energy consumers. Before I
discuss these areas of concern, I would like to briefly
describe how and why commercial energy firms use swaps.
Members of the Working Group are engaged in many aspects of
the energy business, including electricity generation, oil and
natural gas production, refining, storage and transportation,
and merchandising and trading energy commodities. These
activities expose the Working Group's members to many
commercial risks. Fortunately, commodity derivatives give us
the ability to manage some of these risks.
For example, we can buy or sell necessary feedstocks and
end-products at predictable prices. They provide us with
greater certainty around the income from our capital
investments. We can take market positions where we are active,
physical market participants, and it gives us the ability to
increase our economic investments in U.S. energy
infrastructure.
Managing the commercial risks enables delivery of energy at
stable and affordable prices. The Working Group believes it was
the intent of Congress to preserve this ability and to avoid
market disruptions that would subject consumers to higher
energy prices. The Working Group highlights three areas of
concern where the CFTC's implementation efforts may run counter
to Congressional intent.
First, the CFTC's proposed definitions of swap dealer and
major swap participant are unnecessarily broad. As proposed,
these definitions would impose costly regulation on many firms
that do not pose a risk to the U.S. financial system. In
response to these costs, firms will be faced with a choice to
either pass the costs on to consumers or scale back business
activities.
Second, overly broad entity definitions may deny commercial
firms the benefits of the mandatory clearing exemption that was
created by Congress to protect them. While clearing will reduce
counterparty risk for these firms, it will increase liquidity
risk.
Third, the CFTC's sequencing of proposed regulations is
causing significant uncertainty for farms that are trying to
determine the impact of and potential requirements for
compliance with the proposed regulations.
We believe these concerns can be avoided. First, the CFTC
should use the available statutory tools to avoid unnecessary
regulation of commercial firms as swap dealers. This can be
done by, first, adopting a distinction between the terms dealer
and trader that is similar to the distinction adopted by the
SEC; and second, implementing the de minimis exception in a way
that recognizes the statutory distinction between customer and
counterparty with a meaningful threshold that allows for a
reasonable amount of customer-facing activity.
Second, the CFTC should adopt the definition of major swap
participant that includes only those firms that truly threaten
the U.S. financial system. Both dollar thresholds and
assessments of firm exposure based on a percent of market value
can be used to make those determinations.
Third, it is imperative that companies have an opportunity
to evaluate in the aggregate the complex set of rules proposed
by the CFTC. As of today, final rules defining swap dealer and
major swap participant have not been issued, and the CFTC has
not issued even a proposed rule defining swap, a critical
definition needed to understand the impact of all the proposed
rules.
The CFTC should ensure that rulemakings are logically
sequenced and that effective dates for final rules provide
firms adequate time to identify and implement the extensive
systems changes that will be needed to ensure compliance.
I have highlighted today particular issues that may create
unintended consequences, ultimately resulting in increased
energy costs for consumers. The Working Group is confident that
there are solutions for these issues, and we look forward to
continuing to work with the CFTC to implement these solutions.
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to present this
testimony on behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy
Firms, and I would be pleased to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Allison follows:]

Prepared Statement of James C. Allison, Gas and Power Risk Manager,
North America, ConocoPhillips, Houston, TX; on Behalf of Working Group
of Commercial Energy Firms
I. Introduction
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee; thank you for this opportunity to discuss certain key issues
regarding the implementation of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the regulation of commodity
derivatives, including the regulation of entities and products in
commodity derivatives markets.
I am Jim Allison, North America Gas & Power Risk Manager for
ConocoPhillips Company, and I am appearing today on behalf of the
Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms. The Working Group is a
diverse group of commercial firms in the energy industry whose primary
business activity is the physical delivery of energy commodities to
others, including industrial, commercial, and residential consumers. My
testimony and statements made today reflect the positions of the
Working Group, and do not necessarily reflect the positions of
ConocoPhillips or any individual member of the Working Group.
The Working Group supports the policy goals of the Dodd-Frank Act
to promote the financial stability of the United States by improving
accountability and transparency in the financial system and to reduce
systemic risk. However, achieving these goals without imposing
excessive costs and burdens on the economy is contingent on successful
implementation of a regulatory framework that accommodates the
differences among the new entities, products, and markets that the CFTC
will regulate under Title VII. Implementation of such regulations will
be successful only if those regulations do not result in costs that are
greater than the public benefit of the Dodd-Frank Act, and if those
regulations are developed in a logical and prudent manner.
Among the Working Group's specific concerns with the CFTC's
proposed rules regarding regulation of commodity derivatives markets
are (1) the vagueness and potential breadth of the definitions of
``swap dealer,'' ``major swap participant,'' and ``swap,'' and (2) the
challenges posed by the CFTC's ongoing rulemaking process, including
the sequencing of the issuance of proposed rules, the interdependent
nature of many of those rules, and the limited amount of time
stakeholders will have to analyze and plan for the effects of those
rules. If these concerns are not appropriately addressed, they are
likely to decrease the ability of commercial firms to use commodity
derivatives to manage commercial risks, and, in the case of energy
markets, are highly likely to result in increased costs for the
ultimate consumers of energy products and decreased job opportunities.
This reduction or elimination of involvement by commercial firms in
commodity derivatives markets is likely to result in reduced
competition in those markets. In the short-term, this reduction in
competition would create decreased liquidity in commodity derivatives
markets as commercial firms reduce their participation in those
markets. In the long-term, this reduction in competition would create
concentration of commodity derivatives transactions among the financial
entities that have traditionally been recognized as swap dealers. Many
of these are the firms that have been considered ``too big to fail.''
II. How and Why Commercial Firms Use Swaps
Members of the Working Group are engaged in many aspects of the
energy business, including: (1) the basic creation or manufacturing
processes, such as exploring for, producing, and marketing crude oil
and natural gas; refining feedstocks into gasoline and other products,
and marketing those products; and generating and marketing electricity,
including electricity from renewable projects such as wind and solar;
(2) the logistical activities that are fundamental to the energy
business, including storing energy commodities and moving energy
commodities by tanker, pipeline, transmission line, or other means from
source to market or from one market to another; and (3) the associated
merchandising and trading of energy commodities.
All of these activities expose the Working Group's members to a
wide array of commercial risks, including risks that are similar to
those experienced by any commercial firm engaged in manufacturing or
logistics, such as operational risk, market risk, and credit risk. Like
agricultural firms, the Working Group's members differ from some
manufacturing firms in that their basic energy products are commodities
around which financial derivatives have been developed. Those
derivatives allow each Working Group member to manage the level of
commercial risk to which it is exposed, scaling the commercial risk
that has been created through its primary business activity up or down
to achieve the level of exposure to that risk that the firm believes is
appropriate for its stakeholders. For example, commercial energy firms
can use commodity derivatives to:

Buy or sell necessary commodity products, including
feedstocks, end products, and inventories, at predictable
prices;

Provide greater certainty for future cash flow from
investments;

Take market positions in the commodities in which they are
active physical market participants; and

Increase the ability to make economic investments in U.S.
energy infrastructure and the development of energy resources.
III. Specific Issues
A. The CFTC's Proposed Definition of ``Swap Dealer'' Could Result in
Regulation of Commercial Energy Firms as Swap Dealers Where
There Is No Public Benefit
1. The CFTC's Proposed Rule Does Not Recognize a Distinction Between
Swaps Used for ``Dealing'' and ``Trading'' Purposes
The Dodd-Frank Act definition of ``swap dealer'' is based on four
categories of activity that are comparable to the types of activities
used to define ``dealer'' in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Based
on that ``dealer'' definition, the SEC has applied a long-standing and
well-known Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule. In general, the SEC's
Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule recognizes that certain activities
involving securities may at first appear to be dealing activities but
are, in fact, trading activities, and that market participants engaging
in such trading activities should not be regulated as dealers. There
are significant similarities between the Dodd-Frank Act definition of
``swap dealer'' and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 definition of
``dealer''; however, the CFTC's proposed definition of ``swap dealer''
specifically rejects making a distinction between dealers and traders
in commodity derivatives markets. The CFTC rejects the application of a
dealer/trader distinction to these markets, which increases the
likelihood of commercial energy firms being regulated as swap dealers,
despite the fact that such firms use commodity derivatives to manage
risks associated with their primary business activity of delivering
physical energy commodities to others. The Working Group strongly
recommends that the CFTC implement a framework that distinguishes
between dealers and market participants that use commodity derivatives
for their own hedging or trading purposes.
2. The CFTC's Proposed De Minimis Exception Is So Narrow That It Will
Be Unavailable to Commercial Energy Firms That Do Engage in a
Relatively Small Amount of Dealing Activity
The Working Group believes Congress intended the de minimis
exception to apply to any person that would otherwise be a swap dealer
but for the fact that it engages in limited amounts of swap dealing or
whose notional amount of exposure is small. The CFTC's proposed de
minimis exemption included in the definition of ``swap dealer'' is so
narrow that commercial firms that may engage in a relatively small
amount of transactions in a swap dealing capacity will be unable to
claim the exemption and will be subject to full regulation as swap
dealers. As noted above, there is no public benefit to regulating such
firms as swap dealers. The CFTC's proposal inexplicably provides that
any entity who enters annually into more than twenty swaps, has more
than fifteen counterparties, or enters into swaps with more than $100
million in notional amount is a swap dealer regardless of its regular
business. Such interpretation essentially makes every market
participant in the swap markets a swap dealer and renders the express
statutory definition superfluous. The CFTC has proposed this limited de
minimis exception even when data indicates that the largest 25 bank
holding companies control more than 90 percent of the U.S. swaps
market. An appropriate interpretation of ``de minimis'' would provide a
meaningful exception for entities other than these traditional
financial institutions. It was not the intent of Congress to create a
de minimis exception that applies to no one.
3. An Unnecessarily Broad Definition of ``Swap Dealer'' Will Harm
Commodity Derivatives Markets
The Working Group is concerned that an unnecessarily broad
definition of ``swap dealer'' will harm the liquidity and efficiency of
commodity derivatives markets. Efficiency requires that regulations be
designed to result in the least-cost approach to achieve a regulatory
objective, and to ensure that the public benefit of those regulations
is greater than the costs of those regulations. These costs include the
costs for individual market participants to comply with regulations,
public costs to implement and enforce the regulations, and the public
and private costs created by the impact of the regulation on the
regulated market and participants in that market.
Classification of commercial energy firms that use commodity
derivatives as swap dealers would have significant implications for
those firms, including:

Applying capital and margin requirements that could consume
or divert resources that might otherwise be available for
infrastructure investment, including investment in the
production of new energy resources; and

Denying those firms the benefits of the end-user exception
from mandatory (1) clearing and (2) on-facility execution of
swaps.

Further, the excessive breadth of the definition of ``swap dealer''
will impose substantial additional and unnecessary burdens on
regulators. A broad definition of ``swap dealer'' that results in
regulation of commercial firms as swap dealers will result in a
dilution of the CFTC's resources that will necessarily result in less
oversight of large traditional swap dealers.
Commercial energy firms have not traditionally been considered swap
dealers, do not cause systemic risk, and were not a cause of the
financial crisis. The Working Group believes the CFTC has not justified
the cost, relative to the public benefit, of a broad definition of
``swap dealer,'' and should adopt a final definition of ``swap dealer''
that is tailored to regulate only those firms that truly function as
swap dealers and not those firms that simply use commodity derivatives
to manage commercial risks associated with their primary business
activity of delivering physical commodities to others.
B. The CFTC's Proposed Definition of ``Major Swap Participant'' Could
Result in Regulation of Commercial Energy Firms Even When Those
Firms Do Not Create Systemic Risk
The CFTC's proposed definition of ``Major Swap Participant'' is
overly broad and is likely to result in companies that are not
systemically risky being unnecessarily subject to prudential
regulation. Despite the Dodd-Frank Act's limitation on the definition
of ``major swap participant'' to entities that are ``systemically
important or can significantly impact the financial system of the
United States,'' the CFTC has chosen to classify companies as major
swap participants based upon fixed exposure thresholds that the Working
Group believes fall well below levels that actually pose a risk to the
U.S. financial system. Importantly, these thresholds do not appear to
have any direct relationship to systemic risk and will not adjust to
changing market prices. Even if one could assume that the current CFTC-
proposed thresholds are reasonable in the present market, over time, as
commodity prices fluctuate, the CFTC will have to routinely revisit
these thresholds to make sure they comply with Congressional intent.
The effort to monitor and adjust these thresholds will be another
unnecessary use of the CFTC's resources. If commodity prices increase
as they have over the past several months, more and more companies will
reach these fixed thresholds despite the fact that the relative market
positions of these companies would have largely remained unchanged.
Because of these effects, the Working Group respectfully suggests that
the CFTC should test the systemic risk of companies in ways that
account for current market conditions. Evaluating exposures as a
percentage of market value rather than by relying on fixed thresholds
is one way to do this. Given that regulation of major swap participants
is very similar to regulation of swap dealers, many of the negative
effects of a definition of ``swap dealer'' that unnecessarily results
in regulation of commercial firms would also apply to unnecessary
regulation of those firms categorized as major swap participants.
C. Mandatory Clearing Will Not Reduce Risk--It Will Only Transform
Counterparty Risk into Liquidity Risk
The Working Group believes that mandatory clearing will only
succeed in transforming counterparty risk into liquidity risk. One
benefit of the end-user exception to mandatory clearing is that
commercial firms will be protected from this liquidity risk. However,
if the definitions of ``swap dealer'' and ``major swap participant''
are unnecessarily broad and result in commercial firms being regulated
as swap dealers or major swap participants, then those firms will be
fully exposed to this liquidity risk.
Clearing reduces counterparty risk by requiring every party to a
transaction to provide (1) full cash margin on the change in the value
of the cleared portfolio every day and (2) initial margin sufficient to
cover the potential movement in value between daily margin calls. Daily
margin calls must be settled in cash, on very strict and short
deadlines, and they apply to changes in value caused by ordinary market
movement and those caused by extraordinary market events.
When the financial system is functioning smoothly, a commercial
firm can manage liquidity requirements caused by ordinary market
movement through capital reserves and access to lines of credit.
However, liquidity requirements caused by extraordinary market events
may require a diversion of capital from other uses. This admittedly is
an extreme scenario, but it is precisely these extreme scenarios that
must be analyzed to understand how the CFTC's proposed rules affect
risk in the financial system.
When combined with the vagueness and potential breadth of the
definitions of ``swap dealer'' and ``major swap participant,'' the
transformation of counterparty risk to liquidity risk and the exposure
of commercial firms to this liquidity risk may actually thwart the
policy goals of the Dodd-Frank Act. The CFTC can avoid this by
appropriately tailoring the definitions of ``swap dealer'' and ``major
swap participant'' and not unnecessarily including commercial firms in
either category of regulated entities.
D. The CFTC's Rulemaking Process Does Not Allow Stakeholders to
Properly Consider the Interaction of the Rules Required for
Regulation of Commodity Derivatives Under Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act
Title VII represents a fundamental redesign of the regulatory
regime applicable to commodity derivative markets, especially the
commodity derivatives used by the Working Group's members to manage the
risks associated with their primary business activity of delivering
physical energy commodities to others. A threshold element of this
redesign is the determination of which products and market participants
will be regulated by the CFTC. Notwithstanding the CFTC's aggressive
efforts to adopt all final rules required by the Dodd-Frank Act, as of
March 29, 2011, the CFTC has not issued final rules defining ``swap
dealer'' and ``major swap participant,'' and it has not issued even a
proposed definition of ``swap.'' A direct result of the lack of final
rules defining these key terms is that more than 8 months after passage
of the Dodd-Frank Act, market participants still do not know with any
certainty the universe of entities and products that will be subject to
regulation under Title VII's provisions relating to commodity
derivatives. Without full knowledge of which entities will be regulated
as swap dealers and major swap participants and which products will be
regulated as swaps, the Working Group's members and other commercial
energy firms are not able to determine the impact of these rules on
their businesses. This uncertainty is likely to result in disruption of
energy markets and could have negative consequences on the broader
economy, including, but not limited to, increased prices for ultimate
consumers of those products. Such consequences are avoidable. Given the
complexity of the rulemaking process, the Working Group believes it is
imperative that the CFTC allow interested parties a period of time to
analyze and comment on all of the rules proposed under Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act in the aggregate. Further, once the CFTC issues final
rules, the Working Group believes market participants should be given
adequate time to evaluate their compliance obligations, and to design
and implement measures to meet such obligations in an efficient manner.
Many of these rules will require time-consuming and expensive changes
to systems and processes, so reasonable compliance deadlines are
critical.
IV. Conclusion
In closing, the Working Group restates its support for the policy
goals of the Dodd-Frank Act to promote the financial stability of the
United States by improving accountability and transparency in the
financial system and to reduce systemic risk. Under Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act, the CFTC has been asked to take on a significant amount
of new regulatory oversight for derivative markets and derivative
market participants. The Working Group appreciates the diligent efforts
of the CFTC and its staff to understand our businesses and the markets
in which we operate. However, if the CFTC's rules to implement Title
VII of the Dodd-Frank Act are not designed to appropriately regulate
commodity derivatives markets and if those rules are not implemented in
a coordinated and prudent manner, commercial energy firms may either be
subject to unnecessary and costly regulation or will reduce their use
of commodity derivatives to manage commercial risks, each of which
could ultimately result in increased energy costs for consumers.
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to present this testimony
on behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms and I will be
pleased to answer any questions.

The Chairman. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT OF MARK J. CVRKEL, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
SUSQUEHANNA BANK, LITIZ, PA

Mr. Cvrkel. Chairman Lucas, and Members of the Committee, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Mark Cvrkel. I am a Chief Financial Officer of
Susquehanna Bank, headquartered in Lititz, Pennsylvania.
Susquehanna Bank is a commercial bank with assets of
approximately $14 billion, deposits of more than $9 billion,
and more than 3,000 employees in 221 locations. At Susquehanna,
we are committed to building the economic strength of the
communities we serve in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, and
West Virginia.
As is the case with hundreds of community and regional
banks, Susquehanna Bank's risk management strategy involves
using interest rate derivatives to prudently manage risks that
are inherent to the business of commercial banking.
Additionally, we enter into certain interest rate and foreign
exchange derivatives with commercial banking customers to
facilitate their risk management needs.
My comments today stem from concerns that certain proposed
rules released by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
could unnecessarily jeopardize our ability to manage risk,
provide the services our clients demand, and remain competitive
against much larger financial institutions.
I would like to focus today on four issues: the swap dealer
definition; the potential exemption for small banks; the
eligible contract participant definition; and the process and
timing of rulemaking.
Several community and regional banks have expressed concern
that the swap dealer definition in the CFTC's proposed rule
could capture hundreds of community and regional banks that
offer risk management products to commercial customers. This
would hamper the ability for smaller banks to compete with
larger financial institutions without any appreciable benefit
in terms of enhanced market oversight or reduction in systemic
risk.
Congress provided an exemption from the swap dealer
definition for any swap offered by a bank to a customer in
connection with originating a loan with that customer; however,
the CFTC's proposed rule interpreting this exemption is very
narrow.
In addition, we are concerned that the CFTC's proposed
thresholds for the so-called ``de minimis exception'' from the
swap dealer definition are extremely low. These low thresholds
could have the effect of either subjecting many small banks to
the substantial regulatory burden imposed on swap dealers, or
causing them to cease offering certain risk management services
to their customers.
We urge regulators to compare the thresholds for the de
minimis exception against the volume of dealing done by large
financial institutions that control the vast majority of the
OTC derivatives market. Even an extremely conservative analysis
of available data suggests that the CFTC could substantially
increase the thresholds without running afoul of Congressional
intent.
Congress provided the regulators with the authority to
exempt small banks from the financial entity definition. If
such an exemption were granted, these small banks still would
have to meet certain conditions required for end-user exception
to the clearing requirement.
Moreover, small banks already are subject to existing
regulations, including rules that require adequate capital to
be held against all assets, including derivatives. In addition,
existing regulations allow examiners to take certain actions to
prevent default or to limit bank losses in the event of
default. These protections adequately mitigate risks associated
with an exception for too-small banks. We respectfully ask that
the Committee urge the regulators to exercise the authority to
exempt small banks from the financial entity definition.
We appreciate Congress' efforts to ensure that OTC
derivatives are not marketed to unsophisticated customers.
However, we would urge the regulators to clarify that smaller,
sophisticated firms could continue to enter into hedges over-
the-counter, providing that they meet specific criteria already
established by the CFTC and observed by market participants for
more than 20 years.
Finally, community and regional banks are concerned with
the aggressive pace of rulemaking. We would urge Congress to
extend the statutory effective date for Title VII and set a
sequence for rulemaking that supports thorough cost-benefit
analysis and productive public comment.
Community and regional banks are essential to support job
creation at small, middle-market businesses that forms the
foundation for any economic recovery. We caution against
finalizing rules that would place undue burdens on small banks
that had nothing to do with the financial crisis, do not pose
systemic risk, and collectively engage in a fraction of the
derivatives traded by the large dealers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I will
answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cvrkel follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mark J. Cvrkel, Chief Financial Officer,
Susquehanna Bank, Lititz, PA
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on the key
definitions in Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act. My name is Mark Cvrkel
and I am the Chief Financial Officer of Susquehanna Bank
(``Susquehanna'').
Headquartered in Lititz, PA, Susquehanna is a commercial bank with
assets of approximately $14 billion, deposits of more than $9 billion
and more than 3,000 employees in 221 locations. At Susquehanna we are
committed to building the economic strength of the communities we serve
in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland and West Virginia.
As is the case with hundreds of community and regional banks,
Susquehanna's risk management strategy involves using interest rate
derivatives to prudently manage risks that are inherent to the business
of commercial banking. We do not use credit default swaps or use
derivatives for speculation. At Susquehanna, we use derivatives to add
stability to our interest income and expense and to modify the duration
of specific assets and liabilities. In short, we use derivatives to
manage exposure to fluctuations in interest rates over which we have no
control.
Additionally, we enter into a relatively small amount of interest
rate and foreign exchange derivatives with commercial banking customers
to facilitate their risk management needs. For example, we are able to
offer a borrower a competitive long-term financing at a fixed rate by
pairing a variable-rate loan with an interest rate swap--thereby
providing the customer with the fixed rate they desire without taking
on any incremental interest rate risk at the bank. As another example,
we may have a middle-market customer that sells its products in Canada.
We can offer to enter into an FX forward with the customer so that when
they are paid in Canadian dollars, they can fix the exchange rate and
know the exact amount they will receive in U.S. dollars.
Neither our use nor our customers' use of derivatives poses
systemic risk. As was shown during the financial crisis, systemic risk
in the derivatives market is concentrated among a few very large and
interconnected financial institutions. According to the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency's Quarterly Report on Bank Trading and
Derivatives Activities, while more than 1,000 banks in the U.S. use
derivatives, 96% of the notional and 86% of the credit exposure is held
at the top five banks in the U.S.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Please refer to page 1 of the report at: http://
www.occ.treas.gov/topics/capital-markets/financial-markets/trading/
derivatives/dq410.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My comments today stem from concerns that certain proposed rules
released by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC'')--
including those relating to the key definitions in Title VII--could
unnecessarily jeopardize our ability to manage risk, provide the
services our clients demand and remain competitive against much larger
financial institutions.
I would like to focus today on four issues: the swap dealer
definition, the potential exemption from the financial entity
definition for small banks, the eligible contract participant
definition and the process and timing for rulemaking.
(1) Swap Dealer Definition
Several community and regional banks have expressed concern that
the swap dealer definition in the CFTC's proposed rule could capture
hundreds of community and regional banks that offer risk management
products to commercial customers. This would hamper the ability for
many smaller banks to compete with larger financial institutions
without any appreciable benefit in terms of enhanced market oversight
or reduction in systemic risk.
Congress provided an exemption from the swap dealer definition for
any swap offered by a bank to a customer in connection with originating
a loan with that customer; however, the CFTC's proposed rule
interpreting this exemption is very narrow. While not required by Title
VII, the CFTC is considering whether to limit the exemption to swaps
offered contemporaneously with origination of the loan. As it is very
common for a borrower to enter into an interest rate swap before or
after origination of the corresponding loan, the exemption should not
be limited to any swap entered into contemporaneously with a loan. In
addition, we would urge the CFTC to consider excluding from the swap
dealer definition swaps offered by a bank in connection with
syndications, participations and bond issuances that are facilitated by
the bank.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Please refer to pages 3-4 of the comment letter submitted by
Susquehanna Bank and 18 other community and regional banks to the CFTC
for examples.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition we are concerned that the CFTC's proposed thresholds
for the so-called ``de minimis exception'' from the swap dealer
definition are extremely low. For example, if a bank were to offer just
21 FX hedges \3\ to customers in one year, they would be required to
register as a swap dealer. These low thresholds could have the effect
of either subjecting many small banks to the substantial regulatory
burden imposed on swap dealers, or causing them to cease offering
certain risk management services to customers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Note that the Secretary of the Department of the Treasury has
the authority to make a written determination exempting certain FX
derivatives from certain regulatory requirements. Such a determination
has not been made as of the writing of this statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We urge regulators to compare the thresholds for the de minimis
exception against the volume of dealing done by the large financial
institutions that control the vast majority of the OTC derivatives
market. For example, while executing more than 20 trades with customers
in one year would require a bank to register as a swap dealer, it is
known that Lehman Brothers had 900,000 trades in place at the time of
its bankruptcy. Available data \4\ suggests that the CFTC could
substantially increase the thresholds without running afoul of
congressional intent. We do not believe the benefit of regulatory
oversight over smaller financial institutions engaged in a relatively
infinitesimal level of dealing activity outweighs the cost associated
with registration and compliance for such firms.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Please refer to pages 5 and 6 of the comment letter submitted
by Susquehanna Bank and 18 other community and regional banks to the
CFTC for additional comparative data: http://www.chathamfinancial.com/
wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Coalition-Comments-Small-Banks.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(2) Potential Exemption for Small Financial Institutions
Congress provided the regulators with the authority to exempt small
banks from the financial entity definition. If such an exemption were
granted, these small banks still would have to meet the same conditions
required for the end-user exception to the clearing requirement.
Moreover, small banks already are subject to existing regulations,
including rules that require adequate capital to be held against all
assets, including derivatives. In addition, existing regulations allow
examiners to take certain actions to prevent default, or to limit bank
losses in the event of default. These protections adequately mitigate
risks associated with an exception for small banks. We respectfully ask
that the Committee urge the regulators to exercise the authority to
exempt small banks from the financial entity definition.
(3) Eligible Contract Participant Definition
Section 723 of Title VII includes a Limitation of Participation
provision prohibiting any firm that is not an ``eligible contract
participant'' from entering into a hedge over-the-counter.\5\ We
appreciate Congress' efforts to ensure that OTC derivatives are not
marketed to unsophisticated customers; however, many community and
regional banks are concerned that certain customers--including small
businesses and other firms that execute hedges out of pass-through
entities--may not be able to use the customized, OTC derivatives that
they require for risk management purposes. We would urge the regulators
to clarify that smaller, sophisticated firms could continue to enter
into hedges over-the-counter, providing that they meet specific
criteria already established by the CFTC and observed by market
participants for more than 20 years.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Firms that are not eligible contract participants will only be
permitted to enter into derivatives on regulated exchanges. In addition
to other criteria, corporations and partnerships that have at least $10
million in assets or are hedging and have $1 million in net worth
qualify as eligible contract participants under the Commodity Exchange
Act.
\6\ Certain firms have been able to enter into over-the-counter
hedges if they meet the criteria set forth in the CFTC's 1989 Policy
Statement Concerning Swaps Transactions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(4) Process and Timing
Finally, while the regulatory agencies are to be commended for
running an open and transparent rulemaking process, community and
regional banks are very concerned with the aggressive pace of
rulemaking. We would urge Congress to extend the statutory effective
date for Title VII and set a sequence for rulemaking that supports
thorough cost-benefit analysis and productive public comment. We would
recommend a sequence for rulemaking that defines entity and product
definitions and other key terms first, duties and obligations second
and then the specific regulatory requirements that apply based on these
terms, duties and obligations. Additionally, we would recommend that
the regulators permit market participants to consider the entirety of
the proposed rules for all of Title VII, once they are available, and
provide additional comment before finalizing any of the proposed rules.
Conclusion
Community and regional banks are essential to support the job
creation at small and middle-market businesses that forms the
foundation of any economic recovery. We applaud the work of the
regulators to strengthen the OTC derivatives market, but we urge
caution against finalizing rules that would place undue burdens on
small banks that had nothing to do with the financial crisis, do not
pose systemic risk and collectively engage in a fraction of the
derivatives traded by the large dealers. It is critical to get these
definitions right in order to ensure that regulation of the derivatives
market is effective and unintended consequences are minimized. I thank
you for the opportunity to testify today, and I am happy to answer any
questions that you may have.

The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Field.

STATEMENT OF JAMES M. FIELD, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEERE & COMPANY,
MOLINE, IL

Mr. Field. Good afternoon. My name is Jim Field. I am the
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Deere &
Company, perhaps better known as John Deere.
I am pleased to have this opportunity to share our
perspectives on the implementation of Title VII of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
As with most major multinational companies, the new law
will impact many aspects of our business, especially our
captive finance business. Through our captive finance business,
John Deere Financial Services, Inc., we provide literally tens
of millions of dollars of liquidity into rural America each and
every day. We provide essential financing to agricultural
producers, construction contractors, commercial landscapers,
and foresters seeking to purchase high-quality John Deere
equipment. This source of financing is essential to our
customers' success and directly contributes to the growth and
prosperity of local economies across this country.
As the Committee knows, derivatives are an essential tool
for companies like Deere to manage commercial risks inherent in
our business, such as interest rate risk and foreign exchange
risk. We do not use the derivatives for speculative purposes at
Deere. The prudent use of derivatives supports our ability to
provide high-quality products and services to U.S. farmers and
other customers around the world.
John Deere worked closely with the Congress on the
derivatives reform legislation and commends this Committee for
its leadership on that important title. While we believe the
statutory direction is generally clear, the current rulemaking
process has not yet adequately settled several implementation
issues and concerns. I would like to highlight several areas
for the Committee, all of which are subject to ongoing
rulemaking proceedings.
Congress provided an exception for captive finance
companies from the major swap definition. This exception--often
referred to as the 90:90 exception--is explicitly provided for
in the statute. However, we are concerned that the statutory
language is imprecise and could be interpreted in a manner to
inadvertently preclude many end-users for whom this exception
was or is intended.
We are currently seeking guidance to clarify the
application of the captive finance provision to ensure it
reflects how we operate and practice. For instance, as a
captive finance company, we facilitate the sale of all products
sold by the parent and its dealers, not just those manufactured
by the parent or another subsidiary. For instance, we may
finance an implement manufactured by another company, along
with one of our tractors, as part of an entire sales package.
We also facilitate the financing for parts and services on
John Deere equipment. For example, we provide financing for
significant overhauls on Deere equipment. This work is done at
a John Deere dealership for a John Deere customer using both
Deere and non-Deere parts. A significant portion of the finance
covers the labor cost or the technician's hours. We interpret
the exception to include the full value of these notes, but
others might interpret this differently.
We are seeking more clarity that reflects the legislative
intent while not adding burdensome requirements. Regulations
that provides either a broader exception or additional clarity
reflecting ordinary business activities are necessary.
In addition to the major swap participant exemption for
captive finance companies, the CFTC proposed a rulemaking to
include an exemption for a captive finance company. We want to
ensure that the definition of a captive finance company, as it
applies to the clearing exemption, is consistent with the
definition of a captive finance company as it applies to the
major swap participant exemption.
A second area of concern relates to the exemption from
mandatory clearing requirements for derivatives end-users such
as Deere. While it appears that this exemption would apply to
our trades, a regulatory requirement on swap dealers and major
swap participants to collect margins from end-users could
effectively eliminate the benefits of the clearing exemption.
Hence, we strongly support a statutory provision that prohibits
regulatory agents from requiring swap dealers or major swap
participants to post or collect capital or margin on trades
that are executed with a financial or nonfinancial end-user
counterparty.
If John Deere is required to clear swaps, independently or
post margin through our transactions with a major swap
participant, we would need to divert working capital to comply
with this requirement. Furthermore, the requirements of posting
margin on a daily basis could create additional costs and
administrative burdens.
We are also seeking clarification that unintended parties
are not defined as a swap dealer or major swap participant. The
CFTC and the SEC propose to consider the economic reality of
transactions between wholly-owned affiliates, including whether
the swaps and security-based swaps simply represent an
allocation of risks within a corporate group. John Deere
supports this interpretation and would note further that the
regulator should not limit an interpretation of inter-affiliate
transactions to those between wholly-owned affiliates.
Transactions between commonly controlled affiliates, as
well as swap transactions done by one corporate treasury entity
to hedge the commercial risk of another entity in the same
corporate group, merely represent the shifting or hedging of
risk within a corporate group, and do not pose any more or any
less risk to the economy as a whole. Including such inter-
affiliate swaps or affiliate risk-hedging swaps for purposes of
calculating the major participant definitions would effectively
``double count'' the same swaps.
Last, John Deere wishes to emphasize the importance of
getting this regulation right for all derivatives end-users. We
recognize the substantial efforts being made by the regulatory
agents to advance several concurrent rulemakings in order to
meet the timelines provided by Congress. However, given the
complexity of the business issues involved, the number of
potentially affected market participants, and the potential
disruption to legitimate risk mitigation strategies, we believe
that an extension of the date by which the rules must be
promulgated, as well as a workable implementation schedule,
should be considered.
Let me again reiterate John Deere's appreciation for the
opportunity to appear before this Committee today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Field follows:]

Prepared Statement of James M. Field, Senior Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer, Deere & Company, Moline, IL
Good afternoon.
My name is Jim Field, and I am Senior Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer of Deere & Company.
I am pleased to have this opportunity to share Deere & Company's
perspectives on the implementation of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Deere & Company is also a
member of the Coalition for Derivatives End-Users who share our
perspective. As with most major multi-national companies, the new law
will impact many aspects of our business, especially our captive
finance business.
Deere & Company is a leading global manufacturer of agricultural,
construction, forestry and turf care equipment, and provides advanced
products and services, including financial services, to customers whose
work is linked to the land--those who cultivate, harvest, transform,
enrich and build upon the land to meet the world's dramatically
increasing need for food, fuel, shelter and infrastructure. We are
headquartered in Moline, Illinois, with sales in over 100 countries and
employing over 56,000 people. Since 1837, John Deere has delivered
innovative products of superior quality built on a tradition of
integrity.
Through our captive finance business, John Deere Financial
Services, Inc., we provide literally tens of millions of dollars of
liquidity into rural America each and every day. We provide essential
financing to agricultural producers, construction contractors,
commercial landscapers and foresters seeking to purchase high-quality
John Deere equipment. This source of financing is essential to our
customers' success and directly contributes to the growth and
prosperity of local economies across the country.
My testimony today will focus on the impacts of Title VII on
derivatives end-users and, in particular, the End-Use Exception and
Captive Finance Provision that were added to the Commodity Exchange Act
through the Dodd-Frank Act.
As the Committee knows, derivatives are an essential tool for
companies like John Deere to manage commercial risks inherent in our
business, such as interest rate and foreign exchange risks. We do not
use derivatives for speculative purposes. The prudent use of
derivatives supports our ability to provide high-quality products and
services to U.S. farmers and to customers around the world.
We provide financing for our customers on a significant percentage
of our sales in both good and bad economic times. Our financial
services operations have over $25 billion in assets. We offer fixed and
variable rate financing to meet the various long and short-term
financing needs of our customers. We issue debt in the commercial
paper, medium term note, and asset-backed securitization markets to
fund our loan and lease portfolios. Institutional debt investors
purchase the majority of our debt securities, and the demand for these
securities varies as economic conditions change. Derivatives enable us
to match the interest rate characteristics of the funding available in
the capital markets with the financing needs of our customers. This was
especially critical during the credit crisis. John Deere's volume of
new loans to customers and dealers increased during the credit crisis
as we were able to provide product financing when other financial
institutions curtailed lending. During the crisis, we were able to
issue long-term fixed rate notes in the capital markets and use
interest rate swaps to match the fixed and floating rate loans and
leases that we provided to our customers. We employ this strategy of
issuing longer-termed debt even in good economic times to reduce our
refunding risk.
For a swap to be effective, it must match the timing and amount of
the cash flows of the hedged exposure. Therefore, the terms of our
interest rate swaps are customized to match the terms of the debt we
issue. They will match the currency, principal or notional amount,
interest rates, and maturity dates. Standardized contracts with
predetermined terms would be a far less effective tool for hedging our
risk exposure.
Derivatives provide stability to our business. At the end of our
most recent first quarter, John Deere had over $15 billion notional
amount of derivative transactions outstanding. That is a large number,
but it corresponds to the more than $25 billion of credit we have
extended to our customers and dealers to purchase the equipment they
need to help drive the economy. The fair value of these derivatives,
which represents the price to terminate or settle the positions, was
approximately $253 million, and was a receivable for John Deere--our
counterparties would owe us that amount if we terminated the
derivatives.
John Deere worked closely with the Congress on the derivatives
reform legislation and commends this Committee for its leadership on
that important title. While we believe the statutory direction is
generally clear, the current rulemaking process has not yet adequately
settled several implementation concerns. I would like to highlight
several areas for the Committee, all of which are subject to ongoing
rulemaking proceedings.
Congress provided an exception for captive finance companies from
the major swap participant definition. This exception is defined as:

``entities whose primary business is providing financing and
use derivatives for the purpose of hedging underlying
commercial risks related to interest rate and foreign currency
exposures, 90 percent or more of which arise from financing
that facilitates the purchase or lease of products, 90 percent
or more of which are manufactured by the parent company or
another subsidiary of the parent company.''

We are concerned that the statutory language is imprecise and could
be interpreted in a manner to inadvertently preclude many end-users,
for whom the exception is intended, from qualifying.
We are currently seeking guidance to clarify the application of the
captive finance provision to ensure it reflects how we operate in
practice. For instance, as a captive finance company we facilitate the
sale of all products sold by the parent and its dealers, not just those
that are manufactured by the parent or another subsidiary. We may
finance an implement manufactured by another company along with one of
our tractors as part of the entire sale. We also facilitate the
financing for parts and service on John Deere equipment. For instance,
we provide financing for significant overhauls on pieces of equipment.
This work is done at a John Deere dealership, for a John Deere
customer, using both Deere and non-Deere parts. A significant portion
of the financing covers the labor costs. We interpret the full value of
these notes to fall under the exception, but others might interpret
this differently.
We are seeking further clarity that reflects Congress' intent while
not adding burdensome requirements. Regulations that provide either a
broader exception or additional clarity reflecting ordinary business
activities are necessary.
In addition to the major swap participant exemption for captive
finance companies, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
proposed a rulemaking to include a mandatory clearing exemption for a
captive finance company. We want to ensure that the definition of a
captive finance company as it applies to the mandatory clearing
exemption is consistent with the definition of a captive finance
company as it applies to the major swap participant exemption.
A second area of concern relates to the exemption from mandatory
clearing requirements for derivatives end-users, such as John Deere.
While it appears that the exemption would apply to our trades, a
regulatory requirement on swap dealers and major swap participants to
collect margin from end-users could effectively eliminate the benefits
of the clearing exemption. Hence, we strongly support a statutory
provision that prohibits regulatory agencies from requiring swap
dealers or major swap participants to post or collect capital or margin
on trades that are executed with a financial or nonfinancial end-user
counterparty.
If John Deere is required to clear swaps independently or post
margin through our transactions with a swap dealer or major swap
participant, we would need to divert working capital to comply with
this requirement. Furthermore, the requirements of posting margin on a
daily basis could create additional costs and administrative burdens on
an end-user engaged in derivatives primarily to manage risk.
We are also seeking clarification that unintended parties are not
defined as a swap dealer or major swap participant. The CFTC and SEC
propose to consider the ``economic reality'' of transactions between
wholly-owned affiliates, ``including whether the swaps and security-
based swaps simply represent an allocation of risk within a corporate
group.'' John Deere supports this interpretation and would note further
that the regulators should not limit an interpretation of inter-
affiliate transactions to those between wholly-owned affiliates.
Transactions between commonly-controlled affiliates, as well as
swap transactions done by one corporate treasury entity to hedge the
commercial risk of another entity in the same corporate group, merely
represent the shifting or hedging of risk within a corporate group and
do not pose any more or any less risk to the economy as a whole.
Including such inter-affiliate swaps or affiliate risk-hedging swaps
for purposes of calculating the major participant definitions would
effectively ``double-count'' the same swaps, as swaps subsequent to the
market-facing transaction simply transfer a swap's risk-mitigation
qualities to affiliated entities.
We also have some concerns with potentially conflicting rules from
the U.S. Department of Labor regarding utilization of swaps by pension
plans that could, unintentionally, restrict the ability of ERISA-
covered plans like John Deere's from utilizing derivative markets to
manage risks.
Last, John Deere wishes to emphasize the importance of getting this
regulation right for all derivative end-users. We recognize the
substantial efforts being made by the regulatory agencies to advance
several concurrent rulemakings, in order to meet the timelines provided
by Congress. However, given the complexity of the business issues
involved, the number of potentially affected market participants, and
the potential disruption to legitimate risk mitigation strategies, we
believe that an extension of the date by which rules must be
promulgated, as well as a workable implementation schedule, should be
considered.
Let me again reiterate John Deere's appreciation for this
opportunity to appear before the Committee today. I would be pleased to
answer your questions.
Thank you.

The Chairman. The gentleman has been very thorough.
Mr. McMahon.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD F. McMAHON, Jr., VICE PRESIDENT,
FINANCE AND ENERGY SUPPLY, EDISON ELECTRIC
INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, D.C.; ON BEHALF OF AMERICAN GAS
ASSOCIATION; ELECTRIC POWER SUPPLY ASSOCIATION

Mr. McMahon. Chairman Lucas and Members of the Committee, I
am Richard McMahon, Vice President of Energy Supply and Finance
for the Edison Electric Institute. I am testifying on behalf of
EEI, AGA, and EPSA. Together, our members serve most of our
nation's electric and gas consumers.
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss the role of OTC
derivatives markets in helping our utilities and our customers,
and specifically our implementation concerns with Title VII of
the Dodd-Frank Act.
Our members' goal is to provide our customers with reliable
and affordable electric and gas service. Therefore, it is
essential to manage the significant price volatility inherent
in wholesale commodity markets for natural gas and electricity.
The derivatives market is an extremely effective tool in
insulating our customers from this price volatility. Our
members are the quintessential commercial end-users of swaps
and in no way contribute to systemic risk.
Utilities and energy companies are financially stable and
highly creditworthy. As a result, utilities and their customers
get a significant cost-benefit from little or no margin
collateral requirements for their OTC derivatives transactions.
Exchanges and clearinghouses demand expensive cash margin
deposits from all participants, irrespective of their credit
standing. A margin requirement on all OTC swaps for utilities
would have an average annual cash flow impact of between $250
million and $400 million per company. If our members were
forced to post margin on all their OTC swaps, or their
transaction costs go up significantly for other reasons, we
will have three equally undesirable choices--redirect dollars
from our core infrastructure capital spending programs, or
borrow the money and pass that cost through to our customers
and rates, or curtail our derivatives hedging programs and pass
the commodity price volatility through to our customers.
We were pleased to hear Chairman Gensler today regarding
margin and end-users. It is essential that this approach be
fully implemented. However, we are concerned that our
transaction costs may go up significantly as a result of other
aspects of Dodd-Frank implementation. For example, the yet-to-
be-promulgated rulemaking on capital and margin requirements
for bank and nonbank swap dealers could impose incremental
capital requirements on those dealers that engage in non-
cleared OTC swaps with end-users. Undoubtedly, swaps dealers
would pass along this additional cost to end-users, thereby
more or less nullifying any benefit of having an end-user
exemption from clearing margin.
Dodd-Frank left many important issues to be resolved by
regulators and set impractically tight deadlines on
rulemakings. To further complicate matters, many of the complex
issues raised by scores of rulemakings are interrelated. As a
result, interested parties are unable to provide meaningful
comments to the proposed rules because they do not know the
full effect of the complete universe of proposed rules.
For instance, the CFTC has not yet issued the proposed
rules on the definition of swap. This definition is critical to
many of the current rulemakings of Dodd-Frank and could
significantly expand the reach and impacts of these
regulations.
For the end-user exception provision of the Dodd-Frank Act,
the CFTC's proposed rule would require an end-user to report
roughly a dozen items of information to the CFTC each and every
time it elects to rely on the end-user clearing exemption for a
swap. The CFTC does not need such representations from end-
users about each and every one of their non-cleared swaps to
prevent abuse of the end-user clearing exemption.
We request that the Committee emphasize to CFTC that it
should implement the end-user clearing exemption by
streamlining their proposed requirements in the following ways:
by requiring end-users to represent to the CFTC, once, that
they intend to rely on the end-user clearing exemption, and by
informing the CFTC, once, how they generally intend to meet
their financial obligations associated with entering into non-
cleared swaps, and by maintaining a record showing that an
appropriate committee of the board of directors--assuming they
are a public company--has reviewed and approved their overall
decision not to clear.
We are also concerned with how the CFTC plans to define
swaps dealer. CFTC's proposed rule includes very expansive
language about the types of activities that the CFTC views as
dealing. At the same time, the Commission has proposed to
implement the not as part of a regular business and de minimis
exceptions in a very restrictive manner. The result could be
that commercial end-users are inappropriately miscast as
dealers.
Since the enactment of Dodd-Frank, the CFTC has promulgated
dozens of proposed rules. Commercial end-users like our members
have struggled mightily just to keep pace and have filed
comments in more than 17 different Dodd-Frank rulemakings to
date. We do not believe that the end-user clearing exemption
was intended to result in this burdensome outcome.
We believe that under the current timetable, it is
impossible for the CFTC to promulgate workable rules;
therefore, we ask that the Congress extend the statutory
deadline for the promulgation of derivatives rules of Dodd-
Frank under Title VII. We also urge Congress to direct the
regulatory agencies to promulgate those rules so that the basic
definitions are issued prior to other rules that they rely
upon.
I am happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McMahon follows:]

Prepared Statement of Richard F. McMahon, Jr., Vice President, Finance
and Energy Supply, Edison Electric Institute, Washington, D.C.; on
Behalf of American Gas Association; Electric Power Supply Association
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for this opportunity to discuss the role of over-
the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets in helping utilities and energy
companies insulate our customers from the volatility of commodity price
risk, and specifically our implementation concerns regarding the entity
and product classifications under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank), about which
there remains great uncertainty.
I am Richard McMahon, Vice President of Energy Supply and Finance
for the Edison Electric Institute (EEI). EEI is the trade association
of U.S. shareholder-owned electric utilities, with international
affiliates and industry associates worldwide. EEI's U.S. members serve
95 percent of the ultimate electricity customers in the shareholder-
owned segment of the industry, and represent approximately 70 percent
of the total U.S. electric power industry.
I also am testifying on behalf of the American Gas Association
(AGA) and the Electric Power Supply Association (EPSA). AGA represents
199 local energy companies that deliver clean natural gas throughout
the United States. There are more than 70 million residential,
commercial and industrial natural gas customers in the U.S., of which
91 percent receive their gas from AGA members. EPSA is the national
trade association representing competitive power suppliers, including
generators and power marketers.
Utilities and Energy Companies Hedge Risk
Wholesale natural gas and electric power are, and have been
historically, two of the most volatile commodity groups. Our members
use natural gas extensively as a fuel to generate electric power, and
distribute natural gas to consumers in their homes. Additionally,
utilities generate and purchase wholesale electricity from generators
and marketers to meet consumer demand.
The goal of our members is to provide their customers with reliable
service at affordable and stable rates. Therefore, it is essential to
manage the price volatility inherent in wholesale commodity markets for
natural gas and electric power. Our members purchase fuel and sell
power at thousands of delivery points throughout the U.S. They need the
ability to use OTC swaps because existing futures contracts cover only
a limited number of natural gas and electricity delivery points. The
derivatives market has proven to be an extremely effective tool in
insulating our customers from this risk and price volatility. Utilities
and energy companies use exchange-traded and OTC natural gas and
electric power swaps to hedge commercial risk. About 40% of our gas
swaps and about \1/3\ of our power swaps are traded on exchanges.
In sum, our members are the quintessential commercial end-users of
swaps.
Why the Margin Issue Is Critically Important
Utilities and energy companies are financially stable and highly
creditworthy. On average, EEI's members are rated BBB. As a result,
utilities and their customers get a significant cost benefit from low-
or no-collateral requirements for their OTC derivatives transactions.
In some cases, our members provide a letter for credit or a lien on
assets as collateral to support their obligations on swaps. Exchanges
and clearinghouses are generally blind to the financial health of their
participants and demand cash margin deposits, both initial and
variation margin.
Our industry is in the midst of a major capital spending program to
enhance the electric grid, make our generation fleet cleaner and bring
new technologies to our customers. Last year, shareholder-owned
electric utilities' capital expenditures (CAPEX) were $83 billion,
while gas distribution utilities' CAPEX was $5 billion. We expect this
pace of capital investment to continue throughout the decade. The
capital investments of all of our members are contributing to our
nation's economic recovery and job growth.
A margin requirement on all utility OTC swaps would have an average
annual cash flow impact of between $250 million and $400 million per
company for EEI members. This ``dead capital'' tied up in margin
accounts at clearinghouses would need to be funded by our retail
customers.
If our members are forced to post margin on all of our OTC
transactions, we have three equally undesirable choices:

Re-direct dollars from our core infrastructure capital
spending programs to margin accounts at clearinghouses;

Borrow the money to post in margin accounts and pass that
cost through to our customers in rates; or

Curtail our derivatives hedging programs and pass the
commodity price volatility in natural gas and electricity
through to our customers.

Because of these undesirable consequences, the National Association
of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC) passed a resolution in
support of the industry's goal of maintaining our ability to use OTC
derivatives without cash margining requirements (see attached).
We were very pleased to hear Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC) Chairman Gensler's recent testimony earlier this month before
Congress in which he stated, ``Proposed rules on margin shall focus on
transactions between financial entities rather than those transactions
that involve nonfinancial end-users.'' It is essential that this now
unambiguous direction from the CFTC Chairman be carried through fully
in implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act. We believe this was the clear
intent of the Congress, and it was confirmed in the Dodd-Lincoln
letter, which was drafted as part of the conference committee to
clarify the intent of Congress to fully exempt end-users from margining
and burdensome CFTC compliance obligations. (see attached).
However, there remains significant concern that our transaction
costs may go up significantly as the result of Dodd-Frank
implementation. For example, the yet-to-be promulgated rulemaking on
capital and margin requirements for bank and nonbank swap dealers could
impose incremental capital requirements on those dealers that engage in
non-cleared OTC swaps with end-users. Undoubtedly, swap dealers would
pass this additional cost along to end-users, thereby nullifying any
benefit of having an end-user exemption from clearing margin.
Need for a Proper Sequencing and an Extension of the Implementation
Timetable
We support the overarching goals of the Dodd-Frank Act to bring
greater transparency and oversight to derivatives markets and to
address systemic risk to the economy. Additionally, we compliment the
CFTC Chairman, Commissioners and staff for their hard work and openness
in seeking input from different market participants during the
implementation process. But, like the CFTC and other market
participants, we are overwhelmed by the pace and scope of rulemakings.
Since the enactment of Dodd-Frank, the CFTC has established 30
rulemaking teams and has promulgated dozens of proposed rules. Energy
swaps are a small fraction of the more than $650 trillion swaps market.
We believe that, under the current timetable, it is impossible for the
CFTC to adequately understand the energy swaps market, the other
segments of the commodity-based swaps (metals and agriculture) market,
and the much larger other classes of swaps (rates and credit), and to
promulgate workable rules.
Therefore, we ask that Congress extend the statutory deadline for
the promulgation of derivatives rules set forth in section 712 of the
Dodd-Frank Act. Also, we urge Congress to direct the regulatory
agencies to promulgate these rules so that the basic definitions are
issued prior to other rules that rely upon them.
The Dodd-Frank Act left many important issues to be resolved by
regulators and set impractically tight deadlines on rulemakings by the
agencies charged with implementation. To further complicate matters,
many of the complex issues raised by scores of rulemakings are
interrelated. As a result, interested parties are unable to comment on
the proposed rules in a meaningful way, because they cannot know the
full effect of the complete universe of proposed rules. For example, it
is very difficult to comment on the proposed swap dealer definition,
position limits, and record-keeping and reporting rules for swaps
before the proposed definition of a swap has been issued.
Commercial end-users like our members have struggled mightily just
to keep pace, and have been compelled, because of the aforementioned
uncertainty, to file comments in more than 17 different Dodd-Frank
rulemakings in the past 6 months. We do not believe that the end-user
clearing exemption was intended to result in this burdensome outcome.
Concerns Regarding Entity Designation and Implementation Burdens on
End-Users
In a provision of the Dodd-Frank Act known as the ``end-user
clearing exception,'' Congress gave our members and other end-users of
swaps the flexibility to elect not to clear swaps that they use to
hedge commercial risk.
The CFTC's proposed rule implementing this provision would require
an end-user to report roughly a dozen items of information to the CFTC
every time it elects to rely on the end-user clearing exception for a
swap. The required information for each swap includes representations
that:

it is a nonfinancial entity,

the swap is hedging commercial risk,

it has certain credit arrangements in place, and

in the case of publicly-traded companies like most of our
members, that an appropriate committee of the board of
directors (or equivalent body) has reviewed and approved its
decision not to clear.

The CFTC does not need repeated representations from our members
and other end-users about every one of their non-cleared swaps to
prevent abuse of the end-user clearing exception. Our members and other
end-users understand that knowingly providing the CFTC with inaccurate
information is a very serious violation of the Commodity Exchange Act
(CEA). That is more than sufficient incentive for end-users to rely on
the end-user clearing exception only when they are authorized to do so.
We request that the Committee emphasize to the CFTC that it can
implement the end-user clearing exception, consistent with Congress's
intent, by requiring end-users to:

represent once that they will only rely on the end-user
clearing exception for swaps that hedge commercial risk;

inform the Commission once how they generally meet their
financial obligations associated with entering into non-cleared
swaps (coupled with an obligation to provide notice of material
changes); and

in the case of publicly-traded companies, maintain a record
that shows that an appropriate committee of the board of
directors (or equivalent body) has reviewed and approved their
decision not to clear.

In addition to our concerns about the CFTC's proposed
implementation of the end-user clearing exception, we have serious
concerns about how the CFTC plans to define ``swap dealer.'' The CFTC's
proposed rule includes very expansive language about the types of
activity--including ``accommodating'' the demand of third parties for
swaps--that the CFTC views as dealing activity. At the same time, the
Commission has proposed to implement the ``not as part of a regular
business'' and ``de minimis'' exceptions to the definition of ``swap
dealer'' in a very restrictive manner. The result could be that
commercial end-users are inappropriately miscast as swap dealers. If
our members, who primarily engage in hedging activities, are caught
within the definition of ``swap dealer,'' they will face not only the
costs of registration and margin requirements, but they also will be
subject to additional capital requirements (not yet defined by the
CFTC), cost of IT systems for additional record-keeping and reporting,
and other costly requirements not appropriate for end-users.
The CEA, prior to the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, excluded
physical forward transactions from the CFTC's jurisdiction over futures
contracts. The definition of swap in the Dodd-Frank Act includes
options for the purchase or sale of commodities, but excludes ``any
sale of a nonfinancial commodity . . . so long as the transaction is
intended to be physically settled.'' The CFTC has issued proposed rules
on swap position reporting and commodity options that indicate the CFTC
intends to regulate options that, when exercised, require the delivery
or receipt of physical commodities as swaps or ``swaptions.'' The end-
user community is concerned about the CFTC's proposal because many
contracts for the delivery of power in the electric industry, such as
capacity and requirements contracts, include price, volume or other
optionality. Including these end-user to end-user contracts in the
definition of swap would greatly expand the scope of the CFTC's
regulation over the electric utility industry, conflict with the
jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and
potentially would subject end-users to a number of burdensome
regulatory requirements. We urge Congress to restrain CFTC's regulatory
authority in this critical area of our business.
Conclusion
Thank you for your leadership and interest in implementation of the
Dodd-Frank Act. We appreciate your role in helping to ensure that
shareholder-owned and community-owned utilities and energy suppliers
can continue to use OTC derivatives to cost-effectively help protect
our nation's consumers from volatile wholesale natural gas and power
commodity prices. We ask that the Congress extend the statutory
deadline for the promulgation of derivatives rules set forth in section
712 of the Dodd-Frank Act. Also, we urge Congress to direct the
regulatory agencies to promulgate these rules in a logical order so
that the basic definitions are issued prior to other rules that rely
upon them.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to testify and would be happy
to answer any questions.
Attachtments
Resolution on Financial Reform Legislation Affecting Over-the-Counter
Risk Management Products and Its Impacts on Consumers
Whereas, There is a diverse group of end-users, consisting of
electric and natural gas utilities, suppliers, customers, and other
commercial entities who rely on over-the-counter (``OTC'') derivative
products and markets to manage electricity and natural gas price risks
for legitimate business purposes, thereby helping to keep rates stable
and affordable for retail consumers; and

Whereas, The United States Congress is considering financial reform
legislation with the goal of ensuring that gaps in regulation,
oversight of markets and systemic risk do not lead to economic
instability; and

Whereas, Previous NARUC resolutions support Federal legislative and
regulatory actions that fully accommodate legitimate hedging activities
by electric and natural gas utilities; and

Whereas, The proposed legislation would, among other things,
provide the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) with oversight
of OTC risk management products, including mandatory centralized
clearing and exchange trading of all OTC products; and

Whereas, Mandatory centralized clearing of all OTC contracts will
increase expenses associated with hedging activity, and ultimately end-
user prices, due to increased margin requirements; and

Whereas, A report by the Joint Association of Energy End-Users
stated that the effect of margin requirements resulting from mandatory
clearing for electric utilities would have the unintended effect of
reducing or eliminating legitimate hedging practices and could
jeopardize or reduce investments in Smart Grid technology; and for
natural gas utilities and production companies could reduce capital
devoted to infrastructure and natural gas exploration; and

Whereas, The laudable goals of reform that ensure market
transparency and adequate regulatory oversight can be accomplished by
means other than mandatory clearing of OTC risk management contracts
and the anticipated extra expense. For example, a requirement that
natural gas and electric market participants engaging in legitimate
hedging report all OTC derivative transactions to a centralized data
repository, like the CFTC, provides sufficient market transparency
without the costs associated with mandatory clearing; and

Whereas, Proposed reforms would cause regulatory uncertainty with
regard to the oversight of Regional Transmission Organizations (RTOs)
and Independent System Operators (ISOs), where such uncertainty and/or
overlapping jurisdiction can lead to negative impacts on liquidity,
market confidence and reliability; and

Whereas, The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), and the
Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUCT) for Texas/ERCOT, as the
regulators with the necessary expertise and statutory mandates to
oversee electricity and natural gas markets to protect the public
interest and consumers, should not be preempted by the financial reform
legislation from being able to continue exercising their authority to
ensure reliable, just and reasonable service and protect consumers; and

Whereas, Energy markets currently regulated by FERC or the PUCT
(for Texas/ERCOT) under accepted tariffs or rate schedules should
continue to be subject to FERC's and the PUCT's (for Texas/ERCOT)
exclusive Federal jurisdiction, including jurisdiction over physical
and financial transmission rights, and market oversight; and should
themselves not be subject to CFTC jurisdiction as a clearinghouse due
to the financial and other settlement services they provide those
transacting in regional electricity markets; now, therefore be it

Resolved, That the Board of Directors of the National Association
of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, convened at its 2010 Winter
Committee Meetings in Washington, D.C., supports passage of financial
reform legislation ensuring that electric and natural gas market
participants continue to have access to OTC risk management products as
tools in their legitimate hedging practices to provide more predictable
and less volatile energy costs to consumers; and be it further

Resolved, That new financial legislation being considered by
Congress should weigh the costs of potential end-user utility rate
increases versus the benefits of new standards for the clearing of OTC
risk management contracts used by natural gas and electric utilities
for legitimate hedging purposes; and be it further

Resolved, That any Federal legislation addressing OTC risk
management products should provide for an exemption from mandatory
clearing requirements for legitimate hedging activity in natural gas
and electricity markets; and be it further

Resolved, That any exemption to the mandatory clearing requirement
for OTC derivatives be narrowly tailored as to not allow excessive
speculation in natural gas and electricity markets; and be it further

Resolved, That the FERC, and the PUCT for Texas/ERCOT, charged with
the statutory obligation to protect the public interest and consumers,
should continue to be the exclusive Federal regulators with authority
to oversee any agreement, contract, transaction, product, market
mechanism or service offered or provided pursuant to a tariff or rate
schedule filed and accepted by the FERC, or the PUCT for Texas/ERCOT;
and be it further

Resolved, That NARUC authorizes and directs the staff and General
Counsel to promote with the Congress, the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission and other policymakers at the Federal level, policies
consistent with this statement.

Sponsored by the Committee on Gas, Consumer Affairs, and
Electricity Adopted by the NARUC Board of Directors February 17, 2010.
______

June 30, 2010

Hon. Barney Frank,
Chairman,
House Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.;

Hon. Collin C. Peterson,
Chairman,
House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

Dear Chairmen Frank and Peterson:

Whether swaps are used by an airline hedging its fuel costs or a
global manufacturing company hedging interest rate risk, derivatives
are an important tool businesses use to manage costs and market
volatility. This legislation will preserve that tool. Regulators,
namely the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the prudential regulators, must not
make hedging so costly it becomes prohibitively expensive for end-users
to manage their risk. This letter seeks to provide some additional
background on legislative intent on some, but not all, of the various
sections of Title VII of H.R. 4173, the Dodd-Frank Act.
The legislation does not authorize the regulators to impose margin
on end-users, those exempt entities that use swaps to hedge or mitigate
commercial risk. If regulators raise the costs of end-user
transactions, they may create more risk. It is imperative that the
regulators do not unnecessarily divert working capital from our economy
into margin accounts, in a way that would discourage hedging by end-
users or impair economic growth.
Again, Congress clearly stated in this bill that the margin and
capital requirements are not to be imposed on end-users, nor can the
regulators require clearing for end-user trades. Regulators are charged
with establishing rules for the capital requirements, as well as the
margin requirements for all uncleared trades, but rules may not be set
in a way that requires the imposition of margin requirements on the
end-user side of a lawful transaction. In cases where a Swap Dealer
enters into an uncleared swap with an end-user, margin on the dealer
side of the transaction should reflect the counterparty risk of the
transaction. Congress strongly encourages regulators to establish
margin requirements for such swaps or security-based swaps in a manner
that is consistent with the Congressional intent to protect end-users
from burdensome costs.
In harmonizing the different approaches taken by the House and
Senate in their respective derivatives titles, a number of provisions
were deleted by the Conference Committee to avoid redundancy and to
streamline the regulatory framework. However, a consistent
Congressional directive throughout all drafts of this legislation, and
in Congressional debate, has been to protect end-users from burdensome
costs associated with margin requirements and mandatory clearing.
Accordingly, changes made in Conference to the section of the bill
regulating capital and margin requirements for Swap Dealers and Major
Swap Participants should not be construed as changing this important
Congressional interest in protecting end-users. In fact, the House
offer amending the capital and margin provisions of Sections 731 and
764 expressly stated that the strike to the base text was made ``to
eliminate redundancy.'' Capital and margin standards should be set to
mitigate risk in our financial system, not punish those who are trying
to hedge their own commercial risk.
Congress recognized that the individualized credit arrangements
worked out between counterparties in a bilateral transaction can be
important components of business risk management. That is why Congress
specifically mandates that regulators permit the use of non-cash
collateral for counterparty arrangements with Swap Dealers and Major
Swap Participants to permit flexibility. Mitigating risk is one of the
most important reasons for passing this legislation.
Congress determined that clearing is at the heart of reform--
bringing transactions and counterparties into a robust, conservative
and transparent risk management framework. Congress also acknowledged
that clearing may not be suitable for every transaction or every
counterparty. End-users who hedge their risks may find it challenging
to use a standard derivative contracts to exactly match up their risks
with counterparties willing to purchase their specific exposures.
Standardized derivative contracts may not be suitable for every
transaction. Congress recognized that imposing the clearing and
exchange trading requirement on commercial end-users could raise
transaction costs where there is a substantial public interest in
keeping such costs low (i.e., to provide consumers with stable, low
prices, promote investment, and create jobs.)
Congress recognized this concern and created a robust end-user
clearing exemption for those entities that are using the swaps market
to hedge or mitigate commercial risk. These entities could be anything
ranging from car companies to airlines or energy companies who produce
and distribute power to farm machinery manufacturers. They also include
captive finance affiliates, finance arms that are hedging in support of
manufacturing or other commercial companies. The end-user exemption
also may apply to our smaller financial entities--credit unions,
community banks, and Farm Credit institutions. These entities did not
get us into this crisis and should not be punished for Wall Street's
excesses. They help to finance jobs and provide lending for communities
all across this nation. That is why Congress provided regulators the
authority to exempt these institutions.
This is also why we narrowed the scope of the Swap Dealer and Major
Swap Participant definitions. We should not inadvertently pull in
entities that are appropriately managing their risk. In implementing
the Swap Dealer and Major Swap Participant provisions, Congress expects
the regulators to maintain through rulemaking that the definition of
Major Swap Participant does not capture companies simply because they
use swaps to hedge risk in their ordinary course of business. Congress
does not intend to regulate end-users as Major Swap Participants or
Swap Dealers just because they use swaps to hedge or manage the
commercial risks associated with their business. For example, the Major
Swap Participant and Swap Dealer definitions are not intended to
include an electric or gas utility that purchases commodities that are
used either as a source of fuel to produce electricity or to supply gas
to retail customers and that uses swaps to hedge or manage the
commercial risks associated with its business. Congress incorporated a
de minimis exception to the Swap Dealer definition to ensure that
smaller institutions that are responsibly managing their commercial
risk are not inadvertently pulled into additional regulation.
Just as Congress has heard the end-user community, regulators must
carefully take into consideration the impact of regulation and capital
and margin on these entities.
It is also imperative that regulators do not assume that all over-
the-counter transactions share the same risk profile. While uncleared
swaps should be looked at closely, regulators must carefully analyze
the risk associated with cleared and uncleared swaps and apply that
analysis when setting capital standards for Swap Dealers and Major Swap
Participants. As regulators set capital and margin standards on Swap
Dealers or Major Swap Participants, they must set the appropriate
standards relative to the risks associated with trading. Regulators
must carefully consider the potential burdens that Swap Dealers and
Major Swap Participants may impose on end-user counterparties--
especially if those requirements will discourage the use of swaps by
end-users or harm economic growth. Regulators should seek to impose
margins to the extent they are necessary to ensure the safety and
soundness of the Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants.
Congress determined that end-users must be empowered in their
counterparty relationships, especially relationships with swap dealers.
This is why Congress explicitly gave to end-users the option to clear
swaps contracts, the option to choose their clearinghouse or clearing
agency, and the option to segregate margin with an independent third
party custodian.
In implementing the derivatives title, Congress encourages the CFTC
to clarify through rulemaking that the exclusion from the definition of
swap for ``any sale of a nonfinancial commodity or security for
deferred shipment or delivery, so long as the transaction is intended
to be physically settled'' is intended to be consistent with the
forward contract exclusion that is currently in the Commodity Exchange
Act and the CFTC's established policy and orders on this subject,
including situations where commercial parties agree to ``book-out''
their physical delivery obligations under a forward contract.
Congress recognized that the capital and margin requirements in
this bill could have an impact on swaps contracts currently in
existence. For this reason, we provided legal certainty to those
contracts currently in existence, providing that no contract could be
terminated, renegotiated, modified, amended, or supplemented (unless
otherwise specified in the contract) based on the implementation of any
requirement in this Act, including requirements on Swap Dealers and
Major Swap Participants. It is imperative that we provide certainty to
these existing contracts for the sake of our economy and financial
system.
Regulators must carefully follow Congressional intent in
implementing this bill. While Congress may not have the expertise to
set specific standards, we have laid out our criteria and guidelines
for implementing reform. It is imperative that these standards are not
punitive to the end-users, that we encourage the management of
commercial risk, and that we build a strong but responsive framework
for regulating the derivatives market.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Christopher Dodd,
Chairman,
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs;

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Blanche L. Lincoln,
Chairman,
Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.

The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Trakimas.

STATEMENT OF ANN E. TRAKIMAS, CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER, CoBANK, GREENWOOD VILLAGE, CO; ON BEHALF OF FARM
CREDIT COUNCIL

Ms. Trakimas. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Lucas,
Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the Committee. Thank
you for your leadership in overseeing the CFTC's implementation
of the derivatives title of the Dodd-Frank Act and for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Ann Trakimas and I am the Chief Operating
Officer of CoBank. I am testifying today on behalf of the Farm
Credit System. New derivatives regulation has the potential to
affect the Farm Credit System's ability to offer cost-
effective, dependable financing to farmers, farm-related
businesses, rural home buyers and rural energy, water and
communications companies.
Farm Credit supports Congress' goal of making the U.S.
financial system safer and more transparent. We believe,
however, that some of the new proposed regulations would impose
unwarranted costs on Farm Credit institutions, ultimately
increasing the cost of credit to our customers without making
the financial system safer.
The provisions on derivatives in the Dodd-Frank Act were
designed to reduce and control systemic risk in the financial
system. In passing the Act, Congress made clear its view that
Farm Credit institution derivative activities do not pose a
systemic threat. As a result, we believe Congress' intent is
for new regulation to be focused on institutions that engage in
derivatives activity that do create systemic risk.
Farm Credit institutions should be exempt from the
mandatory swap clearing requirements of the Act. System
institutions are end-users and use them solely for hedging the
risks inherent in making loans to their customers and in
managing their liquidity and funding costs. Farm Credit
institutions primarily use plain vanilla, fixed for floating
interest rate, swaps and caps. We do not use swaps to
speculate; we are not market makers, and we do not use the
credit default swaps that contributed to the financial crisis.
The System's swaps are an extremely small portion of the
overall derivatives market. We have robust procedures in place
today, closely overseen by our Federal regulator, that ensures
our swaps post no significant risk to us or to our
counterparties.
The recent global financial crisis conclusively
demonstrated that Farm Credit's strong risk controls
effectively limited our exposure to financial stress resulting
from derivatives activities. Congress recognized all of this in
the Dodd-Frank Act when it directed CFTC to consider exempting
small banks, credit unions, and Farm Credit institutions for
mandatory swap clearing.
The CFTC's final regulations in this area should provide an
exemption from mandatory swap clearing for derivatives
activities that do not possess systemic risk.
In addition, no Farm Credit institution should be
considered a swap dealer. Only one Farm Credit institution,
CoBank, offers swaps to its customers.
CoBank does a limited number of these transactions each
year, and all of these transactions are executed in conjunction
with loans made to our customers. All of our customers'
derivative transactions are nonspeculative, and we offset the
risk associated with each. These customer transactions pose no
systemic risk and are critical to helping our customers
economically manage the risks inherent in their loans.
Additionally, because CoBank is the only lender to many of
its borrowers, we may be the only counterparty able to enter
into a swap with that customer, because we already hold the
customer's collateral via our loan agreements.
Congressional intent in this area is clear: The Dodd-Frank
Act specifically gives CFTC the authority to exclude these
types of customer swap transactions from the swap dealer
definition. CoBank's customer derivatives are the same as the
customer derivatives that commercial banks provide to their
customers, and Congress has exempted commercial banks from
designation as a swap dealer.
There is no reason that the same exemption should not apply
to the Farm Credit System.
On behalf of the members of the Farm Credit System, thank
you for holding this hearing and for considering our views on
this important topic.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Trakimas. Can I just complete? Farm Credit institutions
rely on the safe use of derivatives to manage our interest rate
liquidity and balance sheet risks. These instruments in turn
help us provide cost-effective, dependable financing to
farmers, ranchers, ag co-ops and other farm-related and rural
infrastructure businesses that serve rural America. It is
essential that in implementing Dodd-Frank, the CFTC does not
impose unwarranted, duplicative, and costly regulations on the
Farm Credit System. Mandatory clearing or swap dealer
regulation would increase our borrowers' financing costs.
We look forward to working with the Committee as well as
the CFTC to strike the appropriate balance between improving
the safety of the financial system and preserving rural
America's access to credit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would be very happy to
answer any questions that you or the Committee have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Trakimas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ann E. Trakimas, Chief Operating Officer, CoBank,
Greenwood Village, CO; on Behalf of Farm Credit Council
Good afternoon, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and
Members of the Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of the Farm Credit System, and I commend the Committee for
its leadership in overseeing the rulemaking process as the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC'') implements the derivatives title
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(``Dodd-Frank'').\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am the Chief Operating Officer of CoBank, a member bank of the
Farm Credit System. Before joining CoBank, I served as a director of
the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation, the entity that
issues debt securities that CoBank and other Farm Credit banks use to
fund loans to farmers and ranchers, farm-related businesses,
agricultural cooperatives, and rural electric, water, and
communications providers.
As you know, the Farm Credit System provides 40% of agricultural
lending in the United States. New derivatives regulation has the
potential to affect the Farm Credit System's ability to offer cost-
effective, dependable financing to farmers, farm-related businesses,
and rural America. The Farm Credit System supports Congress's goal of
making the financial system safer. We believe, however, that new
regulation should not impose unwarranted costs on Farm Credit System
institutions, which would ultimately raise the costs of loans to our
member-borrowers and diminish rural America's access to credit, without
making the financial system safer.
In explaining how proposed regulations will affect the Farm Credit
System and what steps we believe the CFTC should take in implementing
Dodd-Frank, I would like to make three points:
First, the Farm Credit System already has in place important
protections for safety, soundness, and consumer protection. These
attributes illustrate that many of Dodd-Frank's regulatory concerns do
not apply with equal force to the Farm Credit System. In passing the
Act, Congress concluded that the Farm Credit System did not pose a
systemic threat and specifically excluded them from oversight by the
new systemic risk regulatory agency.
Second, Farm Credit System banks and associations should qualify
for the end-user exemption to Dodd-Frank's clearing requirement.
Congress authorized and instructed the CFTC to consider exempting Farm
Credit System institutions, regardless of size, from mandatory clearing
since they do not pose a systemic risk to the financial system and they
were not the cause of the problems that resulted in the recent
financial crisis. Imposing higher costs, through unnecessary
derivatives regulations, on Farm Credit System institutions ultimately
leads to higher credit costs for farmers and ranchers, their
agricultural cooperatives, rural infrastructure providers and others in
rural America. While Dodd-Frank places special emphasis on exempting
institutions with less than $10 billion in assets, Congress also made
it clear that it should not be viewed as a limit by CFTC. If the CFTC
adopts an asset test, it must be applied in a manner that appropriately
recognizes the unique cooperative structure of the Farm Credit System
to ``look through'' Farm Credit Banks to the smaller Farm Credit
associations that own them. Alternatively, the CFTC should adopt a
risk-based approach to mandatory clearing in a manner similar to the
definition of major swap participant.
Third, no Farm Credit System institution should be considered a
swap dealer. Farm Credit System institutions enter into customer
derivative transactions that are linked to the financial terms of the
loans they issue. All customer derivative transactions are non-
speculative in nature with risk immediately eliminated through
appropriate risk management activities and controls. These customer
derivative transactions pose no systemic risk to the financial system
and are critical to helping our customers economically manage interest
rate and foreign currency risk. In this way, the Farm Credit System's
customer derivatives activity is the same as the same sort of customer
derivatives activity of commercial banks, which Congress has exempted
from designation as a swap dealer. There is no reason that the same
exemption should not apply to the Farm Credit System.
Background
I would like to begin with an overview of the Farm Credit System,
which comprises five banks and 84 cooperative lending associations. As
you know, Congress created the Farm Credit System ``to accomplish the
objective of improving the income and well-being of American farmers
and ranchers by furnishing sound, adequate, and constructive credit and
closely related services to them, their cooperatives, and to selected
farm-related businesses necessary for efficient farm operations.'' \2\
Congress also intended ``to encourage farmer- and rancher-borrowers
participation in the management, control, and ownership of a permanent
system of credit for agriculture which will be responsive to the credit
needs of all types of agricultural producers having a basis for
credit.'' \3\ Today, the Farm Credit System is safe, sound, and
responsive to its customer-owners. This is due, in part, to the
following aspects of the Farm Credit System.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 12 U.S.C.  2001(a).
\3\ Id.  2001(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Farm Credit System uses safe, non-speculative swaps and already
effectively addresses counterparty credit risk. Farm Credit System
institutions primarily use plain vanilla, fixed-for-floating interest
rate swaps, and virtually all of our derivatives qualify for hedge
accounting treatment. Farm Credit System institutions do not use swaps
to speculate, and do not use the credit default swaps that contributed
to the financial crisis. And Farm Credit System institutions already
effectively manage counterparty credit risk. We deal with
counterparties that have an investment grade or better long-term credit
rating, and we monitor the credit standing of and levels of exposure to
individual counterparties. Substantially all of our derivative
contracts are supported by credit support agreements requiring the two-
way posting of collateral in the event certain dollar thresholds of
exposure are reached. These thresholds are small relative to the Farm
Credit System capital. As of December 31, 2010, the net
uncollateralized exposure of Farm Credit System institutions to swap
dealers was only $232 million. As of that same date, Farm Credit Bank
capital stood at $12.3 billion.
Farm Credit System institutions are regulated by the Farm Credit
Administration, an independent Federal agency that effectively
mitigates the risk of Farm Credit System institutions to the United
States financial system. The Farm Credit Act gives the Farm Credit
Administration broad powers ``for the purpose of ensuring the safety
and soundness of System institutions.'' \4\ These powers include
suspending or removing directors or officers of Farm Credit System
institutions who engage in unsafe or unsound practices, and the ability
to place unsafe or unsound institutions in conservatorship or
receivership.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id.  2252(a)(10).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Farm Credit Administration also effectively oversees the
capital adequacy and derivatives activity of Farm Credit System
institutions. The Farm Credit Administration sets minimum capital
standards and rates the safety and soundness of each Farm Credit System
institution, and it requires Farm Credit System institutions to limit
their exposure to single or related counterparties and to establish
policies that ensure that counterparty risks are consistent with the
institution's risk-bearing capacity.
The Farm Credit System is not so interconnected with other
financial entities to raise systemic risk concerns. Because Farm Credit
System institutions do not take deposits, Farm Credit System banks and
associations cannot experience a ``run on the bank.'' And the
Systemwide Debt Securities used to fund the Farm Credit System are (1)
insured by the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation, a government-
controlled, independent entity, that administers a more than $3 billion
insurance fund paid by premiums imposed on System institutions, and (2)
issued by the five Farm Credit System banks, which are jointly and
severally liable for these Systemwide debt obligations. In short, these
layers of investor protection ensure that the Farm Credit System will
not cause a run on the funding of other entities.
The Farm Credit System is a cooperative enterprise. Farm Credit
System associations are cooperatives owned by their borrowers, and Farm
Credit System banks are cooperatives primarily owned by their
affiliated associations and other borrowers organized as cooperatives.
Borrowers purchase equity in the institutions with which they do
business, and Farm Credit System institutions return a portion of their
earnings to their borrower-owners in the form of patronage
distributions. Farm Credit Administration regulations further govern
our standard of conduct, requiring, among other things, that Farm
Credit System institutions monitor and avoid conflicts of interest.
Finally, Farm Credit System institutions are uniquely well suited
to provide derivatives to their customers. To the extent that a System
institution is a customer's only lender, that customer will likely be
unable to enter into a swap with another party that would not have
access to the loan collateral. New regulation would raise the costs of
derivatives to the Farm Credit System's customers and could cause
System institutions to stop offering these products. This would deprive
some farmers, farm-related businesses, and rural America of the ability
to manage risk, and drive others to Wall Street swap dealers that are
less familiar with their unique needs.
In sum, Farm Credit System institutions are safe and sound, and
they operate with high standards of conduct for their customers. Before
determining that new regulation is warranted, regulators must therefore
consider the Farm Credit Administration's effective current regulation
of safety and soundness, the low risk profile of Farm Credit System
institutions, and the unique relationship those institutions have with
their borrower-owners.
With these principles in mind, I would like to discuss two
significant areas of potential new regulation: (1) whether Farm Credit
System institutions will qualify for the end-user exemption as we
believe Congress, and this Committee, intended; and (2) whether Farm
Credit System institutions will be designated as swap dealers, which we
believe Congress, and this Committee did not intend and if it occurred
would be unfair and unnecessary.
End-User Exemption
As you know, Dodd-Frank provides an exemption to mandatory clearing
for end-users entering into swaps to hedge or mitigate commercial risk.
Although Dodd-Frank generally defines end-users as nonfinancial
entities, Congress also directed the CFTC to ``consider whether to
exempt small banks, savings associations, farm credit system
institutions, and credit unions.'' \5\ Because the Farm Credit System
is already safe and sound, and because our derivatives are already
collateralized, we believe Congress gave the CFTC broad authority to
permit Farm Credit System institutions, including those with total
assets of more than $10 billion, to use the end-user exemption. We have
urged the CFTC to clarify in its final rules that Farm Credit System
institutions will qualify for the end-user clearing exemption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Pub. L. No. 111-203,  723(a)(3), 124 Stat. at 1680 (CEA 
2(h)(7)(C)(ii)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, we have asked the CFTC to provide the maximum flexibility to
adopt an equitable solution for exempting Farm Credit institutions from
mandatory swaps clearing if they do not pose a systemic risk to the
U.S. financial institutions. Consistent with what we believe to be
Congress's intent, the Dodd-Frank Act authorizes CFTC to exempt any-
sized Farm Credit System institution from mandatory clearing
requirements, which is appropriate given Farm Credit System
institutions' derivatives use does not pose a systemic risk to the
financial system. More troubling to us is the CFTC may take a more
narrow approach, particularly with respect to how it interprets the
Dodd-Frank Act's reference to the $10 billion asset limit, which would
make even more critical that it at least recognize the unique
cooperative structure of the Farm Credit System where the cooperative
district banks are generally owned by cooperative lending associations,
which engage in most of the System's retail lending. Under this
structure, the cooperative lending associations are smaller than their
affiliated banks that provide them funding and use derivatives to
manage liquidity and other balance-sheet risks. For example, AgriBank,
FCB, is the largest district bank, and its assets exceed $10 billion.
But the 17 associations that own 99% of AgriBank have average assets of
$3.6 billion. This is well below the $10 billion threshold that some
have suggested.\6\ Congress did not intend the $10 billion as a size
limitation for exempting Farm Credit institutions from mandatory
clearing. If, however, CFTC decides to implement an exemption test that
included size, the agency must then also recognize the unique
cooperative structure of the Farm Credit System and ``look through''
Farm Credit Banks to the smaller Farm Credit associations that own
them. One consequence of our unique structure is that each bank
centrally funds loans for its district. Centralized funding enables the
associations to benefit from lower administrative and operational
costs. Swaps that hedge risk on behalf of Farm Credit System
associations are executed by the district bank to gain hedge
accounting, to minimize administrative costs, and to minimize
counterparty credit risk and margin requirements via district-wide
netting of offsetting exposures. This is more cost effective and
strengthens the liquidity of the System. As a result, Farm Credit
System associations have a lower risk profile than the small commercial
banks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ As the Farm Credit Council noted in its February 22 comment on
the CFTC's proposed end-user exception rules, although the majority of
Farm Credit System associations have assets of less than $10 billion,
the few associations with greater assets do not present risk requiring
mandatory clearing. Even the failure of a large association would have
no material impact on the Farm Credit System's ability to meet its debt
obligations because the five Farm Credit System banks are jointly and
severally liable for the System's notes and bonds. Thus, no association
is so large that it would impact System debt holders if it were placed
in receivership. By contrast, if a standalone bank fails, its
bondholders will likely face losses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We believe the increased costs of mandatory clearing will
ultimately be borne by farmers and ranchers because of the higher cost
of credit, and will put our cooperative lending associations at a
disadvantage with respect to the small commercial banks with which they
compete. The increased costs of mandatory clearing will be passed on
from the banks to their associations, reducing their capital and
liquidity, which in turn will either reduce the funds available for
loans or increase borrowing costs. That result would be unfair and
unnecessary given that Congress intended to give regulators maximum
flexibility in implementing the end-user exemption.
Second, we have asked the CFTC to consider the risk of an
institution's derivatives activity instead of simply its total assets.
To the extent clearing is designed to address credit risk, large
institutions may in fact be less risky than smaller institutions. Risk
is a function of the type and amount of derivative activity after
netting offsetting positions and collateral, not simply of total
assets. Accordingly, we have urged the CFTC to consider a risk-based
measure of which financial entities should be eligible for the end-user
clearing exemption.
One such approach could draw on the framework proposed by the CFTC
and the Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'') for determining
whether an entity has a ``substantial position'' in a major swaps
category warranting regulation as a major swap participant. A similar
test measuring uncollateralized current exposure or current exposure
plus potential future exposure would also be appropriate for
determining which financial institutions pose enough risk to warrant
mandatory clearing. Specifically, we have proposed that current
uncollateralized exposure of $2 billion in rate swaps and $1 billion in
other categories of swaps--or current uncollateralized exposure and
potential future exposure of $3 billion for rate swaps or $1 billion
for other swaps--would be appropriate. These proposed thresholds, which
are lower than the thresholds the CFTC has proposed for identifying
major swap participants, would address risk among financial entities
and would more accurately capture financial institutions whose swap
exposure poses risk to the financial system. We are convinced that
implementing a risk-based test using current and potential exposures is
more equitable and appropriate way to determine when financial
institution derivative activities, including Farm Credit System
institutions, may pose a systemic risk to the financial system and,
therefore, require mandatory clearing of derivative transactions.
Alternatively, the CFTC could adopt a test based on an
institution's uncollateralized exposure to swaps as a percentage of
capital. The Farm Credit System has suggested to the CFTC that
appropriate risk limits would be current uncollateralized exposure to
swaps of 10% of capital, or current uncollateralized exposure plus
potential future exposure to swaps of 20% of capital. These limits
would appropriately identify which small financial institutions pose
systemic risk warranting mandatory clearing.
In the end, it is critically important that Farm Credit System
banks, associations, and their members can make use of the end-user
clearing exemption. Clearing will raise costs for Farm Credit System
institutions that will ultimately be borne by our agricultural
borrowers in the form of higher interest rates. We do not believe that
new costs on agricultural borrowers are justified.
Swap Dealer Regulation
Finally, I would like to address the issue of whether any Farm
Credit System institution will be defined as a ``swap dealer'' and
therefore will be forced to register with the CFTC and comply with
potentially costly new capital, margin, and business conduct standards.
Farm Credit System institutions do not use swaps speculatively and
we are not market makers. CoBank does, however, enter into swaps with
customers as a service that enables them to modify or reduce their
interest rate and foreign currency risk related to their loans with the
bank or its related associations. For example, a floating-rate loan
agreement may require the customer to hedge fluctuations in interest
rates. The most efficient way for the customer to do so is to enter
into an interest rate swap or cap. By requiring the customer to hedge
against changing interest rates and by providing the customer a swap
for that hedge, CoBank reduces the risk that higher interest rates may
cause excessive interest expense that the customer cannot afford. Thus,
the hedging requirement mitigates risk for both the bank and the
customer.
All of the Farm Credit System's customer derivatives transactions
are non-speculative, and Farm Credit System institutions offset the
risk associated with them. For example, CoBank concurrently enters into
offsetting agreements with approved counterparties, and customer
derivatives are secured under the related loan agreements with CoBank
or its related association. CoBank's customers--which include
agricultural cooperatives; rural energy, communications, and water
companies; farmer-owned financial institutions including agricultural
credit associations; and other businesses that serve rural America--
depend on these swaps to hedge risk and allow them to access credit.
Indeed, because CoBank is the only lender to many of its borrowers, it
may be the only counterparty able to enter into a swap backed by the
loan collateral.
We believe that Congress intended to clarify that ``community banks
aren't swap dealers or major swap participants'' \7\--at least not when
they enter into a swap with a customer that is linked to the financial
terms of the customer's loan. To accomplish this objective, Dodd-Frank
states that ``in no event shall an insured depository institution be
considered to be a swap dealer to the extent it offers to enter into a
swap with a customer in connection with originating a loan with that
customer.'' \8\ Although the statute says ``insured depository
institution,'' we believe Congress intended to exclude swaps offered in
connection with loans and did not intend to confer a peculiar market
advantage on commercial banks. To effectuate the intent that community
banks not be designated swap dealers, the members of the Farm Credit
System have urged the CFTC to clarify that this exemption applies
equally to Farm Credit System institutions when they offer derivatives
to customers in connection with loans, even though our institutions do
not accept deposits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 156 Cong. Rec. S5922 (daily ed. July 15, 2010) (statement of
Sen. Lincoln) (``The definition of swap dealer was adjusted in a couple
of respects so that a community bank which is hedging its interest rate
risk on its loan portfolio would not be viewed as a Swap Dealer. In
addition, we made it clear that a bank that originates a loan with a
customer and offers a swap in connection with that loan shouldn't be
viewed as a swap dealer. It was never the intention of the Senate
Agriculture Committee to catch community banks in either situation. We
worked very hard to make sure that this understanding came through in
revised statutory language which was worked out during conference.'').
\8\ Pub. L. No. 111-203,  721(a)(21), 124 Stat. at 1670 (adding
CEA  1a(49)(A)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, the Farm Credit System's customer interest rate derivatives
are identical to swaps offered by community banks in connection with
loans. For example, CoBank customizes customer swaps to match the terms
of loans and to ensure that the customer is effectively hedged against
changes in interest rates. Because the swaps are connected to the
financial terms of the loan, CoBank's customer interest rate swaps are
consistent with the CFTC's preliminary interpretation of the community
banks exemption.
Second, Farm Credit System institutions are subject to similar
regulatory requirements as insured depository institutions. As an
example, the Farm Credit Administration uses the same FIRS, or CAMELS,
rating system for Farm Credit System institutions that the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation uses for commercial banks.
Third, although Farm Credit System institutions do not accept
deposits, the Systemwide Debt Securities they use to finance loans are
insured, just as deposits of commercial banks are insured. If a bank
cannot pay principal or interest on an insured debt obligation, the
investors are paid from an independently administered insurance fund
supported by premiums paid by Farm Credit System institutions. In the
event that the entire insurance fund is exhausted, investors have
further recourse to the five Farm Credit System banks, which are
jointly and severally liable for Systemwide Debt Securities. All of the
Farm Credit System's debt financing is insured in this manner.
Finally, unless Farm Credit System institutions were able to use
it, the community bank exemption would give commercial banks an
unwarranted competitive advantage in the market for agricultural
lending. In determining whether an entity is a swap dealer, the rules
currently proposed by the CFTC and the SEC do just that. The proposed
rules exempt derivatives offered by commercial banks, while counting
the same derivatives offered by the Farm Credit System, simply because
System institutions do not accept deposits. This is unfair, and we do
not believe that Congress intended this result in exempting community
banks from additional regulation. Accordingly, we have urged the CFTC
to provide this same exemption to the Farm Credit System in its final
rules.
* * * * *
On behalf of the members of the Farm Credit System, I thank the
Committee for holding for this hearing and for considering our views on
these very important issues. Farm Credit System institutions rely on
the safe use of derivatives to manage interest rate, liquidity, and
balance sheet risk. These instruments, in turn, help us to provide
cost-effective, dependable financing to farmers, farm-related
businesses, and rural America. It is essential that, in implementing
Dodd-Frank, the CFTC does not impose unwarranted, duplicative, and
costly regulation on the Farm Credit System. Mandatory clearing or swap
dealer regulation would raise costs of financing for our borrowers. We
look forward to working with the Committee, as well as with the CFTC,
to strike the appropriate balance between improving the safety of the
financial system and preserving rural America's access to credit.
Again, I thank the Committee for its leadership on these important
matters.

The Chairman. Thank you again.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allison, if ConocoPhillips were no longer providing
swaps to its physical customers because of the cost associated
with regulation as a swap dealer due to that activity, how do
you anticipate the demand for those swaps would be met? If you
can't do it, what is going to happen?
Mr. Allison. The customers that were unable to acquire
swaps from us would either have to increase the risk they were
willing to bear, or they would go to an entity that I would
think of--probably one of the big financial firms. The well-
known financial firms are the biggest swap dealers in the
energy space as in the other derivatives markets, and that
would be the most likely firm to pick up any business that we
weren't doing.
The Chairman. So they simply expose themselves to more
risk, or they increase their cost by finding some entity that
would?
Mr. Allison. Yes.
The Chairman. Mr. Fields, Mr. McMahon, how would you
respond to the assertion that central clearing shifts the
informational advantage from Wall Street to the end-users and
that the result from end-users of a central clearing mandate
would be better pricing? How do you respond to that comment by
some people?
Mr. McMahon. I will start first. Our members utilize
exchanges and central clearing for some of their transactions
in electric swap transactions and electric power and natural
gas. So it is not that we don't use clearing in exchanges, but
only where it makes sense. Oftentimes there are a lot of
customized transactions that need to be done that don't lend
themselves to central clearing. So we need the ability to
utilize all the options.
I think that for us, that is the key, having that
flexibility and also where it makes sense; because of our
credit standing, oftentimes we don't need to post any margin,
and that benefit flows directly to our customers.
The Chairman. Mr. Field?
Mr. Field. I would reply to that in the sense that when we
are bidding a transaction, we will have a very, very
transparent and a very significant process where we are getting
lots of market information from many different Wall Street
banks. And so we feel that actually it is very, very
transparent from our perspective today and we don't see that
advantage. In fact, we see an advantage where oftentimes the
banks are bidding very aggressively for our business, because
they like a swap with a nonfinancial institution, a non-Wall
Street bank. They like having us as the counterparty.
The Chairman. Mr. Cvrkel, Ms. Trakimas, as the bankers at
the table, how is the credit profile of a potential borrower
impacted by whether or not they are hedging their exposure to
risk? I know it is a simple question but it is one of those
things we need to point out and discuss in public.
Ms. Trakimas. I guess I will start. Our customers typically
borrow in the floating rate market, and essentially they use
interest rate swaps to cap the interest rate risk on that
floating rate loan. So to the extent that we do not offer this
product because of increased costs and regulation, they will be
increasing their risk profile to us and themselves. So it is a
disadvantage.
Mr. Cvrkel. When we look at our customers, one thing we
need to evaluate credit risk exposure is fixed-debt service
cost so the cost will be consistent over the next 5 years or 10
years. If we are unable to offer those customers that fixed-
rate debt service cost, chances are we would not make any loans
greater than 10 years. That would be out. Lending would be shut
off.
The Chairman. I suspected that was the case, and thank you
for pointing that out.
Mr. Field, one last question. Does your pension fund engage
in swaps and are you concerned about the CFTC's business
conduct rules?
Mr. Field. Yes, we do engage in swaps and we are concerned
about the rule. Let me, if you can indulge me for a minute.
The Chairman. Please.
Mr. Field. John Deere has a defined benefit plan that
covers more than 40,000 participants. And we are very, very
proud that we are able to provide a defined benefit plan in
this environment; and in fact, as you all know, that is the
minority of companies that do that anymore.
And we use swaps basically to discharge our fiduciary duty
to reduce the risk to manageable levels. So we have a payment
obligation to our beneficiaries that has a very long tail on
it. And what we are trying to do is go out and get assets that
match up against that long tail. And the only way that we can
do that cost effectively is through the use of swaps. So we are
very concerned about this.
The Chairman. It is an important issue.
My time has expired.
I now turn to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Holden,
and recognize him for 5 minutes.
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cvrkel and Ms. Trakimas, following up on the Chairman's
question, basically if you are not exempted, the services you
provide your customers now, you will not do in the future
because of the regulation and because of the costs; or is more
staff needed to comply.
Mr. Cvrkel. The way I look at it is we started swaps in
2007; we have done 54 transactions. And currently with the
additional regulation come on us, we don't have the staff nor
would I get the staff. So chances are we would stop using swaps
to fix our debt service cost and help our customers. And that
lending opportunity would go away.
Mr. Holden. They would have to go to larger entities?
Mr. Cvrkel. That is correct.
Ms. Trakimas. From our perspective, it is clear that the
costs to our customers will increase and the potential negative
there is that the availability of credit will also diminish. We
would be looking at higher capital requirements and higher
margin requirements.
The other issue to think about here is that our customers
may not have access to another swap counterparty because our
swaps are made in connection with the loans that we make to
them and we hold the collateral against those loans. So from a
collateral perspective, the customers posting to us collateral
on our loan, which we also use to collateralize our swap
position. So the marketplace is not prepared to, and our
customers are not prepared to, technically and operationally
post collateral to anyone else other than their lender.
Mr. Holden. To the extent that such exemptions are granted,
could such exemptions be based on the same standard regardless
of the type of entity? Suppose the CFTC determines that an
exemption is warranted for Farm Credit banks with less than $20
billion in assets, could the CFTC set a different threshold for
small banks and credit unions?
Ms. Trakimas. Yes. From our perspective, it is not the size
of the institution that is the question; the question to us is
what is the risk in the transaction. And also all swaps are not
created equal. Some are more risky than others. And the type of
swaps that we use are plain vanilla, interest-rate swaps that
are risk mitigation tools.
And from our perspective, you could be a very large
institution and have very small swap exposure. And I would
probably put us in that category. We are a good-sized
institution, but the size of our portfolio of swaps from a risk
perspective is just very, very small.
On the other hand, you could be a small institution with a
very, very high volatility swaps portfolio.
So to us, it is not necessarily the size that counts.
If I just might. To the extent that that is the way the
rules will be written, however, we do--a lot of our lending
associations are small. When you look at the System on a
combined basis, we are large. So if it does come down to a
numbers, a size perspective, we do think that we would
appreciate a sizeable threshold so our lending associations
could be excluded.
Mr. Holden. Do you care to comment, Mr. Cvrkel?
Mr. Cvrkel. I think one thing you have to look at is even
the size of the organization. For instance, for banks under $10
billion, they have .04 percent of the swap market; for banks of
$30 billion and under, that goes up to .1 percent. The top five
banks in the country have 96 percent of the notional value of
the swap portfolio.
So the risk is not into smaller banks. It is not banks of
$14 billion or $20 billion. That is not where the risk exposure
is.
Also when you look at swap risk, I think it is somewhat
misleading, everyone is looking at the big numbers of the $600
billion market; that is not the risk exposure. The risk
exposure is the uncollateralized portion of that swap. When we
do a swap, and if it is an asset to our counterparty, we have
to post collateral. So the risk is the difference that is not
posted.
And one thing, one comment I want to make, too, as I
mentioned we made 54 transactions since 2007. When Lehman
Brothers went bankrupt they had 900,000 transactions compared
to 54. Why should we get regulated like them?
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois for 5 minutes, Mr.
Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just say I don't expect any of you to comment on my
comment, but the fact that you have to be here today and
subject yourself not only to questions but also to this whole
incredibly complicated labyrinthine process is an indication to
me how Congress overreaches in regard to a problem and then
causes innumerable problems as a result of it. So that is just
my parenthetical. I don't expect Members of the Committee or
you to respond, but this is a good example of bureaucracy run
amok and over-regulation and over-legislation run amok. So take
that as you will.
I wish Mr. Gensler were still here, but since he isn't let
me direct this question to Mr. Cvrkel. And I don't mean--this
is not an adversarial question to you. I remember in response
to one of my questions, that he indicated that they hadn't
received any public comment in regard to one particular area.
I am specifically now directing you--maybe you don't have
awareness of this--to a letter of February 22nd of this year,
in which at some point in the letter--this is a letter that
Susquehanna signed and a number of other entities signed. I am
quoting, ``These low thresholds, especially when coupled with
narrow interpretation of the statutory exclusion for IDIs,
could have the effect of either subjecting many small banks to
the substantial regulatory burden imposed on swap dealers or
causing them to cease offering certain risk management services
to customers.''
I think I heard him correctly. The Chairman, maybe he
overlooked this letter, indicated he hadn't received any input
in that regard.
Would you agree with me that this is a pretty definitive
letter from you and your coalition?
Mr. Cvrkel. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson. And that maybe the Chairman just overlooked
this public input?
Mr. Cvrkel. Apparently he has.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Field, you are a corporate citizen of my
State of Illinois, and we are very happy and proud to have you,
and I know Congressman Schilling who represents your district
just does an extraordinary job of advocating on your behalf and
your employees' behalf.
But let me just ask you specifically whether you think that
the captive finance exemption that we have referenced in
questions in response, was intended for a business like yours.
And a follow-up question is: What would be the impact of your
specific ability to lend to farmers and others if they don't
qualify for that exemption?
Mr. Field. Well, first let me thank you for the comments
about Deere, and I am very privileged to be here and represent
Deere, and we are privileged to be in the great State of
Illinois.
Mr. Johnson. Even though we are trying to tax you and
Caterpillar and everybody else out of the state, in the state
legislature. But that is another issue.
Mr. Field. Yes. We believe that the captive finance
exemption is--and the legislative intent was clearly to capture
companies like Deere. And as we mentioned, we were very active
in the process. And the reason why we are active in the process
is because this is a critically important offering for us and
for our customers.
And the reason why it is critically important is because
the farm sector isn't always the world's most favorite sector
in the world. And neither is the construction sector. But we
are there through thick and thin. We are in the finance
business not to be in the finance business; we are in the
finance business to help sell pieces of John Deere equipment.
And if we did not have that exemption, well, one thing for sure
is that there would be an increased cost, increased regulatory,
burdensome requirements for us, and ultimately impacted in the
wallets of our farmer customers, or through us by having to
take costs out of the system somewhere else. Because we need to
be in the finance business and we need to be there through
thick and thin.
Mr. Johnson. Let me just encourage you to continue to
communicate with us specifically through Congressman Schilling,
who is your advocate here, and we hope to be responsive to what
you want us to do.
One last question for Ms. Trakimas.
Ms. Trakimas. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Can you give me some examples, I have only
about 20 seconds, so your 20 second examples of some of the
particular swaps that you provide to customers, and why you
think that should be distinguished from swaps dealing in
general?
Ms. Trakimas. Our swaps are what we call plain vanilla
swaps fixed or floating, and caps. And essentially this is just
to manage the interest rate risk that we as lenders have on our
balance sheet. It helps us manage our liquidity and our costs.
And we also provide these swaps to our customers. These are
extremely low-volatility swaps and they are merely there to cap
the interest rate risk that is either connected with our loans
or our customers' loans.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Conaway, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, panel, thank you
for sitting here all afternoon.
You all heard Chairman Gensler's comments to our questions,
several different directions in trying to understand his idea
of a swap dealer. Can any of you say with any degree of
certainty how you are classified under these new rules? Just
right down the list. Mr. Allison.
Mr. Allison. I don't think I can say with certainty how we
ought to be classified. I think I know where Chairman Gensler
thinks we are, but I don't know that that is the outcome
necessarily dictated by the rules.
I will not claim to understand fully how all of the rules
work. But, I know where Chairman Gensler thinks the answer is
for us.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Mr. Cvrkel.
Mr. Cvrkel. I think we would be considered a swap dealer.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Mr. Field.
Mr. Field. I don't think we could say with a level of
certainty that I would be comfortable answering.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. McMahon.
Mr. McMahon. I don't think any of our members should be
classified as swaps dealers; but, again, there was a question
asked about utilities, and the Chairman answered that question
to say that most aren't, but some may be. So that would be my
interpretation of what he said.
Ms. Trakimas. We really have no idea. But to the extent
that we are like commercial banks and our business is like
commercial banks, we think we should be treated like commercial
banks and be exempt.
Mr. Conaway. The point being is that that level of
uncertainty and/or certainty is pervasive across the folks you
represent, your members or whatever, and so that is a pretty
telling indication that we don't have a lot of granularity yet.
We made a big deal about the cost-benefit analysis that we
think has not been done at CFTC. At least the comments included
in their proposed rules are pretty cavalier with respect to the
decision making process.
Can you comment on what the estimates that the CFTC has
said you will bear in terms of cost versus your own internal
analysis of what you think it is going to cost to comply as you
understand the rules today, Mr. Allison?
Mr. Allison. In certain of the rulemakings, the Working
Group has been able to do fairly detailed comparisons of our
estimate versus the CFTC's estimate, and our perspective is
that the costs we would expect to bear are very, very, very
much larger than what the CFTC has.
Mr. Conaway. A factor of what?
Mr. Allison. Up to a factor of 100, depending on exactly
what costs element you are looking at.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you. Mr. Cvrkel.
Mr. Cvrkel. Yes. As far as if it goes the way it is written
now, we would be out of the swap business. We would not take on
the added cost, and we would not be able to provide long-term
fixed rate debt service cost to our customers.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Mr. Field.
Mr. Field. We have not done a detailed analysis, but
suffice to say that our presence here today is because we
believe the cost is quite significant to Deere.
Mr. Conaway. Significant beyond what the estimate that the
CFTC is providing?
Mr. Field. No. No. Not beyond.
Mr. Conaway. So you think the CFTC got it right as to what
it would cost you?
Mr. Field. Let me get back to you on that.
Mr. Conaway. It is a leading question.
Mr. Field. We haven't done a comparison.
Mr. Conaway. Okay, thank you. Mr. McMahon.
Mr. McMahon. I am not aware of an estimate in terms of the
impact on the utility industry. But what I will say, as I
pointed out in my statement, is assuming that we are end-users,
this transactional approach that they appear to be going in
terms of the end-user exemption would be costly in and of
itself, and it shouldn't be like that for end-users.
Mr. Conaway. But the information in the proposed rule, does
it give you enough information to be able to--for your members
to guess at what their implementation cost would be?
Mr. McMahon. Again, if some of them fall into this category
of swaps dealer, it would be profound. And, we don't have all
the information we will need at this point because there is
reporting and a lot of different things and systems changes and
governance changes. So there are a lot of issues.
Mr. Conaway. Any indication you have in the proposed rules
that they are getting it right; or is it just a broad statement
you think understated what the costs will be?
Mr. McMahon. We just feel that the costs are going to be
very significant.
Mr. Conaway. Ms. Trakimas.
Ms. Trakimas. We have attempted to make an estimate of the
costs, but the rules are so vague that we, with no confidence
or accuracy, can come up with a number. But it is clear that
costs will go up, and credit availability to our customers will
decline and farmers and ranchers will suffer.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Just for the record, does anybody think
those are good results, that costs go up and services go down?
Just official.
Mr. Allison. For the record, no.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. Field?
Mr. Cvrkel?
Mr. Cvrkel. No.
Mr. Conaway. The transcriber can't put down nods of the
head, so I need you to say in the record. Mr. Field.
Mr. Field. No.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. McMahon.
Mr. McMahon. No.
Ms. Trakimas. No.
Mr. Conaway. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time. I now turn to the gentleman from Illinois, for 5 minutes,
Mr. Schilling.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Chairman. First and foremost I
would like to welcome you all here, and I am with
Representative Johnson and we have a lot better things that we
could be doing right now. And I am part of the freshman class,
the 87 that were swept in, and I come here basically for the
same reason that I believe that you folks might be here, is the
over-regulating.
You know, I look at Mr. Field's company which is in the
17th Congressional District. It has been the backbone of our
district for over 100 years. I believe we have close to 60,000
employees there. And the thing that we are finding in Illinois
is because of over-regulating and overtaxing, we are losing
lots of people from our great state. And people are finally
rising up to that challenge.
But I just have a couple of questions for Mr. Field
specifically. Could you just comment maybe on the timing
sequencing and the analysis of the SEC and the CFTC on their
proposed rulemaking?
Mr. Field. Yes. Maybe I will answer that question a little
bit more from--contrast it with at least how we would approach
it from a business perspective, because I can't sit here and be
as presumptuous that I understand exactly all these regulatory
processes as some of the folks that are very involved in it.
But I would say from our perspective, when we are doing a
product program, we always say never, ever put quality--put
schedule, rather, ahead of quality. I think the analogy in this
particular piece of legislation and rulemaking is dead-on.
I think what we would like to see is, first of all, that we
come out with a quality product that has the appropriate level
of public conversation, discussion, and exposure prior to going
into adoption. I think it is vitally important that we settle
on these definitions first and foremost, and then we can start
to see how this mosaic comes together, because we understand
what definitions apply to who and what, and where we are going
to be in this whole process. Right now, it is a little bit like
from our perspective; and from others' perspective, it is a
little bit like trying to put your finger on a bead of mercury,
because you might fall out of this one and then you are in here
and then you are over here. So, getting buttoned down in
aggregate and a holistic view of the definitions, so then we
can start to understand what provisions apply to whom, would be
very, very important.
Mr. Schilling. So basically you would say that just let us
know what our environment is, what cards are on the table, so
we know what we are doing.
Mr. Field. Yes. And let's not shortchange this. This is a
very, very sweeping piece of legislation for corporate America
and for all that are involved in the financial process. I think
from our perspective, we think it would be a grave injustice to
put schedule ahead of quality here.
Mr. Schilling. And then finally, and being one of the less
senior people here, a lot of my questions get asked by the time
it gets to me. So finally, do you think that the agencies will
meet their 1 year deadline or even should meet the 1 year
deadline?
Mr. Field. I think Chairman Gensler indicated that they
most likely are not going to. And I would say that, from my
perspective, is probably a good thing because at least it shows
we are taking a little bit of time. But, having that 1 year
deadline out there in terms of a sort of a backdrop is
something that I think we might be better off if we were to
remove that or suspend it.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Mr. Field, and thank you all for
what you do for your communities. And I yield back my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. And the chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Thompson, for
the concluding 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel,
everyone on the panel for your testimony and weighing in on
this.
My first question actually really has to do more with the
sequencing in the process by which the CFTC has used in rolling
this out. And have the proposed rules impacted your ability to
participate in the process, and how has it impacted your
ability to evaluate how the proposed regulations will impact
your business?
Mr. Allison. The sequencing has, in fact, had a detrimental
effect on our ability to evaluate the rules and respond
sensibly to the CFTC with comments on them. The Working Group
had filed with the CFTC, before the rulemakings came out, a
letter proposing an order for the rules. The CFTC followed a
different order. And we recently filed another comment with the
CFTC about the sequence we think they should use from here, and
I would be happy to get those added into the record if that
would be helpful.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Cvrkel. As far as when we look at the proposal, in my
job I have multiple tasks to do other than this. So to spend my
time to understand all the proposed regulations and go down
that road is--I just really don't have the time. The concern I
have, it is going to affect our customers, and I believe if you
are a bank you want to have good customer service, and that is
how you keep your customers. And being defined as a swap
dealer, we would have a disservice to our customers and also to
economic growth in our region because credit will no longer be
there for the long term.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Mr. Field.
Mr. Field. I think the sequencing has had an impact. I
think, to my earlier comment, not having all the definitions as
the starting point, speaks to that. I think earlier today a
Member of Congress said, ``You know, it would be nice to have
all the pieces together so that we can see how this all
interrelates rather than piecemeal at some point in time.''
The Chairman. Mr. McMahon.
Mr. McMahon. I would concur. I think the sequencing has had
an impact and a negative impact. I would suggest that we should
start with the fundamental definitions, particularly with a
swap, and work our way out. Our view kind of coming in was that
we would mostly be, we would be end-users and that we would
only be engaged in one or two of these rulemakings, not 17 as
we have to this point. So, yes, it has.
Ms. Trakimas. My response to your question is that I would
encourage the CFTC to go back to what it was tasked with by
Congress, and that is to ensure that systemic risk is reduced
and controlled. How long that takes, if it is a year, clearly
we don't think they should be bound by a time frame, but we
would really ask them to focus on the main purpose of what we
are doing here today, and that is to control and reduce
systemic risk.
Mr. Thompson. I appreciate, actually, all of your thoughts
not only on how it impacts your business, but specifically all
the suggestions of how this could have been done in a better
way to minimize negative impacts and the consequences.
Mr. Cvrkel, why should community and regional banks receive
different treatment under Title VII, and why is your derivative
use distinguishable from those that are the target of the new
regulation under Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Cvrkel. I guess the way I look at it is, here again,
banks like ours didn't cause the meltdown. We don't have any--
the swaps we do are vanilla swaps. There is no additional risk
exposure. And here again, there is some confusion on defining
risk related to swaps. And the risks should be defined as the
uncollateralized portion of that swap, not the notional. And
under Dodd-Frank I don't believe under the proposals, opinions
of banks our size and how we use bank swaps with our customers
were taken into consideration.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. I would assume that most you would
agree with the thoughts that this is actually a solution in
search of a problem as it was proposed.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The time
for all questions has expired.
Before we adjourn, I would like to thank our panel's
participation. Many times in this body we become so focused on
grandiose pieces of legislation that we forget that there are
dramatic effects on you, your customers, your businesses, your
pensioners, on the entire economy as a whole. And that is why
we need to hear from you in the straightforward fashion that
you have come today to discuss the potential impact.
With that, under the rules of the Committee, the record for
today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to
receive additional material and supplemental written responses
from the witnesses to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:20 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Supplementary Material Submitted by Hon. Frank D. Lucas, a
Representative in Congress from Oklahoma
21 March 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Re: Risk Management Requirements for Derivatives Clearing
Organizations--Federal Register Vol. 76, No. 13 3698 (January 20, 2011)
RIN 3038-AC98

Dear Mr Stawick:

The Financial Services Authority (``FSA'') is submitting this
letter in response to the request for comment in respect to the rule
proposals by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (``the
Commission'') regarding risk management requirements for derivatives
clearing organisations (``DCOs'').
The FSA supports the September 2009 G20 commitment to improving the
over-the-counter (``OTC'') derivatives markets and the clearing through
central counterparties (``CCPs'') of standardised OTC derivative
contracts. Regulatory authorities need to consider how existing market
infrastructures can best play a role in meeting these commitments in an
environment where CCPs are becoming increasingly systemically
important. There is a clear need for stronger international standards
for CCPs and the FSA is contributing to the work currently underway in
developing such standards through, for example, the CPSS-IOSCO \1\ work
on principles for financial market infrastructure.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS),
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
\2\ CPSS IOSCO Principles for financial market infrastructures--
consultative report 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Risk management standards for CCPs must be anchored in the
characteristics of the products being cleared, and the FSA recognises
that different product types may require different clearing models.
This can extend to participant eligibility in models where the clearing
members are required to perform specific actions to assist in a member
default, for example Interest Rate Swap clearing models that include an
obligation to bid for, or be allocated, portfolios from the defaulting
clearing member.
The Commission has requested comment on whether establishing a
capital threshold on participants is an effective approach to promoting
fair and open access to DCOs.\3\ The FSA supports transparent and non
discriminatory rules, based on objective criteria, governing access to
CCPs. We note the CPSS-IOSCO proposed principle that CCPs should allow
``fair and open access to its services . . . based on reasonable risk-
related participation requirements''.\4\ However whilst capital
thresholds or other participation eligibility threshold \5\ limitations
may be a potential tool to help ensure fair and open access to CCPs, to
impose them on clearing arrangements for products that have complex or
unique characteristics could lead to increased risk to the system in
the short to medium term.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Federal Register Vol. 76, No. 13 page 3701.
\4\ CPSS IOSCO Principles for financial market infrastructures--
consultative report 2011, Principle 18, Key consideration 1.
\5\ Such as the Commission's proposals 39.12(a)(1)(iv) ``A
derivatives clearing organization shall not require that clearing
members must be swap dealers'', ibid (v) ``A derivatives clearing
organization shall not require that clearing members maintain a swap
portfolio of any particular size, or that clearing members meet a swap
transaction volume threshold.'', and ibid (2)(iii) ``A derivatives
clearing organization shall not set a minimum capital requirement of
more than $50 million.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Participation requirements sometimes need to be tailored to take
into account the types of products being cleared by a CCP. For example
the less liquid derivative markets typically require more complex
default management processes that impose more onerous obligations on
the participants than the exchange traded futures market. The ability
of the surviving clearing members to meet their obligations in relation
to default management is important in mitigating systemic risk in the
event of a clearing member default.
As noted by CPSS-IOSCO in its consultation, a CCP should ensure
that its participants ``have the requisite operational capacity,
financial resources, legal powers, and risk-management expertise so
that their activities do not generate unacceptable risk for the [CCP]
and other participants''.\6\ Capital requirements, the ``swap dealer''
criteria and portfolio size or volumes have previously served as
proxies for establishing that a clearing member meets these criteria.
If such criteria are to be excluded, then CCPs must develop alternative
membership criteria that ensure the CCP's own safety. Consideration
should be given to the time required to develop such criteria.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ CPSS IOSCO Principles for financial market infrastructures--
consultative report 2011, Principle 18, 3.18.1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CCPs must therefore set appropriate risk based membership criteria
that test a clearing member's financial and operational ability to:

(i) manage the default of one of their own clients (i.e., to
hedge and liquidate positions); and

(ii) participate in the CCPs default management process without
introducing risk to the system (for example bid accurately in a
default auction, hedge any portfolios acquired in a default
auction, or manage any risks presented by the forced allocation
of a portfolio in a default process).

Potential clearing members who lack the requisite operational
capacity, financial resources, legal powers or risk-management
expertise to participate in a default management process might consider
that they could source these capabilities from a more experienced third
party in the event of a default. Outsourcing the clearing member
responsibility to partake in the default management process to a third
party could present additional risk to the system \7\ and increase the
cost for the participant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ As well as adding legal and operational complexity at a time
market stress, there is the risk that third parties might act
differently than clearing members acting for themselves, given their
different incentives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A CCP may seek to reduce the relative impact of the default process
on participants with lesser financial and operational ability by
providing that their role in a default be proportional to the risk they
introduce. As this would only limit the relative and not the absolute
size of the risk (for example the size of portfolio that could be
allocated to a clearing member in a default) this approach does not
reduce the CCP's need to set the appropriate membership criteria needed
to gauge the ability of the clearing member to engage fully in the
default management process (including loss allocation).
Increasing the amount of margin called or contributions to the
default fund does not compensate for the risk that a participant cannot
participate in the default management process. Margin and default funds
increase the time available to a CCP to liquidate its positions, but
they do not directly assist the actual liquidation.
We note that the Commission proposes that CCPs may exclude or limit
certain types of market participant if the CCP can demonstrate that
``the restriction is necessary to address credit risk or deficiencies
in the participants' operational capabilities that would prevent them
from fulfilling their obligations as clearing members''.\8\ If capital
requirements, the ``swap dealer'' criteria and portfolio size or
volumes are to be subject to limitation as criteria then we believe the
Commission's exclusion should specifically extend to address clearing
members whose operational capabilities would prevent them from
fulfilling their obligations to the CCP to participate in a default
management process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Federal Register Vol. 76, No. 13 39.12(a)(1)(iii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FSA therefore requests that when the Commission finalises its
rules it takes into account that access should be based on
proportionate risk-related participation requirements and that risks
may be introduced into the system by universally prohibiting certain
participant eligibility criteria.
Yours sincerely,

Alexander Justham,
Director, Market Division,
Financial Services Authority.
______

Supplementary Material Submitted by James C. Allison, Gas and Power
Risk Manager, North America, ConocoPhillips, Houston, TX; on behalf of
Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms
February 22, 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swaps, RIN 3038-AD10

Dear Secretary Stawick:
I. Introduction
On behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms (the
``Working Group''), Hunton & Williams LLP hereby submits these comments
in response to the request for public comment set forth in the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission's (the ``CFTC'' or ``Commission'')
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing
of Swaps (the ``Proposed Rule''), published in the Federal Register on
December 23, 2010,\1\ which proposes to provide ``non-financial
entities,'' i.e., commercial firms, with an exception from the
mandatory clearing requirements (``End-User Exception'') pursuant to
new Section 2(h)(7) of the Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA''), as
established by Section 723 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the ``Act'').\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swaps, Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, 75 Fed. Reg. 80747 (Dec. 23, 2010).
\2\ Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub.
L. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group considers and responds to requests for public
comment regarding legislative and regulatory developments with respect
to the trading of energy commodities, including derivatives and other
contracts that reference energy commodities. The Working Group
appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments in response to
the Proposed Rule and respectfully requests that the Commission
consider the comments set forth herein. The Working Group looks forward
to working with the Commission to further develop and define the End-
User Exception prior to the effective date of Title VII.
II. Executive Summary
The Working Group strongly supports the goals of the Act to enhance
transparency and reduce systemic risk in the swap markets. To that end,
the Working Group submits for the Commission's consideration comments
and recommendations it believes will assist the Commission in
developing a final rule that preserves the integrity of the swap
markets and serves the best interests of market participants.
Specifically, the Working Group requests the Commission adopt the
following recommendations:
1. Revise Proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b) to Require a Single, Omnibus
Annual Notification Filing. The Working Group submits that requiring
notification to the Commission each time a non-financial entity elects
to use the End-User Exception is inconsistent with Section 2(h)(7)(A)
of the Act. Additionally, such requirement is overly burdensome and
will disrupt the trade execution process. In light of the foregoing,
the Working Group strongly suggests that the Commission require a
single, omnibus annual filing that reports such notification in the
same prospective, narrative, and comprehensive form as the Commission's
current Form 40.
2. Recognize Discretion Granted to the Board in Meeting its
Obligation to Review and Approve Election to Use End-User Exception.
Contrary to new CEA Section 2(j), which permits an appropriate
committee of the board of directors (or equivalent governing body)
(collectively, the ``Board'') broad discretion in meeting its
obligation to review and approve the use of the End-User Exception by
an SEC Filer,\3\ proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii) requires board
review and approval on a transaction-by-transaction basis. As such, the
Commission should reconcile the proposed rule with the clear and
unambiguous new CEA Section 2(j) to permit the board (i) to adopt a
single, continuing resolution approving any decision by an SEC Filer to
use the End-User Exception and (ii) to delegate its obligation to
appropriate supervisory personnel with direct knowledge and oversight
responsibility of swap trading activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ An ``SEC Filer'' refers to an issuer of securities that is
registered under section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15
U.S.C. 781) or that is required to file reports pursuant to Section
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 780).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Adopt a Definition of ``Hedging'' or ``Mitigating Commercial
Risk'' that Appropriately Reflects Commonly Used Practices In Energy
Markets. Because the unambiguous language of the proposed definition of
``commercial risk'' eliminates the need to adopt regulatory text
identifying transactions that fall outside of the scope of this
definition, proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(2)(i) should be struck from any
final rule adopted in this proceeding. Further, commercial energy firms
do not generally execute swaps transactions to hedge a particular
underlying physical trade. Indeed, in order to mitigate commercial
risk, commercial energy firms hedge their underlying physical positions
dynamically and on a portfolio basis, which do not involve the matching
of hedges to specific underlying physical positions. Thus, any
definition of ``hedging'' adopted by the Commission must contemplate
such market practices.
4. Exempt Inter-Affiliate Swap Transactions from Mandatory
Clearing. Because inter-affiliate transactions do not have any bearing
on, or reflection of, swap markets, these transactions should be exempt
from the mandatory clearing requirements. At a minimum, the Working
Group recommends that the Commission confirm that otherwise qualified
non-financial entities may engage in uncleared swap transactions with a
swap dealer or major swap participant affiliate.
III. Comments of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms
The Working Group is a diverse group of commercial firms in the
energy industry whose primary business activity is the physical
delivery of one or more energy commodities to others, including
industrial, commercial, and residential consumers. Members of the
Working Group are energy producers, marketers, and utilities. As
commercial firms, the Working Group members function primarily as
principals, not intermediaries, by transacting futures and energy-
related derivatives on a daily basis, among other things, to mitigate
or hedge the commercial risk associated with their core businesses of
delivering electricity, heating oil, crude oil, natural gas, propane,
gasoline, and other energy commodities to U.S. consumers.
The Working Group generally supports the intent of the Proposed
Rule implementing new CEA Section (2)(h)(7). By exempting qualifying
transactions involving ``non-financial entities'' from the mandatory
clearing requirements, this exception permits the continuation of a
well-established and long-standing practice in the energy markets of
accommodating the unique credit profiles of certain market
participants. Unlike centralized clearing arrangements that demand
uniformity in credit support based upon each underlying exposure,
current practice in energy markets is for market participants to extend
credit based on fundamental analysis of the ability of each
counterparty to continue as a going concern, or through the use of
alternative collateral support.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ For instance, certain commercial firms in the energy sector use
asset-based collateral arrangements (i.e., first liens in generating
facilities). These collateral arrangements are accepted in energy
markets as an appropriate form of credit support for liabilities and
derivatives exposures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ability to transact swaps on an uncleared basis provides a
significant cost benefit by permitting commercial energy firms to
preserve capital and operating cash flow. This is particularly critical
in such firms' efforts to implement major capital spending programs
designed to (i) enhance and expand energy infrastructure, (ii) develop
and deploy technologies that promote energy independence, and (iii)
comply with new environmental rules, regulations, and policies. More
importantly, the ability of commercial energy firms to transact swaps
on an uncleared basis is the most effective and efficient means to
protect both themselves and consumers from the effects of volatility in
physical energy markets.
In recognition of the above factors, the Working Group respectfully
recommends that the Commission adopt the revisions proposed herein to
ensure that any final rule will promote efficient and orderly energy
markets while ensuring transparency in accordance with the requirements
of new CEA Section 2(h)(7).
A. An Annual Filing Is Sufficient To Meet the Notice Requirement
Regarding the Election To Use the End-User Exception
New Section 2(h)(7)(A) of the CEA provides counterparties to a swap
an exception from mandatory clearing if one of the counterparties ``(i)
is a non-financial entity; (ii) is using swaps to hedge or mitigate
commercial risk; and (iii) notifies the Commission, in a manner set
forth by the Commission, how it generally meets its financial
obligations associated with entering into non-cleared swaps.'' Proposed
CFTC Rule 39.6(b) requires the ``reporting counterparty'' to provide
notification of the manner in which the non-financial electing party
expects to meet its financial obligations associated with the
qualifying, non-cleared swap.
Specifically, such notification must be submitted to a swap data
repository (``SDR'') pursuant to the protocol for ``reporting
counterparties'' set forth in the proposed rule for Swap Data
Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements (the ``Proposed General
Reporting Rule'') \5\ and must contain several items of information
associated with a non-financial entity's election to use the End-User
Exception.\6\ Where the counterparty electing to use the End-User
Exception is an SEC Filer,\7\ the notification must include two
additional items of information: (i) the relevant SEC Central Index Key
number for that counterparty; and (ii) whether the Board has reviewed
and approved the decision not to clear the swap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Proposed Rule at 80748. See Swap Data Recordkeeping and
Reporting Requirements, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 75 Fed. Reg.
76574 (Dec. 8, 2010).
\6\ See proposed CFTC Rule  39.6(b). These items generally
include: (1) the identity of the electing counterparty to the swap; (2)
whether the electing counterparty is a ``financial entity'' as defined
in new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(C)(i); (3) whether the electing counterparty
is a finance affiliate meeting the requirements of new CEA Sections
2(h)(7)(C)(iii) or 2(h)(7)(D); (4) whether the swap is used by the
electing counterparty to hedge or mitigate commercial risk as defined
in proposed CFTC Rule  39.6(c); (5) the method or mechanism by which
the electing counterparty generally expects to meet its financial
obligations associated with its non-cleared swaps; and (6) whether the
electing counterparty is an issuer of securities registered under
section 12 of, or is required to file reports under section 15(d) of,
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
\7\ Unlike the Act, the Proposed Rule defines an issuer of
securities to include a counterparty that is controlled by a person
that is an issuer of securities. See Proposed Rule at 80750 n. 15. That
is, the Proposed Rule broadens the definition of an issuer of
securities as set forth in the Act to include subsidiaries. The Working
Group submits that there is no policy or purpose that supports the
expansion of the definition of issuer of securities beyond that which
is provided under the Act. Indeed, while the Working Group acknowledges
the Commission's concern in ensuring proper Board oversight of a non-
financial entity's swap trading activity, the Commission required such
only for an SEC Filer. If the Commission were seeking to accomplish
such an objective, then it should have imposed the requirement on all
non-financial entities that use swap trades. Because it did not, the
Proposed Rule results in unreasonable disparate treatment of market
participants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Proposed Rule states that the submission of information
required by proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b) must be submitted to an SDR on a
transaction-by-transaction basis.\8\ Notwithstanding this requirement,
the Proposed Rule requests comment on whether it would be difficult or
prohibitively expensive for persons to report the information that must
be included in the notification required by proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b).
The Working Group submits that it would be prohibitively expensive for
persons to do so and suggests a much less burdensome approach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ In relevant part, the Proposed Rule states:

The Commission proposes in  39.6(b) to require non-financial
entities to notify the Commis-
sion each time the end-user clearing exception is elected by
delivering specified information
to an SDR in the manner required by proposed rules for swaps data
recordkeeping and re-
porting.

Proposed Rule at 80748 (emphasis added; footnote omitted).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. A Single, Omnibus Annual Filing Is Consistent with, and in
Furtherance of, the Statutory Objectives of New CEA 2(h)(7)(A)
To maximize efficiency, minimize administrative burdens and costs,
and ensure consistency with the express language of new CEA Section
2(h)(7)(A), the Working Group submits that this notification only be
submitted annually and recommends that such notification should be
reported in the same manner and form as the Commission's current Form
40 applicable to large traders with reportable futures positions.
Specifically, the Working Group envisions that the notification would
be (i) prospective in nature (i.e., for the forthcoming calendar year
beginning on January 1), and (ii) provide all information required by
proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b) on a narrative and consolidated basis.
Proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(a) requires submission of the notification
of the election of the End-User Exception to be on a transaction-by-
transaction basis. Moreover, the Proposed Rule interprets this
provision to require market participants to determine whether a swap
qualifies for the End-User Exception at the time of execution. As noted
below, these requirements conflict with the plain language of new CEA
Section 2(h)(7)(A). This apparent conflict should be reconciled by the
Commission in any final rule issued in this proceeding.
Proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(a) states, in relevant part:

(a) A counterparty to a swap (an ``electing counterparty'') may
elect to use the exception to mandatory clearing under section
2(h)(7)(A)(iii) of the Act if the electing counterparty is not
a ``financial entity'' as defined in section 2(h)(7)(C)(i) of
the Act, is using the swap to hedge or mitigate commercial risk
as defined in  39.6(c), and provides or causes to be provided
to a registered swap data repository or, if no registered swap
data repository is available, the Commission, the information
specified in  39.6(b) . . . .

(emphasis added).\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Notwithstanding the statement in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(a)
that ``a counterparty to a swap (the `electing counterparty') may elect
to use the exception to mandatory clearing under section
2(h)(7)(A)(iii) of the Act,'' new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A) is drafted in
the conjunctive and, therefore, should be read in its entirety as the
End-User Exception. The Commission's reliance on new CEA Section
2(h)(7)(A)(iii) as the specific End-User Exception is misplaced. This
interpretation effectively swallows the other statutory criteria that
must be satisfied by a market participant to avail itself of the End-
User Exception. The Working Group respectfully submits that new CEA
Section 2(h)(7)(A)(iii) constitutes only the ``notice'' element of the
End-User Exception that must be interpreted consistent with the express
language of, and Congressional intent, underlying the other statutory
elements.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In contrast, new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A) states:

(A) In general.--The requirements of paragraph (1)(A) shall
not apply to a swap if 1 of the counterparties to the swap--

(i) is not a financial entity;
(ii) is using swaps to hedge or mitigate commercial
risk; and
(iii) notifies the Commission, in a manner set forth
by the Commission, how it generally meets its financial
obligations associated with entering into non-cleared
swaps.

(emphasis added).

The language of new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A)(ii) and (iii),
highlighted above, demonstrates a clear and unambiguous intent by
Congress to permit a non-financial entity to make a general election to
use the End-User Exception. Use of the singular form of the word
``swap'' in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(a) is in direct conflict with the
statutory use of ``swaps'' in CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A)(ii) and (iii). The
conjunctive requirements of CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A) make clear that the
election to use the End-User Exception will not be required on a
transaction-by-transaction basis. That is, this language cannot be
reasonably construed by the Commission to require market participants
to identify or provide notification that a particular swap qualifies
for the End-User Exception at the time it is entered into.
Consequently, since the election is not on a transaction-by-transaction
basis, notification cannot be on a transaction-by-transaction basis
unless the statute indicates otherwise. As stated above, however, new
CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A)(iii) references ``swaps'' in the plural, which
does not contemplate notification on a transaction-by-transaction
basis. Accordingly, although new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A)(iii) provides
the Commission with the discretion to prescribe the manner (i.e., the
form and format) in which such notification may be provided to it, the
Commission must interpret this provision consistent with the express
language of, and the Congressional intent underlying, new CEA Section
2(h)(7)(A)(ii) and (iii), which clearly permits the use of the Working
Group's proposed annual omnibus notification in the form described
above.
2. Notification Should be Submitted by the Non-Financial Entity
Electing to Use the End-User Exception
The Working Group submits that it is not appropriate to impose an
obligation on a ``reporting counterparty,'' as that term is defined in
the General Reporting Rule, to submit information to an SDR associated
with a non-financial entity counterparty's election to use the End-User
Exception.\10\ In order to minimize the potential for administrative
errors or conflicts between parties that could disrupt the trade
execution process, proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b) should be revised to
require the counterparty electing to use the End-User Exception to
submit any required information to an SDR, not the reporting
counterparty.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ The Working Group believes that placing this obligation on the
reporting counterparty is improper as it could create an inherent
conflict of interest between the parties to a commercial transaction
that should be avoided by the Commission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the extent that the Commission has concerns regarding possible
abuse of this exception, new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(F) provides it with
the authority to request information from any non-financial entity
claiming the use of the End-User Exception. The Commission may also
solicit such information by issuing a formal special call pursuant to
CFTC Rule 21.\11\ In addition, the Commission's broad statutory
enforcement authority under the CEA, as enhanced by the enactment of
Title VII, is a strong deterrent to situations in which the End-User
Exception could be abused through the knowing and willful submission of
false information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See 17 CFR  21 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Board Review and Approval of Use of End-User Exception by an SEC
Filer
As noted above, pursuant to proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii), the
End-User Exception is only available to an SEC Filer if the Board has
reviewed and approved its decision to enter into swap transactions
subject to this exception. Further, this provision requires the
notification submitted to an SDR relating to a counterparty's election
to use the End-User Exception to include confirmation that the required
Board review and approval has been obtained.
The scope and application of proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii)
raises two concerns that should be addressed by the Commission in any
final rule issued in this proceeding. First, the requirement for an SEC
Filer to obtain Board review and approval each time a non-financial
entity elects to use the End-User Exception is inconsistent with the
statutory language of CEA Section 2(j) requiring a Board to review and
approve the decision to enter into swaps, not each individual swap.
Second, the Proposed Rule is not clear whether the Board review and
approval requirement may be delegated to executive officers or other
senior managers that have the direct corporate oversight responsibility
for (i) stand-alone subsidiaries or affiliates of an SEC Filer engaged
in swap trading activities, or (ii) functional business units of a
corporate entity in which swap trading activities are organizationally
housed. The Working Group's concerns are discussed separately below.
1. Board Review and Approval of an SEC Filer's Decision to Use the End-
User Exception
Based upon the express language of proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(b)(6)(ii) and related interpretative guidance in the Proposed
Rule, it appears that an SEC Filer must obtain on a transaction-by-
transaction basis Board review and approval of each and every election
to use the End-User Exception.\12\ Specifically, proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(b)(6)(ii) states, in relevant part, as follows:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See Proposed Rule at 80748, 80757  39.6(b)(6)(ii) (stating
that the Commission must be notified ``each time'' the End-User
Exception is elected, and where the non-financial party is an SEC
Filer, such notification must include confirmation that the Board has
approved the decision not to clear the swap).

(6) Whether the electing counterparty is an entity that is an
issuer of securities registered under section 12 of, or is
required to file reports under 15(d) of, the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, and if so:
* * * * *
(ii) Whether an appropriate committee of the board of
directors (or equivalent body) has reviewed and
approved the decision not to clear the swap.

(emphasis added).

This language violates new CEA Section 2(j) which states:

(j) Committee Approval by Board.--Exemptions from the
requirements of subsection (h)(1) to clear a swap and
subsection (h)(8) to execute a swap through a board of trade or
swap execution facility shall be available to a counterparty
that is an issuer of securities that are registered under
section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C.
78l) or that is required to file reports pursuant to section
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o)
only if an appropriate committee of the issuer's board or
governing body has reviewed and approved its decision to enter
into swaps that are subject to such exemptions.

(emphasis added).

The use of the phrase ``decision to enter into swaps,'' namely, the
singular form of ``decision'' and plural form of ``swaps,'' in new CEA
Section 2(j) cannot be reasonably interpreted by the Commission to
require Board review and approval of an SEC Filer's decision to elect
the End-User Exception on a transaction-by-transaction basis. In
contrast, such language actually requires only that a Board review and
approve an SEC Filer's general decision to enter into multiple swaps
qualifying for the End-User Exception. Accordingly, pursuant to new CEA
Section 2(j), a Board of an SEC Filer may adopt a single, continuing
resolution approving the decision to use the End-User Exception.
The Working Group's reading of new CEA Section 2(j) is supported by
a statement in footnote 18 of the Proposed Rule that a ``board
committee could adopt policies and procedures to review and approve
decisions not to clear swaps, on a periodic basis or subject to other
conditions deemed satisfactory to the board committee.''\13\
Specifically, this statement demonstrates a recognition by the
Commission that a Board may review and approve an SEC Filer's decision
to use the End-User Exception at its discretion. A transaction-by-
transaction review and approval process is not required. Recognizing
the importance of appropriate and diligent corporate oversight as
required by applicable state laws, the Board may modify the proposed
resolution upon determining that a material change in circumstances
warrants such action.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Proposed Rule at 80750 n. 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accordingly, to eliminate any regulatory uncertainty created by the
Proposed Rule, the Commission should reconcile and conform the language
of proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii) with new CEA Section 2(j). In
doing so, the Commission will ensure that proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(b)(6)(ii) is consistent with, and gives meaning to, the
Congressional intent underlying new CEA Section 2(j).
2. Delegation of Board Review and Approval Obligation To Duly
Authorized Personnel Should Be Permitted
The Commission should clarify that, for non-financial entities
formed as a stand-alone subsidiary or affiliate of a parent holding
company, the Board, for that subsidiary or affiliate, is permitted to
review and approve the decision to use the End-User Exception. That is,
Board review and approval for that non-financial entity is sufficient
to meet the requirements of proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii), and such
review and approval need not be obtained from the Board of the parent
holding company.
The Commission should further clarify that, for any non-financial
entity operating as a functional business unit within a single
corporate entity, the obligation to review and approve the use of the
End-User Exception under proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii) may be
delegated by the Board to duly authorized executive officers or other
senior managers with direct oversight responsibility for swap trading
activities.
The delegation of the Board review and approval requirement in
proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii) to such executive officers and other
senior managers will ensure that duly authorized supervisory personnel
with day-to-day knowledge of the operation of the relevant swap markets
and their participants are in the position to review and approve a non-
financial entity's use of the End-User Exception. Furthermore, such
delegation is supported by statements in footnotes 16 and 18 of the
Proposed Rule, which expressly contemplate the review and approval of
an SEC Filer's decision to use the End-User Exception to be undertaken
by duly authorized personnel.\14\ The exercise of such delegated
authority may be guided by internal policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(b)(6)(ii) or other conditions
established by the Board itself.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See Proposed Rule at 80750 nn. 16 & 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Scope and Application of End-User Exception to Transactions Intended
To Hedge ``Commercial Risk''
The Working Group supports the Commission's proposed interpretation
of the term ``commercial risk'' in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1), and
the consistency of this interpretation with the use of the same term in
the pending joint rulemaking further defining ``Major Swap
Participant.'' \15\ However, to ensure regulatory certainty, the
Commission should (i) strictly limit this definition to identifying
those swaps that hedge or mitigate ``commercial risk,'' as defined in
proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1); and (ii) strike proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(c)(2)(i) from any final regulations implementing this
definition.\16\ In addition, swaps that are executed to mitigate or
hedge commercial risk on a dynamic or portfolio basis should
unconditionally qualify for the End-User Exception.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap
Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap
Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract Participant,'' 75 Fed. Reg. 80174
(Dec. 21, 2010).
\16\ The Working Group supports proposed CFTC Rule 
39.6(c)(1)(iii), which provides that a swap transaction hedges or
mitigates commercial risk if such swap ``qualifies for hedging
treatment under Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting
Standards Codification Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (formerly
known as Statement No. 133).'' Yet the Working Group submits that other
accounting regimes exist and are used by market participants. As such,
any final rule should include those in addition to the standards of the
Financial Accounting Standards Board.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. The Proposed Definition of Commercial Risk Obviates the Need for
Proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(2)(i)
Proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(2)(i) is unnecessary and excessive in
light of the proper scope and specificity of the proposed definition of
``commercial risk'' in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1). Any transaction
that does not fall within the definition ``commercial risk'' cannot, by
definition and in any way, qualify for the End-User Exception. The
Working Group is concerned that, if adopted, the broad and vague
regulatory text in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(2)(i) will dilute and
weaken the proposed definition of ``commercial risk'' in proposed CFTC
Rule 39.6(c)(1).
In addition, the terms ``investing'' and ``trading,'' set forth in
proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(2)(i) are beyond the scope of the CEA, as
amended by Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act. Moreover, these terms, as
well as the term ``speculation,'' are not defined and are widely used
in swap markets in a variety of contexts.\17\ In energy markets, for
instance, the term ``trading'' is often used to describe activity
involving both bona fide hedging as well as proprietary trading.\18\
Notwithstanding that the regulation of ``investing'' and ``trading'' is
beyond the scope of the CEA, the adoption of regulatory text containing
such undefined, yet commonly used, terms will lead to conflicting
interpretations regarding the scope and application of the End-User
Exception. Confusion as to what constitutes investing, trading, and
speculation will inject unnecessary and harmful uncertainty into swap
markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Nowhere in Title VII do the terms ``speculation,''
``investing,'' or ``trading'' appear together. Further, there are open
questions about what activity constitutes ``investing'' or ``trading.''
Even if such terms were to be defined, it is unclear whether Title VII
affords the same treatment for swaps used for investing and trading as
it does for swaps entered into for speculation.
\18\ The Working Group is particularly concerned that the word
``trading'' might impermissibly include the buying and selling of
commodities by parties that are primarily in the business of producing,
delivering, storing, marketing, and managing physical commodities. This
is traditional ``commercial activity.'' Yet, it may also come within
the meaning of ``trading.'' Swaps executed in connection with this
trading likely would constitute bona fide hedging transactions. In
other words, proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(2)(i) would effectively nullify
the force and effect of proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1)(ii), which cannot
be the intention of the Commission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group respectfully submits that such a result is
neither in the public interest nor is it consistent with the
Congressional intent underlying the new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A). Because
the clear and unambiguous language of the proposed definition of
``commercial risk'' eliminates the need to adopt regulatory text
identifying transactions that fall outside of the scope of this
definition, the Commission should strike proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(c)(2)(i) from the final regulations implementing the End-User
Exception.
2. Swaps Used to Offset Risks Associated with Underlying Position in
Physical Commodity Markets Hedge or Mitigate ``Commercial
Risk''
Interpretive guidance in the Proposed Rule creates uncertainty
whether the Commission is attempting to create different categories of
activity in physical commodity markets in order to distinguish whether
a swaps transaction is hedging or mitigating commercial risk. Such
uncertainty arises from interpretive guidance set forth in footnote 23
of the Proposed Rule:

The Commission preliminarily believes that swap positions that
are held for the purpose of speculation or trading are, for
example, those positions that are held primarily to take an
outright view on the direction of the market, including
positions held for short term resale, or to obtain arbitrage
profits. Swap positions that hedge other positions that
themselves are held for the purpose of speculation or trading
are also speculative or trading positions.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Proposed Rule at 80752 at n. 23.

The Working Group seeks clarification that the highlighted language
above is intended to apply to other swaps positions ``that themselves
are held for the purpose of speculation'', and not any other position
that would also include physical positions. Otherwise the Working Group
is concerned that the Commission has adopted a preliminary view that
certain exposures in physical commodity markets would not fall within
the definition of ``commercial risk'' in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1).
This view is not supported by any policy rationale, is inconsistent
with the proposed language under proposed CFTC Rule 39.6, and could
lead to absurd results that would have material, adverse impacts on
both physical commodity and swap markets. All physical market
participants, from car manufacturers, to toy stores, to merchant energy
companies, are in the business of trying to sell a commodity for more
than the cost of producing or procuring the commodity. An energy
company procuring supply in advance of the summer driving season, or a
toy store stocking its shelves in advance of a holiday, are both
arguably taking a position in a physical market to trade based on
speculation that there will be increased demand. If the phrase ``other
positions'' is interpreted as applying to physical market positions, it
could have the perverse result of treating certain bona fide hedges of
positions as outright speculative swap positions. This interpretation
is not consistent with the Congressional intent underlying new CEA
Section 2(h)(7)(A).
In light of the foregoing, the Working Group respectfully requests
that the Commission clarify that the language in the interpretive
guidance set forth in footnote 23 of the Proposed Rule is the result of
imprecise drafting that should be corrected in any final rule issued in
this proceeding. As long as a swap transaction is intended to (i)
offset the types of risks, or (ii) meet other qualifying criteria,
identified in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1), it should be viewed as
hedging or mitigating ``commercial risk.'' To remedy the uncertainty
created by the above-quoted text in footnote 23 of the Proposed Rule,
the Working Group requests that the Commission clarify that the phrase
``other positions'' is intended to mean ``other swap positions.''
3. Swaps that Hedge Commercial Risk on a Portfolio or Dynamic Basis
Should Qualify for the End-User Exception
The Working Group respectfully requests the Commission to recognize
that, although participants in physical energy commodity markets use
swaps and futures to hedge underlying physical positions, they do not,
as a general matter, execute such transactions specifically for the
purpose of hedging a specified underlying physical position only. With
this in mind, the End-User Exception should not be interpreted by the
Commission to implement a ``one-size-fits-all'' approach to hedging by
requiring an entity claiming use of this exception to match a swap that
hedges or mitigates commercial risk with a specified underlying
physical commodity transaction only.
In physical energy markets, the predominant risk management
practice used by commercial firms is to hedge underlying physical
assets and related positions on a portfolio or aggregate basis. In
order to effectively and efficiently mitigate commercial risk
associated with underlying physical assets and related positions,
commercial energy firms will dynamically hedge their aggregate
exposures on a regular and on-going basis. A commercial firm will
normally hedge these exposures utilizing physical transactions,
futures, and swaps, the exact combinations of which will be determined
by various characteristics which may be unique to such firm. A
prescriptive one-to-one matching requirement of each swap to a specific
physical transaction or an asset position is contrary to the statutory
language, and is unnecessary and overly burdensome.
Another well-established practice used by commercial energy firms
to mitigate commercial risk is to hedge dynamically to optimize the
value of underlying physical assets or portfolios. A key aspect of
dynamic hedging is the ability to modify the hedging structure related
to the physical asset or positions when the relevant pricing
relationships applicable to that asset change.\20\ Dynamic hedging may
involve leaving an asset or position unhedged when necessary to
mitigate lost opportunity cost risk, which may require hedges to be
established, unwound, and re-established on an iterative basis over
time. The hedging of commercial risk should therefore include all
hedging activity that maximizes the value of the asset.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ The following provides an example of dynamic hedging of
natural gas and power prices by a commercial energy firm in over-the-
counter swap markets. The dynamic hedging transactions relate to the
sale of power from a gas-fired, electric generating facility (the
``Asset''). The impact of the strategy set forth below is to hedge
commercial risk associated with changing market conditions to (i)
facilitate a cumulative improvement on the return of the Asset, and
(ii) allow for a better economic allocation of the underlying physical
commodities being used or generated by the Asset.

Step 1: Power Prices Exceed Gas Prices; Asset Hedged
to Lock in Positive Margin. The
commercial energy firm purchases fixed price swaps to fix the
prices for natural gas
fuel supply and power output produced by the Asset (``Initial
Hedges''). At the time the
Initial Hedges are entered into, power prices exceeded natural
gas prices. This strategy
locks in a specified positive margin for the Asset.

Step 2: Power Prices and Gas Prices Reverse; Asset
Unhedged to Capture Additional
Positive Margin. At a later date, the relative prices of
natural gas and power reversed
(i.e., gas prices exceeded power prices to the point where the
natural gas was worth
more sold as gas than it would be if it was converted to
electricity), the commercial
energy firm bought back the Initial Hedges to maximize the
positive margin on the
Asset. The repurchase of the Initial Hedges left the Asset in
an unhedged position. The
repurchase of the Initial Hedges made economic sense because it
would have been un-
economic from the physical commodity pricing perspective to run
the Asset. Specifically,
it allowed the commercial energy firm to earn an additional
positive margin on the
Asset under the then-existing market conditions by mitigating
lost opportunity costs as-
sociated with holding gas positions that were worth more than
the power it could have
generated.

Step 3: Power Prices and Gas Prices Reverse Again;
Asset Re-Hedged to Capture Addi-
tional Positive Margin. As the relative prices of natural gas
and power reverse again
a few months later it becomes economical to produce output from
the Asset and enter
into new fixed price natural gas and power price hedges to lock
in an additional positive
margin on the Asset.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the customary use of portfolio and dynamic hedging in energy
markets, it would be impracticable, if not impossible, for the vast
majority of energy market participants to link hedges with specified
underlying physical positions for purposes of complying with the End-
User Exception. Accordingly, the Working Group respectfully submits
that, as long as these transactions meet the underlying requirements of
new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(A) and proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(a), they should
unconditionally qualify for the End-User Exception. In the alternative,
the cost burdens would be drastic, and the potential effects on
liquidity would be severe, without resulting benefits to participants
or the markets.
D. The Applicability of the End-User Exception to Certain Affiliate
Transactions Needs To Be Clarified
New CEA Section 2(h)(7)(D)(i) permits an affiliate of a non-
financial entity to use the End-User Exception if that affiliate,
``acting on behalf of the person and as an agent, uses the swap to
hedge or mitigate the commercial risk of'' the non-financial entity or
other affiliate that also qualifies as a non-financial entity.
Notwithstanding this language, new CEA Section 2(h)(7)(D)(ii) prohibits
an affiliate from using the End-User Exception if it is, among other
things, a Swap Dealer or Major Swap Participant. These provisions are,
however, silent with respect to swap transactions between affiliates
within the same corporate family that are used to manage and allocate
risk. The Commission should use the authority granted to it under new
CEA Section 2(h)(2) to explicitly exempt such inter-affiliate swap
transactions from mandatory clearing and, as applicable, the End-User
Exception notification requirements set forth in proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(b).\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ New CEA Section 2(h)(2) provides the Commission with the
ability to determine whether a specific swap or group, category, type,
or class of swaps should be required to be cleared.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group respectfully submits that there is no benefit to
the public interest or the Commission to require mandatory clearing or
(as applicable) reporting of information pursuant to proposed CFTC Rule
39.6(b) with respect to inter-affiliate swaps that are used to manage
and allocate risk within a holding company system or other
organizational structure. Inter-affiliate swaps do not in any way
enhance systemic risk, nor do they affect liquidity in swap markets.
Information relating to such swap transactions is neither responsive to
one of the central policy goals of Title VII of the Act--to enhance
transparency in swap markets--nor is it necessary to prevent abuse.
Should the Commission decline to grant the requested explicit
exception from mandatory clearing and End-User Exception notification
requirements for inter-affiliate swaps, the Working Group requests
that, at a minimum, it clarify that otherwise qualified non-financial
entities are not prohibited from utilizing the End-User Exception when
engaged in swap transactions with Swap Dealer or Major Swap Participant
affiliates.
E. Presumption of Status as a Non-Financial Entity
As noted in other comments filed with the Commission by the Working
Group, the framework adopted in Title VII for the regulation of over-
the-counter swap markets is based upon the existence of distinct
classes of market participants.\22\ New CEA Section 2(h)(7) and
provisions of the Proposed Rule implementing the End-User Exception
recognize two distinct classes of market participants: (i) financial
entities that are ineligible for this exception, and (ii) non-financial
entities that are eligible for this exception upon compliance with
certain conditions. In order to provide legal and regulatory certainty,
and to be faithful to the intent of the Act, the Commission should not
adopt any presumption that a ``financial entity'' as defined in new CEA
Sections 2(h)(7)(C) and (D)(ii) for one kind of swap is also a
financial entity for other kinds of swaps. Instead, market participants
should be permitted to seek the exemption for each swap for which they
are not registered as a swap dealer. Alternatively, the Commission
should adopt a presumption that a market participant is a non-financial
entity until proven otherwise.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ See Working Group, Comment Letter on Joint Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking on Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based
Swap Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap
Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract Participant,'' Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (Feb. 22, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
F. The Proposed Rule Fails to Adequately Consider Anticipated
Compliance Costs
Section 15(a) of the CEA requires the CFTC, before promulgating a
rule, to ``consider the costs and benefits of the action of the
Commission.'' \23\ The Proposed Rule does not, as a general matter,
provide any empirical data regarding the specific costs and benefit
analysis specific to the implementation of proposed CFTC Rule 39.6 by
market participants.\24\ The Working Group requests that the Commission
(i) consider the costs and benefits associated with the Proposed Rule
in the manner prescribed by CEA Section 15(a), (ii) issue a
supplemental new rule in this proceeding setting forth empirical data
supporting its conclusions regarding the costs and benefits of the
Proposed Rule, and (iii) notice the supplemental rule in the Federal
Register for public comment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ 7 U.S.C.  19.
\24\ Proposed Rule at 80754-55.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. Responses to Specific Requests for Comment
A. Specific Requests for Comment Addressing Notification to the
Commission
Question: Are there clarifications or instructions the Commission
could adopt that are useful for parties seeking to elect to use the
end-user clearing exception? If so, what are they and what would be the
benefits of adopting them?
Response: As stated under Part III.A, above, the Working Group
believes the non-financial entity electing to use the End-User
Exception should be required to submit any relevant information in the
same manner and form as the Commission's current Form 40.
Question: Would it be difficult or prohibitively expensive for
persons to report the information required under the proposed  39.6?
If so, why?
Response: As discussed under Part III.A, the Working Group believes
that notification on a transaction-by-transaction basis will be
prohibitively burdensome and expensive. Too many entities other than
the traders would have to be involved in each deal if this cannot be
handled on an aggregate basis. As such, the ability to hedge with an
adequate price will be slowed due to data collection and additional
employees needed to collect and report information.
Question: Is the information the Commission proposes to collect in
connection with the Financial Obligation Notice sufficient? Is other
information needed to achieve the purposes of the Dodd-Frank Act?
Response: The Working Group believes that no additional information
is necessary to achieve the transparency objectives of new CEA Section
2(h)(7).
Question: Is it necessary or appropriate for the Commission to
collect additional general information on the credit support agreement
and the collateral practices under the agreement, such as the level of
margin collateral outstanding (e.g., less than or equal to a specified
dollar amount, or greater than a series of progressively higher dollar
amounts); the types of collateral provided (e.g., cash, government
securities, other securities, other collateral), or the frequency of
portfolio reconciliation?
Response: The Working Group does not believe this additional
information should be required, as such is not required by the CEA or
the Act.
Question: Is it necessary or appropriate for the Commission to
collect additional general information on specific terms of the credit
support agreement, such as whether the collateral requirements are
unilateral or bilateral provisions and whether there are contractual
terms triggered by changes in the credit rating or other financial
circumstances of one or both of the counterparties?
Response: The Working Group does not believe such additional
information is necessary as such information provides no benefit to the
Commission.
Question: Is it necessary or appropriate for the Commission to
collect additional general information about the guarantor, such as
whether or not the guarantor is a parent or affiliate of the person
electing to use the end-user clearing exception?
Response: The Working Group does not believe such additional
information.
Question: Is it necessary or appropriate for the Commission to
collect additional general information regarding the assets pledged,
such as the type of security interest or the type of property being
used as collateral?
Response: The Working Group does not believe such additional
information is necessary.
Question: Is it necessary or appropriate for the Commission to
collect additional general information regarding the segregation
arrangements, such as the identity of the collateral agent or other
third party involved in the arrangement, and information regarding
whether the arrangement involves a custodian, triparty or different
type of relationship?
Response: The Working Group does not believe such additional
information is necessary.
Question: Is it necessary or appropriate for the Commission to
collect additional general information regarding the adequacy of other
means being used, or the adequacy of the financial resources available,
to meet the financial obligations associated with the non-cleared swap?
Response: The Working Group does not believe such additional
information is necessary as such information provides no benefit to the
Commission.
Question: Should the Commission consider requiring parties electing
to use the end-user clearing exception to report additional types of
information, either in order to limit abuse of the exception or for
other reasons? If so, what other information should be reported and
what would be the benefit of requiring such information to be reported?
What categories of information, if any, should not be required to be
reported and why?
Response: The Working Group does not believe additional information
is necessary. As discussed under Part III.A.2, above, the Commission
has adequate authority to limit abuses.
B. Specific Request for Comment Regarding Treatment of Affiliates
Question: Should the Commission provide additional clarity to the
terms used in CEA Sections 2(h)(7)(C)(iii) and 2(h)(7)(D) in proposed 
39.6 for affiliates electing to use the end-user clearing exception?
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.D, above.
C. Specific Requests for Comment Addressing Board Approval Requirement
Question: Should the Commission provide additional clarity to the
requirements of CEA Section 2(j) [board approval] to facilitate
compliance with proposed  39.6 by parties electing to use the end-user
clearing exception?
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.B, above.
Question: Should the Commission adopt more specific requirements to
implement the provisions of CEA Section 2(j)? If so, what specific
rules should the Commission consider and what would be the benefits of
adopting them?
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.B, above.
D. Specific Requests for Comment Addressing Notification of the
Commission
Question: Does collecting Financial Obligation Notice information
through SDRs provide sufficient assurance that the end-user clearing
exception will be available to non-financial entities wishing to use
the exception? Are SDRs reliable enough to be used for these purposes?
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.A, above.
Question: Is there a more feasible and cost effective way for the
Commission to receive notification regarding the use of the end-user
clearing exception? If so, what is the better alternative and in what
ways is it better?
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.A, above
Question: Would the person reporting information to the SDR be in a
position to have or be able to obtain, in all cases, the information
the Commission is requiring to be reported under proposed Rule 39.6. If
not, why not? Are there special considerations in this regard when a
swap is between two non-financial entities that are each seeking to
elect to use this exception?
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.A.2, above.
Question: Should the Commission require persons electing to use the
end-user clearing exception to follow additional compliance practices
in some circumstances? For example, should the Commission require
electing persons to create a record of the means being used to mitigate
the credit risk of the swap? Would such a requirement be redundant or
duplicative of other proposed record-keeping requirements?
Response: The Working Group submits that no additional compliance
practices are required. The transactions at issue are governed by the
terms of industry standard bilateral master agreements, which
incorporate negotiated credit terms.
E. Specific Requests for Comment Address the Hedging of Commercial Risk
Question: Should swaps qualifying as hedging or risk mitigating be
limited to swaps where the underlying hedged item is a non-financial
commodity?
Response: The Working Group supports the Commission's proposed
definition of ``commercial risk'' in proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(c)(1).
Non-financial commodities such as interest rate and foreign currency
present risk that is central to the effective and efficient operations
of a commercial enterprise. As such, swaps entered into to mitigate or
hedge interest rate risk or currency risk should fall within the
proposed definition of ``commercial risk'' and should be eligible for
the End-User Exception (assuming the other qualifying requirements are
satisfied).
Question: Commenters may also address whether swaps qualifying as
hedging or risk mitigating should hedge or mitigate commercial risk on
a single risk or an aggregate risk basis, and on a single entity or a
consolidated basis.
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.C, above.
Question: Whether swaps facilitating asset optimization or dynamic
hedging should be included; and whether hedge effectiveness should be
addressed.
Response: The Working Group submits its response to this question
under Part III.C, above.
V. Open Comment Period
Given the complexity and interconnectedness of all of the
rulemakings under Title VII of the Act, and given that the Act and the
rules promulgated thereunder entirely restructure over-the-counter
derivatives markets, the Working Group respectfully requests that the
Commission hold open the comment period on all rules promulgated under
Title VII of the Act until such time as each and every rule required to
be promulgated has been proposed. Market participants will be able to
consider the entire new market structure and the interconnection
between all proposed rules when drafting comments on proposed rules.
The resulting comprehensive comments will allow the Commission to
better understand how its proposed rules will impact swap markets.
VI. Conclusion
The Working Group supports appropriate regulation that brings
transparency and stability to the energy swap markets in the United
States. The Working Group appreciates this opportunity to comment and
respectfully requests that the Commission consider the comments set
forth herein as it develops a final rule in this proceeding.
The Working Group expressly reserves the right to supplement these
comments as deemed necessary and appropriate.
If you have any questions, please contact the undersigned.
Respectfully submitted,

R. Michael Sweeney, Jr.;
Mark W. Menezes;
David T. McIndoe;
Counsel for the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms.
______

February 22, 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap
Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap
Dealer'' and ``Eligible Contract Participant''

Dear Secretary Stawick:

On behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms (the
``Working Group''), Hunton & Williams LLP respectfully submits this
letter in response to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (the
``CFTC'') and Securities Exchange Commission (the ``SEC,'' and together
with the CFTC, the ``Commissions'') request for comment concerning the
Commissions' Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Further Definition of
``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap Dealer,'' ``Major Swap
Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap Dealer'' and ``Eligible
Contract Participant'' (the ``Proposed Rules'').\1\ This comment letter
provides the Working Group's comments regarding the proposed definition
of ``major swap participant.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 75 Fed. Reg. 80174 (Dec. 22, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group is a diverse group of commercial firms in the
energy industry whose primary business activity is the physical
delivery of one or more energy commodities to others, including
industrial, commercial and residential consumers. Members of the
Working Group are energy producers, marketers and utilities. The
Working Group considers and responds to requests for public comment
regarding legislative and regulatory developments with respect to the
trading of energy commodities, including derivatives and other
contracts that reference energy commodities.
Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act (the ``Act'') vests the Commissions with new and
expanded authority to regulate a wide array of participants in swap
markets. Swap dealers, security-based swap dealers, major swap
participants and major security-based swap participants in particular,
will be required to develop and implement comprehensive measures to
assure compliance with both substantive and procedural requirements
under the Commissions' new regulations set forth under the Act. Such
regulations have been the subject of several key proposed rulemakings
for which the Working Group has previously submitted comments. The
Working Group anticipates submitting comments on the subjects of
additional key proposed rulemakings.
The Working Group appreciates the opportunity to provide these
comments in response to the Proposed Rules and respectfully requests
that the Commissions consider the comments set forth herein. The
Working Group looks forward to working with the Commissions to further
define the term ``major swap participant'' prior to the effective date
of Title VII of the Act. Because the Commissions have not finalized the
regulatory definition of the terms that are the subject of the Proposed
Rules, members of the Working Group have commented on proposed
rulemakings applicable to swap dealers and major swap participants.
They are concerned about the potential that one or more aspects of the
proposed definitions, which are unclear in material respects, could be
interpreted such that they are deemed to be swap dealers or major swap
participants. The Working Group would also note that the comments
supplied herein are incomplete. Without a definition of ``swap,'' the
Working Group is unable to provide complete comments on the proposed
definition of ``major swap participant.''
I. Comments of the Working Group
The Working Group is generally supportive of the objective approach
taken by the Commissions in further defining ``major swap
participant.'' The use of objective criteria and tests will provide
swap market participants with needed clarity and regulatory certainty
with regard to their status as a potential major swap participant.
However, multiple aspects of the proposed definition of ``major swap
participant'' are vague in material respects and must be clarified so
market participants can properly and consistently apply these aspects
of the proposed definition to their own swap positions and related
business activities.
A. Proposed Definitions Must Reflect Congressional Intent To Capture
Only Entities Presenting Significant Risk to the U.S. Financial
System
Congress clearly intended the definitions of ``major swap
participant'' and ``major security-based swap participant'' to cover
entities with swap portfolios that result in such entities presenting
risk to the United States financial system. The first prong of the
definition of ``major swap participant,'' as set forth in Commodity
Exchange Act (``CEA'') Section 1a(33)(A)(i), deems any entity that
``maintains a substantial position in swaps,'' excluding, among other
things, positions ``held for hedging or mitigating commercial risk'' of
a major swap participant.\2\ In CEA Section 1a(33)(B), Congress
directed the Commissions to define the term ``substantial position'' at
``the threshold that the Commission[s] determine to be prudent for the
effective monitoring, management, and oversight of entities that are
systemically important or can significantly impact the financial system
of the United States.'' \3\ In general, this prong identifies as
``major swap participants'' those entities that have amassed
speculative positions in swaps that are sufficiently large such that
losses on these positions could have a materially adverse effect on the
financial system of the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ CEA Section 1a(33)(A)(i).
\3\ As discussed below, when determining whether a position is a
``substantial position'' if a position creates ``substantial
counterparty exposure,'' the following swaps should be excluded: (a)
swaps that are centrally cleared, (b) swaps to the extent their market
value is collateralized and (c) swaps entered into between affiliates.
These swaps do not have any significance to the stability of the
financial system of the United States or any such risk can be better
addressed elsewhere, such as the regulation of derivatives clearing
organizations and clearing agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second prong of the definition of ``major swap participant''
set forth in CEA Section 1a(33)(A)(ii) defines a ``major swap
participant'' as a party whose ``outstanding swaps create substantial
counterparty exposure that could have serious adverse effects on the
financial stability of the United States banking system or financial
markets.'' Congress clearly intended this standard to be a substantial
threshold. This prong addresses the risk that an entity could inject
huge losses into the financial network by defaulting on its swap
portfolio, whether or not the default is particular to swaps.\4\ In
contrast to the first prong of the definition, the second prong
contemplates potential losses beyond those inherent with an entity's
actual swap positions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ E.g., a major swap participant that becomes insolvent upon
suffering massive losses on its portfolio of residential mortgage
investments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Implicit in both of these prongs of the definition of ``major swap
participant'' is Congress' intent for the definition to capture those
entities that are not swap dealers, but that pose a systemic risk as a
consequence of their swap activities. An entity is systemically risky
if its default would significantly impact the financial system. The
degree of systemic risk an entity poses, therefore, is a function of
(a) the potential size of its default, (b) the degree to which its
default would be distributed through out the financial system, and (c)
the probability of its default. Accordingly, any definition intended to
capture systemically risky entities should take into account all of
those factors.
The tests proposed by the Commissions in the definitions of ``major
swap participant'' and ``major security-based swap participant'' only
consider the size of an entity's swap portfolio and, to some extent,
the degree to which its swaps are margined. To capture only those
entities whose swap activities can significantly impact the financial
system, the Commissions should also factor in (a) the assets an entity
has available to cure any potential default on its swap portfolio and
(b) the degree to which an entity's potential swap exposures are
concentrated among systemically important market participants.
Consideration of those factors might result in the application of any
potential definitions of ``major swap participant'' and ``major
security-based swap participant'' being more difficult for the
Commissions and market participants. However, that additional burden is
justified. If such definitions account for these additional factors,
they will be less likely to unduly burden less risky entities than the
proposed definitions.\5\ Inclusion in the final rule of the additional
factors would capture only entities that truly pose a systemic risk as
a result of their swap activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(sss). The Commissions recommend a
threshold of $3 billion of current unsecured outward exposure or $6
billion in current outward and potential future unsecured exposure for
an entity to have a substantial position in rate swaps and $1 billion
in current outward unsecured exposure or $2 billion in current and
future potential future unsecured exposure for an entity to have a
substantial position in each of the other swap categories. For an
entity's swap positions to constitute a substantial counterparty
exposure, the Commissions proposed a threshold of $5 billion of current
uncollateralized exposure and $8 billion of current and potential
future uncollateralized exposure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Different Thresholds Across Categories Does Not Reflect Systemic
Risk
The degree of systemic risk posed by an entity's swap activities
generally is not a function of the markets or products in which it
transacts. So, the threshold level of swap activities to determine
whether an entity is a major swap participant should not be different
for different markets or classes of swaps. An entity, for example, is
not more systemically risky because it has $1 billion in current
outward exposure in ``other commodities'' swaps rather than $1 billion
in current outward exposure in ``rate'' swaps. However, under the
Proposed Rule, in the first circumstance, the entity is treated as
systemically important and in the second instance, it is not.
The Commissions might have made market-by-market distinctions in
the Proposed Rules because Section 1a(33)(C) of the CEA and Section
3(a)(67)(C) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 contemplate that a
person may be designated as a major swap participant or major security-
based swap participant for one or more categories of swaps or security-
based swaps without being classified as such for all classes of swaps
or security-based swaps. Congress likely understood that an entity
might be a systemically significant participant because of its activity
in one category of swaps, but might enter into other types of swaps
from time to time. Prudential regulation would be unnecessary with
respect to the entity's truly ancillary swap activities. However, the
need for regulation is triggered by the exposure inherent in an
entity's portfolio, not which markets a portfolio might cover.
Accordingly, the Working Group believes that the exposure
thresholds for the determination of substantial positions should be the
same for each swap category. Alternatively, if the thresholds differ
across swap categories, the Commissions must provide sufficient
rationale to support such differences and such reasons should be solely
based on concerns about the risk to the U.S. financial system.
2. Proposed Thresholds Do Not Reflect Systemic Risk
The objective standards outlined in the current definitions, as set
out in the Proposed Rules, likely will capture entities that do not
present systemic risk. While the Working Group supports the use of
objective standards, it respectfully submits that the objective
standards associated with proposed definitional tests have been set too
low and should not be set as a static number.
Though the Commissions conclude otherwise, the proposed thresholds
used to determine whether an entity holds a substantial position or if
its positions create substantial counterparty exposure do not fully
reflect Congress' desire for major swap participants to be limited to
only those entities that are ``systemically important or can
significantly impact the financial system of the United States.'' The
Commissions state:

The proposed thresholds are intended to be low enough to
provide for the appropriately early regulation of an entity
whose swap or security-based swap positions have a reasonable
potential of posing significant counterparty risks and risks to
the market that stress the financial system, while being high
enough that it would not unduly burden entities that are
materially less likely to pose these types of risks.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Proposed Rules note 105.

The instruction of Congress to the Commissions in the Act was to
set definitions for ``major swap participant'' and ``major security-
based swap participant'' that capture entities that are systemically
important. The definition was intended to capture those entities that
(a) for the purposes of the substantial position test ``are
systemically important or can significantly impact the financial system
of the United States'' and (b) for the purposes of the substantial
counterparty exposure test whose swaps and resulting exposures ``could
have serious adverse effects on the financial stability of the United
States banking system or financial markets.''\7\ The Act does not
establish visibility thresholds at which entities might potentially be
systemically important. The Commissions should correct their
interpretation of the Act to correctly reflect the statutory text and
Congress' true intent. Otherwise, the Commissions might regulate
entities as major swap participants or major security-based swap
participants that do not have swap portfolios that present risks to the
U.S. financial system. There is no evidence to show this was Congress's
interest.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ CEA Section 1a(33).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commissions offer no evidence to support why the above
thresholds were selected. The proposed thresholds do not appear to have
any direct relationship to systemic risk. There are numerous examples
of entities sustaining losses well in excess of the proposed limits.
These entities not only did not cause a financial crisis, but also, in
some cases, survived such losses. For example, the collapse of Enron is
cited as an example of a high profile default that did not have a
substantial systemic impact.\8\ Prior to its collapse, Enron had
approximately $18.7 billion in derivatives exposure, which constituted
approximately 3% of the notional outstanding in the global market for
derivatives on ``other commodities.'' \9\ Enron's share of the market
for derivatives on ``other commodities'' was more than ten times larger
than the Commission's proposed threshold. Despite this scale, the
collapse of Enron did not trigger any systemic failure in the U.S.
financial system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See, e.g., Darryl Hendricks, John Kambhu, and Patricia Mosser,
Systemic Risk and the Financial System, Background Paper presented at
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the National Academy of Sciences
Conference on New Directions in Understanding Systemic Risk, May, 2006
and James Bullard, Christopher J. Neely, and David C. Wheelock,
Systemic Risk and the Financial Crisis: A Primer, 91 Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, Sep./Oct. 2009, Sec. 5, Part 1 at 403-17.
\9\ Diana B. Henriques, Enron's Collapse: The Derivatives Market
That Deals in Risks Faces a Novel One, N.Y. Times, Nov. 29, 2001.
Available at : http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/29/business/enron-s-
collapse-thederivatives-market-that-deals-in-risks-faces-a-novel-
one.html, and Bank of International Settlements Press Release: The
global OTC derivatives market at end--June 2001 Second part of the
triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives
Market Activity, December 20, 2001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another example of an entity sustaining massive losses in the
energy derivatives markets, yet not causing the energy markets or U.S.
financial system to collapse is Amaranth Advisors, LLC. On one trading
day, September 14, 2006, Amaranth experienced losses of approximately
$560 million in natural gas futures positions. Amaranth is believed to
have experienced total losses in connection with such position in
excess of $4.35 billion.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Ludwig B. Chincarini, The Amaranth Debacle: A Failure of Risk
Measures or a Failure of Risk Management?, The Journal of Alternative
Investments, Winter 2007, at 93.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commissions should adopt substantial position and substantial
counterparty exposure tests that account for current conditions in swap
markets. Setting thresholds that utilize static numbers will require
the Commissions to revisit such thresholds over time in order to ensure
they continue to reflect Congressional intent. For example, prices in
energy markets are correlated to macroeconomic conditions. So, if the
U.S. economy were to return to strong growth, the notional size of
energy swap markets would grow as the prices of the underlying
commodities rise. Though commercial energy firms' absolute positions
will rise, their relative positions will remain constant. On the other
hand, other factors, such as the use of portfolio compression, might
shrink the notional size of a market while the actual market value
increases. The recent trend in the credit default swap market is an
example.\11\ In short, rising energy prices could push many commercial
energy firms over the proposed major swap participant determination
thresholds or shrinking notional amounts in other markets could allow
entities to avoid designation as a major swap participant. In both
cases, those entity's relative positions in their markets will remain
unchanged and the risk they pose to the financial system will generally
remain constant as well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See Nicholas Vause, Counterparty risk and contract volumes in
the credit swap market, BIS Quarterly Review, December 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group respectfully suggests that the Commissions set
the following limits with respect to a substantial position in other
commodities:

a daily average aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure
in excess of 1% of the gross market value of other commodity
swaps; or

a daily average aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure
plus daily average aggregate potential outward exposure in
excess of 2% of the gross market value of other commodity
swaps.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ The Working Group respectfully suggests that the Commissions
base these determinations on the BIS' market size data until the
Commissions determine the size of the swap markets they will regulate.

Such limits would better reflect Congress' desire for the ``major swap
participant'' definition to capture entities whose swap activities pose
a systemic risk and that those limits will not require frequent
modification as they are a relative measure of an entity's systemic
risk.
3. Speculation, Investing and Trading Are Different Concepts
Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ttt)(2)(i) \13\ provides that any swap
``held for a purpose that is in the nature of speculation, investing or
trading'' will not be considered a hedging transaction for purposes of
the definitional tests.\14\ The Working Group recommends that this
provision be deleted in the final rule.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Proposed Rules at 80215.
\14\ Such categorization is also used in determining whether or not
the end-user exception from the mandatory clearing requirement is
available to certain market participants.
\15\ The Working Group suggests that the CFTC adopt one provision
in its regulations that defines when swaps are hedges or mitigate
commercial risk. We note that the CFTC proposes a similar definition in
proposed CFTC regulation 39.6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposed subparagraph (ttt)(1),\16\ the operative provision,
describes certain hedging and credit mitigation activities. If a firm
uses swaps for these activities, then such swaps are deemed to be held
for ``hedging or mitigating commercial risk'' and excluded when
determining whether a firm's swap portfolio constitutes a substantial
position. As hedges, they are not speculative.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Id. at 80214-15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposed subparagraph (ttt)(2)(i) also should be deleted because it
regulates swaps in connection with ``investing or trading.'' \17\ While
Congress was clearly concerned with speculation, it showed no similar
concern for investing or trading. In fact, no where in Title VII do the
terms ``speculation, investing, or trading'' appear together. Also, the
phrasing ``investing or trading'' does not appear in Title VII. The
Commissions have not defined ``investing'' or ``trading'' in the
Proposed Rules. Thus, there are open questions about what activity
constitutes investing or trading. For example, even if such terms were
to be defined, does Title VII require the same treatment for swaps done
for investing and trading purposes as it does for swaps entered into
for speculative purposes?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ In the alternative, the Commissions should redraft it to read,
``Not held for a purpose that is in the nature of speculation.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trading and investing, as vernacular concepts, include both
speculation and hedging. Use of such terms might suggest that hedging
swaps, which constitute trading or investing activity, would not be
afforded treatment as hedges under the definitional tests. This
treatment of hedging swaps would effectively nullify the statutory
provisions that exclude swaps for hedging purposes when determining
whether a swap portfolio might constitute a ``substantial position.''
The Working Group also is concerned that the word ``trading,'' in
particular, might impermissibly include the buying and selling of
commodities by parties that are primarily in the business of producing,
delivering, storing, marketing and managing physical commodities. This
is traditional ``commercial activity.'' Yet, it might also come within
the meaning of ``trading.'' Swaps executed in connection with this
trading likely would constitute bona fide hedging transactions. It
would make no sense for language in the Commissions' regulations to
disqualify such swaps from being hedges for purposes of the
definitional tests.
4. The Commissions Should Not Reclassify Swaps That Hedge Non-Swap
Speculative Positions
The Commissions, in the release to the Proposed Rules, introduced
uncertainty as to the treatment of swaps entered into by a firm to
hedge physical market positions. This may simply be a drafting issue,
but the Working Group would respectfully request the Commissions to
provide clarification.
In footnote 128 to the Proposed Rules,\18\ the Commissions state
that, ``[s]wap positions that hedge other positions that themselves are
held for the purposes of speculation or trading are also speculative or
trading positions.'' (emphasis added). There is no clarity as to what
the Commissions meant by ``other positions.'' Perhaps it was an error,
and the Commissions meant ``other swap positions.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Proposed Rules at 80195. See, also, Proposed Rules footnote
131 at same.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If the Commission intended to suggest that the hedge of a physical
market position that is a ``trading'' position (i.e., held as a
merchant or merchandiser in the commodity) would not qualify for
treatment as ``hedging or mitigating commercial risk'' under the MSP
definition, this would have serious consequences to physical market
participants. All physical market participants, from car manufacturers,
to toy stores, to merchant energy companies, are in the business of
trying to sell a commodity for more than the cost of producing or
procuring the commodity. An energy company procuring supply in advance
of the summer driving season or a toy store stocking its shelves in
advance of a holiday are each arguably taking a position in a physical
market to trade based on speculation that there will be increased
demand. If the phrase ``other positions'' is interpreted as applying to
physical market positions, it could have the perverse result of
treating certain bona fide hedges of positions as outright speculative
swap positions. Thus, firms would be unable to exclude these swaps from
the exposure calculations.
On the other hand, if the footnote was intended to use the phrase
``other swap positions,'' the sentence in question would be consistent
with what the Working Group believes the Commission's intent to be.
Such an interpretation of footnote 128 also is consistent with
proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ttt)(2)(ii). This subparagraph, in describing
swaps that are not hedging or mitigating commercial risk, reads:

(ii) Not held to hedge or mitigate the risk of another swap or
securities-based swap position, unless that other position
itself is held for the purpose of hedging or mitigating
commercial risk as defined by this rule of  350.4s67-4 of this
title.

In this subparagraph, ``other position'' clearly references another
swap or security-based swap. Unlike footnote 128, subparagraph
(ttt)(2)(ii) does not refer to swaps held to hedge ``other position,''
just those to hedge swaps or securities-bases swaps.
Accordingly, the Working Group requests that the Commission clarify
or correct (as appropriate) the phrase ``other positions'' in footnote
128 to mean ``other swap positions.''
Separately, the Working Group supports the inclusion of
subparagraph (ttt)(2)(ii) in the Proposed Rules as it facilitates as
firm's effective management of it hedge portfolio when that portfolio
includes swaps entered into in connection with commercial activity
(e.g., the physical delivery of energy products). We note, however,
that it prevents a swap intended to offset a speculative swap from
being considered a hedge for purposes of the definitional tests. Yet,
entering into an offsetting swap is a very common and efficient way in
which market participants exit or limit a derivatives position. When
considered in the context of systemic risk mitigation, the Working
Group believes that all hedges should be treated as hedges.
5. The Commissions Should Provide More Support for Their Conclusions
With Respect to Administrative Law Matters
The Commissions, in the release to the Proposed Rules, largely
conclude that the requirements under several administrative statutes
are satisfied because the Proposed Rules only concern definitional
matters. As the definitions covered by the Proposed Rules are the
keystone for Title VII, this conclusory approach to applicable
administrative statutes is wanting.
For example, the Commissions do not provide supporting discussion
about the various thresholds contained in the Proposed Rule. There is
no analysis as to why any particular threshold represents the best
selection. There is no discussion of the impact to the U.S. economy
from the selection of one threshold over another. These definitions
simply cannot be made in a vacuum. Quantitative, economic analysis is
required to understand how and why the Commissions fashioned the
definitions as they appear in the Proposed Rule.
Title VII and the rules to be promulgated by the Commissions
thereunder will fundamentally effect the U.S. financial system and the
U.S. economy. In the energy markets, they will effect the cost of
electricity, natural gas and heating oil received by nearly every U.S.
tax payer. The definitions are central to derivatives reform. Without
them, the other statutory and regulatory provisions largely are
inoperative. To hold that the definitional rules have little or no
associated costs or economic impact (perhaps on the theory that it is
the other statutory provisions or rules that actually impose the
obligations and constraints) is to truly subvert substance to legal
finery.
Thus, among other things, the Working Group does not support the
Commissions' conclusion under the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act of 1996 that the definitions do not constitute a ``major''
rule. The Commissions offer no support behind their conclusions that
the Proposed Rules do not result in or are likely to result in the
following:

an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more
(either in the form of an increase or a decrease);

a major increase in costs or prices for consumers or
individual industries; or

significant adverse effect on competition, investment or
innovation.

The Working Group believes that the Proposed Rules will cause each of
the foregoing to occur.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The Working Group has given notice to Congress and the CFTC on
several occasions of the potential impact to energy markets and the
U.S. economy from reform of the energy swap markets. See for example,
Comments of the Working Group on the CFTC's proposed rule on
Designation of a Chief Compliance Officer; Required Compliance
Policies; and Annual Report of a Futures Commission Merchant, Swap
Dealer, or Major Swap Participant, filed with the CFTC on January 18,
2011, Comments of the Working Group on the CFTC's proposed rule on
Regulations Establishing and Governing the Duties of Swap Dealers and
Major Swap Participants, filed with the CFTC on December 15, 2010, and
January 24, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commissions should provide economic analysis as to the import
of the definitions they have selected. This information, however,
should not appear solely in the final rule. The Working Group therefore
requests that the Commissions (i) consider the costs and benefits
associated with the Proposed Rules in the manner prescribed by CEA
Section 15(a), (ii) issue a supplemental rule in this proceeding
setting forth empirical data supporting its conclusions regarding the
costs and benefits of the Proposed Rules, and (iii) notice the
supplemental rule in the Federal Register for public comment.
B. Suggested Improvements to Exposure Tests
The definitional tests in the Proposed Rules are highly technical.
They also are more challenging to use than may appear at first glance.
Given the potential complexity of and likely interpretive issues with
any tests set forth under the final definitions of ``major swap
participant'' and ``major security-based swap participant,'' the
Working Group requests that the Commissions solicit additional feedback
from market participants prior to the issuance of a final rule. The
Commissions also might request volunteers to walk-through the
determination of whether they are a major swap participant or major
security-based swap participant to ensure that the proposed tests
actually function in practice.
Attached as Exhibit A is an exercise through which members of the
Working Group attempted to perform the definitional tests for major
swap participant. The Proposed Rule, as described below, leaves certain
matters open to interpretation or, in other cases, require entities to
``fill in the blanks.'' Accordingly, Exhibit A reflects some subjective
interpretation. Thus, it is possible that the exercise is not how the
Commissions intended the definitional tests to apply. Accuracy,
however, was not the primary point of the exercise. Instead, the
Working Group wants to demonstrate by example the need for the
Commissions to (a) build and run such models to assure the definitional
tests work in practice, (b) establish a step-by-step procedure for
applying the definitional tests and (c) publish a ``worksheet,''
perhaps like Exhibit A, to facilitate the definitional analysis by
market participants.
1. Clarifications Are Necessary for the Exposure Determinations
Certain aspects of the proposed definitional tests must be further
clarified or revised to ensure proper and consistent application of
these tests by market participants. As stated above, the definitions
should be styled to provide a clear step-by-step method for evaluating
any given swap portfolio and must include clear definitions of critical
terms and related calculations.
There are several instances where descriptions of calculations
related to the definitional tests are not clear. For example, proposed
CFTC Rule 1.3(sss)(3)(ii)(A)(1), as currently styled, could be
interpreted to require notional amounts be summed and then multiplied
by the appropriate multiplier. However, when the entire regulation is
read together, it appears that the notional amount of each swap is
multiplied by the appropriate multiplier, a cap is applied with respect
to credit default swaps, and then the products are summed. As another
example, the adjustment for netting agreements in proposed CFTC Rule
1.3(sss)(3)(ii)(B) is not entirely clear. Is ``NGR'' (a) the net
outward exposure (after netting) divided by gross outward exposure
(before netting) or (b) the net exposure regardless of its direction
divided by the gross exposures without regard to direction? (The
detailed and technical nature of these examples underscores the need
for active participation of industry representatives beyond submission
of prose commentary.)
To further illustrate, in determining the aggregate potential
outward exposure of a swap portfolio under the Proposed Rules, the
aggregate notional amount of a class of swaps in the portfolio is
multiplied by a factor depending on duration.\20\ What is not clear
from the text of the Proposed Rules is whether individual swaps
spanning multiple time horizons should be bifurcated for reporting
purposes so that the notional amount of the swap is split appropriately
between applicable time horizons (as the Working Group believes would
be appropriate), or if the entire notional amount of the swap should be
reported only in the time horizon corresponding to the final maturity
of the swap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Proposed Rule at 80193.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are additional instances in which the Commissions must
further define some of the more basic elements included in prescribed
calculations. For example, the Proposed Rules do not define the terms
``notional principal amount'' or ``notional amount,'' which appear to
be used interchangeably and are integral to the calculation of
potential outward exposure. Notional amounts for swaps, as understood
by members of the Working Group, are not always established in dollars,
but can also be established by reference to units of commodities. Thus,
when determining an ``aggregate notional amount'' of a ``notional
principal amount'' of swaps in a market participant's portfolio, some
conversion is necessary to transform notional amounts measured in units
of commodities to dollar amounts. In addition, the Commissions should
clarify whether or not outward exposure includes unpaid amounts under a
swap. The final rule further defining ``major swap participant'' should
provide sufficient technical guidance to answer seemingly basic
questions such as these and provide clarity on the specific mechanics
and the order in which the calculations in the Proposed Rule 1.3(sss)
are to be performed.
Exhibit B provides some specific recommendations of the Working
Group with respect to language as it appears in the CFTC proposed Rule
1.3(sss).
2. The Commissions Should Afford Favorable Treatment of Cleared Swaps
and Swaps Subject to Daily Margining
The Proposed Rules consider both cleared and daily margined swaps
in the determination of potential outward exposure. The notional value
of these swaps is effectively discounted by 80% when they are included
in the potential outward exposure calculation to account for the risk
mitigation benefits of central clearing and daily margining.\21\ The
Working Group applauds the Commissions for accounting for the risk
mitigation benefits of central clearing and daily margining, although
the proposed 80% discount potentially overstates the risk posed by
daily swings in the value of such swaps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(sss)(3)(iii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleared swaps, in particular, should not be considered in the
determination of whether an entity is a major swap participant. Daily
settlement of gains and losses on cleared swaps shortens the time
horizon for exposure to changing market prices to a single day, and
initial margin required by rules of derivatives clearing organizations
(``DCOs'') ensures that sufficient funds will be available for
settlement of daily losses in almost any conceivable circumstance. If
the Commissions are concerned about the potential risk posed by daily
price swings of cleared swaps, then the proper place to address this
concern is in the regulations pertaining to initial margin requirements
for DCOs and clearing agencies.
Swaps that are subject to daily margining should also be discounted
heavily in calculations of potential outward exposure. While the
Proposed Rules state that ``a swap shall be considered to be subject to
daily mark-to-market margining if, and for so long as, the
counterparties follow the daily practice of exchanging collateral to
reflect changes in the current exposure arising from the swap,'' the
Working Group believes that the existence of contractual margining
provisions should be sufficient justification for the discount
contemplated in the proposed rule in the absence of evidence that the
applicable party has consistently chosen not to enforce margin
provisions contained in its agreements. Absent such evidence, the
Working Group believes that a discount of 98% is appropriate to account
for the risk that a counterparty cannot meet its daily margin call.\22\
\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ The Working Group notes that it is unable to fully evaluate
the proper risk discount for swaps subject to daily margining without
knowing the parameters of margin requirements imposed on major swap
participants.
\23\ This proposed discount is appropriate to address systemic risk
concerns, particularly in respect of the energy swap markets. As
discussed elsewhere, the Working Group does not know of an example of a
default in energy swaps triggering a systemic event to the U.S.
financial system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Unused Unsecured Thresholds Should Not Be Included in Definitional
Tests
The method for determining aggregate potential outward exposure, as
set forth in proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(sss)(3), appears to account for a
portion of the potential exposure twice.\24\ The calculations require
any uncollateralized threshold to be added to the aggregate
uncollateralized outward exposure, which is then added to potential
outward exposure to reach a representation of potential future
exposure. It is entirely unclear why any unused unsecured threshold is
equated to exposure, as it more accurately represents the absence of
exposure. This proposed treatment is onerous and inconsistent with
other standard financial measurements of exposure. For example, when
calculating an entity's debt-to-equity ratio, the indebtedness
component of the calculation does not incorporate undrawn portions of
revolving credit facilities or other forms of available but undrawn
debt. At best, any unused unsecured threshold is a reserve for
potential outward exposure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Proposed Rule at 80188.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The unworkable nature of the proposed inclusion of unused unsecured
thresholds is even more apparent when considered in the context of
master agreements under which there are no trades in place in the
calculation of potential outward exposure. Dormant master agreements
represent an agreement as to the parameters that will govern any future
trades between two parties. Such agreements do not represent an active
credit relationship between the parties. Accordingly, unsecured
thresholds contained in dormant master agreements should not be
included in any measure of current or potential future exposure.\25\
The Proposed Rules should be clarified to exclude any unsecured
thresholds under dormant master agreements from the calculation of
current or potential future exposure. Additionally, the Proposed Rules
should not require the inclusion of any unsecured threshold amount in
excess of calculated outward exposure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Inclusion of dormant trading relationship in the major swap
participant definition would also serve as an incentive to terminate
dormant master agreements. Master agreements are left in place even if
there are no active trades between the counterparties, because, as the
terms of the trading relationship are already in place, they allow the
counterparties to enter into new trades quickly and efficiently.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The consideration of unsecured thresholds creates further
complications in two other significant ways. First, for the purposes of
determining whether an entity has a substantial position, positions
entered into to hedge commercial risk are removed from the
calculations. By including unused unsecured thresholds in the
determination of substantial position, the CFTC is potentially reading
the exclusion of hedge positions out of the Proposed Rules. If an
entity has entered into both speculative and hedge positions under the
same master agreement, how would an entity determine what portion of
any unused unsecured threshold should be allocated to hedge positions?
Second, commercial energy firms often enter into master agreements
that cover both physical and financial positions. Including both in one
agreement is done for efficiency purposes. Only one agreement must be
negotiated, and more importantly, counterparties are able to net
physical and financial exposures. If unused unsecured exposure is
required to be included in the determination of whether an entity is a
major swap participant, then it is uncertain how that unused unsecured
threshold should be allocated between potential physical positions and
potential swap positions. A more fundamental legal question is how
physical positions that are outside the CFTC's jurisdiction should be
considered.
The Commissions might have added unused unsecured thresholds to the
definitional formulas to discourage the use of unsecured trading. The
Working Group believes that the loss of unsecured trading will result
in a diminution of liquidity in the overall market. Many commercial
energy firms rely on some amount of unsecured trading, both for
administrative considerations and for allocation of cash resources. If
unsecured trading is removed or receives punitive treatment under the
Commissions' regulations, then such firms might limit their trading or
even exit the market all together. This would reduce liquidity for the
entire market. Accordingly, the Working Group suggests that the
Commissions not include unused unsecured thresholds in the definitional
tests.
4. Initial Margin Should Be Deducted From Aggregate Potential Outward
Exposure
In the release to the Proposed Rules, the Commissions specifically
ask ``if an entity currently has posted excess collateral in connection
with a position, should the amount of that current over-
collateralization be deducted from its measure of potential future
exposure?'' \26\ The Working Group believes that such excess collateral
should be deducted from potential outward exposure. In particular, any
initial margin posted on a swap should be factored into the
determination of aggregate potential outward exposure. If initial
margin, as the CFTC's own definition of the term states, is ``money,
securities, or property posted by a party to a swap as performance bond
to cover potential future exposures arising from changes in the market
value of the position,'' \27\ then the risk mitigation effects of any
initial margin should logically be considered in the calculation of
aggregate potential outward exposure under the proposed definition of
``major swap participant.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Proposed Rules at 80183.
\27\ Proposed CFTC Rule 23.600.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Adjustments for Netting Agreements in the Calculation of Aggregate
Potential Outward Exposure Should Be Revised
The Proposed Rules provide an adjustment for netting in the
calculation of aggregate potential outward exposure that relies on a
specified formula referencing the ratio of net current exposure to
gross current exposure derived from the calculation of aggregate
uncollateralized outward exposure. The Working Group believes that this
formula-based adjustment for netting is unnecessary because off-setting
positions could be easily reflected directly in calculations of net
total notional principal amount prior to application of conversion
factors specified in the Table to  1.3(sss)--Conversion Factor Matrix
for Swaps.\28\ This approach has been incorporated into example
calculations provided in Exhibit A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(sss).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Collateral Considerations
The Working Group supports the broadest definition of collateral
for determining whether an ``out-of-the-money'' swap is secured for
purposes of the definition of ``major swap participant.'' The
Commissions should recognize in the Proposed Rules that collateral for
a swap might be in forms such as liens on assets and parent guarantees.
Swaps that are secured by sufficient liens on property should be
afforded the same discount as swaps subject to daily margining. Often,
the value of collateral supporting the lien is several times greater
than the exposure. Given the adequacy of this collateral, the
Commissions should afford the same treatment to swaps collateralized in
such a manner. Even if such swaps were subject to daily margining, the
counterparty effectively would not be subject to delivery obligations
because it had already delivered collateral far exceeding the exposure.
D. Treatment of Affiliates
1. Aggregation Across Enterprises
The Commissions state that it would be appropriate to attribute a
majority-owned subsidiary's swap positions to a parent for the
determination as to whether the parent is a major swap participant.\29\
In many circumstances aggregation would not be consistent with ``the
concepts of `substantial positions' and `substantial counterparty
exposure.' '' \30\ Positions of affiliates should not be aggregated to
the extent that such affiliates are independently controlled and
capitalized. Under these circumstances, the affiliate's trading is not
being coordinated with swap activities of other entities and only the
assets of that entity are at risk in the event of a default. If an
entity is independently controlled it is unlikely that such entity was
created in an attempt for a parent to evade classification as a major
swap participant, and if an affiliate is independently capitalized then
there is no recourse to the parent entity or another affiliate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Proposed Rules at 80202.
\30\ The Working Group acknowledges that under certain unusual
circumstances such aggregation would be appropriate. For example, it
would be appropriate to aggregate positions of affiliated entities if
an entity were attempting to evade registration as a major swap
participant by trading swaps out of multiple subsidiaries under common
control.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The market treats an independently controlled and capitalized
entity as distinct from its parent and affiliates, so only its
positions should be considered when attempting to determine if it is a
major swap participant and should not be considered when determining if
its parent company or affiliates are major swap participants. This
approach is consistent with the treatment of affiliated companies under
bankruptcy law where such companies are considered individually so as
to not prejudice the rights of creditors to one entity by allowing
recourse to the assets of such entity to creditors of an affiliate.
This distinction allows subsidiaries to obtain favorable financing
independent of any concerns of a corporate parent. The Commissions
should give deference to the separateness of affiliates so long as they
are managed as distinct entities.
If the Commissions choose to aggregate the swap portfolios of
affiliated entities for the purposes of the major swap participant
determination, the Working Group respectfully requests that the
Commissions not aggregate the positions of an entity that on its own is
a swap dealer or major swap participant with those of its affiliates.
To do so would eliminate an enterprise's ability to segregate all of
its regulated swap activities in one entity, and would thereby
potentially subject that entire enterprise to prudential regulation. To
the extent that an ultimate parent would be considered a major swap
participant as a result of aggregation of positions of its
subsidiaries, the designation should only apply to the parent itself
and not to individual subsidiaries. Such designation should only apply
to individual subsidiaries if the positions of such individual
subsidiaries warrant such designation on a stand-alone basis.
If the Commissions elect to aggregate swap portfolios of affiliated
entities, the Commissions should provide a clear process by which
entities might petition one or both of the Commissions to permit the
petitioning entities to not aggregate positions. The petitioner should
be permitted to provide evidence to the applicable Commission that the
swap portfolios of its affiliates do not reflect a scheme to avoid
registration as a major swap participant. This approach is consistent
with the CFTC's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Position Limits for
Derivatives.\31\ In that notice, the CFTC provided a mechanism by which
certain non-financial entities can disaggregate certain positions if
the parent company can demonstrate that the owned non-financial entity
is independently controlled and managed. The Working Group will comment
separately on specific aspects of the proposed rule on Position Limits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ 76 Fed. Reg. 4752 (January 26, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aggregation of swap portfolios also introduces issues with the
extraterritorial application of the Commissions' jurisdiction.\32\ Many
of the Working Group members have affiliates that are not incorporated
in and do not operate in the United States. These affiliates often
trade in swaps outside of the United States. The Working Group
recommends that the swap portfolios of such off-shore affiliates not be
aggregated with swap portfolios of companies in the same enterprise
that operate within the U.S.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ The Working Group has submitted comments to the CFTC with
respect to the extraterritorial application of its rules and regulation
under Title VII of the Act. Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms
comments to the CFTC's Proposed Rule on Registration of Swap Dealers
and Major Swap Participants, filed with the CFTC on January 24, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Treatment of Inter-Affiliate Swaps
Inter-affiliate swaps should not be considered when determining if
an entity is a major swap participant. Transactions between two
affiliated entities result in the same corporate family taking both
sides of the swap. The corporate family's net credit exposure from the
trade is zero. Given that the net credit exposure is zero,
consideration of inter-affiliate swaps when determining if an entity is
a major swap participant would be counting swaps with no counterparty
risk to the market in tests meant to arrive at some indication of the
level of risk an entity poses to the U.S. financial system.
E. Legacy Portfolios
For many market participants, a large number of swaps in their
portfolios were entered into prior to the enactment of the Act. These
positions were entered into in the ordinary course of business before
parties to these swaps could reasonably anticipate the possibility of
being subject to prudential regulation because of these swap positions.
The Working Group respectfully requests that the Commissions allow
market participants whose current portfolios would make them a major
swap participants to maintain their current positions and allow such
positions to expire on their own terms without regulating the entities
as major swap participants.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ For discussion of the treatment of legacy portfolios and how
they should be considered with regards to registration as a major swap
participant please see the Working Group's comments on the CFTC's
proposed rule on Registration Requirements for Swap Dealers and Major
Swap Participants, filed with the CFTC on January 24, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Any entity that might be deemed a major swap participant should be
permitted to not register as such if each of its relevant existing
transactions expire according with their terms and such entity does not
enter into any new swaps that would cause it to be deemed a major swap
participant. This ``grandfathering'' of legacy portfolios would allow a
smooth regulatory transition and would avoid any market disruption
caused by entities closing-out a significant number of legacy positions
in a short period of time to avoid being a major swap participant. We
anticipate that any entity electing to grandfather a legacy portfolio
would submit a brief petition to the applicable Commission.
F. Netting of Physical Positions
The Working Group strongly supports the Commissions' decision to
consider the risk mitigation effects of netting agreements when
determining whether an entity is a major swap participant. The
Commissions recognized that because (a) swaps are not necessarily
hedged with other swaps and (b) swaps are also used to hedge non-swaps
exposure, certain other positions should be considered for netting
purposes. The Commissions state:

When calculating the net exposure the entity may take into
account offsetting positions with that particular counterparty
involving swaps, security-based swaps and securities financing
transactions (consisting of securities lending and borrowing,
securities margin lending and repurchase and reverse repurchase
agreements) to the extent that is consistent with the offsets
provided by the master netting agreement.\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Proposed Rules at 80189.

The Working Group respectfully requests that the Commissions
consider the netting of physical positions in commodities and
offsetting swaps when calculating net exposure for the purposes of the
major swap participant definition. Specifically, master netting
agreements that cover entire trading relationships, not just uncleared
energy-based swaps and the other listed products, should be considered.
It is common practice for commercial energy firms to enter into a
transaction for a physical energy commodity and then enter into a
related uncleared energy-based-swap transaction with the same
counterparty as a risk mitigation tool. Any multi-transaction-netting
agreement between the two counterparties will typically net obligations
under both the physical energy transaction and the uncleared energy-
based swap. Moreover, trades in physical energy commodities and
uncleared energy-based swaps are often inextricably linked, and
counterparties should be able to consider their entire trading
relationship when determining net exposure for the purposes of the
definition of major swap participant. If the Commissions were to
exclude physical positions from the netting calculations under the
proposed major swap participant definition, then the unsecured exposure
of many commercial energy firms would be substantially overstated,
potentially causing such commercial energy firms to incorrectly be
deemed major swap participants.
G. Limited Purpose Designations
Section 1a(33)(C) of the CEA clearly states and Congress intended
that entities can be designated as a major swap participant for only
one category of swaps. Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(qqq)(2) requires entities
to make an affirmative application to the CFTC to be treated as a major
swap participant for less than all of the major categories of swaps.
However, the statute expressly presumes that an entity may be deemed a
major swap participant for one category of swaps without being
considered a major swap participant for other categories, thus creating
a presumption in favor of the market participant, meaning an entity
deemed to be a major swap participant for a category of swaps should be
presumed to be a major swap participant only for that particular
category. The Commissions have effectively flipped the statute on its
head, establishing a presumption in direct contrast to the express
statutory language. As such, the Working Group respectfully requests
the Commissions to abandon proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(qqq)(2).
If the Commissions choose to retain proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(qqq)(2),
the Working Group believes that it will impose an unnecessary and
potentially substantial burden on both (a) major swap participants that
are clearly a major swap participant for one category of swap and (b)
the Commissions which must process petitions to limit the scope of
description. In the event that proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(qqq)(2) is
retained, the Working Group respectfully suggests that the Commissions
adopt a presumption that if 50% or more of a major swap participant's
swaps fall within one category of swaps and that entity's swaps in
other categories would not separately exceed any of the proposed
thresholds, then that entity is a major swap participant for only that
one category of swap. For example, the swap portfolios of many
commercial energy firms that might be major swap participants are
likely to be predominantly comprised of energy swaps, and the remainder
of the portfolio are likely to be positions such as foreign exchange or
interest rate swaps entered into to hedge commercial risk. Accordingly,
such an entity should not have to file an application to have the scope
of the application of the major swap participant definition limited.
By adopting the recommended presumption, the Commissions will avoid
placing a costly and unnecessary burden on entities that are clearly
only a major swap participant for one class of swaps. In addition, the
presumption would eliminate the need for the Commissions to process
applications that are likely a mere formality.
H. Timing Concerns
The Working appreciates that the Commissions recognize exogenous
market conditions could temporarily force a potential major swap
participant over a threshold during one quarter. Allowing an entity
that exceeds a threshold by twenty percent or less in one quarter an
additional quarter as a reevaluation period will avoid market
disruptions that could result from deeming as major swap participants
entities that, through factors beyond their control, temporarily exceed
a given threshold.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(qqq)(4).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
An entity that potentially meets the definition of a major swap
participant should be given two quarters to register as such. As
discussed more completely in the Working Group's comments to the CFTC's
Proposed Rule on Registration of Swap Dealers and Major Swap
Participants,\36\ the determination of whether an entity is in fact a
major swap participant will be a complex one. Further, coming into
compliance with the regulatory obligations imposed on major swap
participants will likely require a substantial expenditure of
compliance and risk management resources and might require corporate
restructuring as well as the restructuring of existing trading
relationships. This compliance burden will be greatest for commercial
entities that have never been subject to prudential regulation by a
financial regulator. Accordingly, the Working Group believes that two
quarters is the minimum amount of time an entity would need to register
as a major swap participant.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms comments to the
CFTC's Proposed Rule on Registration of Swap Dealers and Major Swap
Participants, filed with the CFTC on January 24, 2011.
\37\ The Working Group notes that this suggested time frame differs
from the more extended time frame recommended in its comments to the
CFTC's Proposed Rule on Registration of Swap Dealers and Major Swap
Participants. The time frame suggested herein assumes that an entity
becomes a major swap participant once the entire new regulatory regime
imposed by Title VII of the Act is in place. Under these circumstances,
an entity that is not a major swap participant from the outset can
undertake some, but not all of the requirements imposed on major swap
participants prior to exceeding the proposed thresholds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I. Open Comment Period
As the Commissions have proposed the definitions contained herein
towards the end of releasing proposed rules under Title VII of the Act,
and have yet to propose a definition of ``swap,'' market participants
have not been able to offer fully informed comments on the CFTC's and
SEC's proposed rules, especially comments regarding the cost
implications of such rules. In addition, given the complexity and
interconnectedness of all of the rulemakings under Title VII of the
Act, and given that the Act and the rules promulgated thereunder
entirely restructure over-the-counter derivatives markets, the Working
Group respectfully requests that the Commissions hold open the comment
period on all rules promulgated under Title VII of the Act until such
time as each and every rule required to be promulgated has been
proposed. Market participants will be able to consider the entire new
market structure and the interconnection between all proposed rules
when drafting comments on all of the proposed rules. The resulting
comprehensive comments will allow the Commissions to better understand
how their proposed rules will impact swap markets.
II. Conclusion
The Working Group supports appropriate regulation that brings
transparency and stability to the swap markets in the United States. We
appreciate the balance the Commissions must strike between effective
regulation and not hindering the uncleared energy-based swap markets.
The Working Group offers its advice and experience to assist the
Commissions in implementing the Act. Please let us know if you have any
questions or would like additional information.
Respectfully submitted,

David T. McIndoe;
Mark W. Menezes;
R. Michael Sweeney, Jr.;
Counsel for the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms.

exhibit a
Calculation of Aggregate Uncollateralized Outward Exposure
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a.                              b.                      c.                  e.              f.             g.               f.
---------------------------------------                        d.                      -----------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------
Current Mark-to-Market                                                 Posted      Uncollateralized
Counterparty              ------------------------------------------------ Master Netting   Net Exposure    Collateral        Exposure
Positive Value  Negative Value  Net Swap Value
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Example Portfolio:
Counterparty 1......................    $15,000,000   ($20,000,000)    ($5,000,000)              $0   ($5,000,000)             $0      ($5,000,000)
Counterparty 2......................     $5,000,000   ($35,000,000)   ($30,000,000)      $5,000,000   ($25,000,000)    $5,000,000     ($20,000,000)
Counterparty 3......................    $35,000,000    ($5,000,000)     $30,000,000              $0    $30,000,000             $0                $0
Counterparty 4......................     $1,000,000   ($16,000,000)   ($15,000,000)              $0   ($15,000,000)            $0     ($15,000,000)
Counterparty 5......................     $5,000,000   ($165,000,000)  ($160,000,000)    $10,000,000   ($150,000,000  $100,000,000     ($50,000,000)
)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aggregate Uncollateralized Outward                                                                                                  ($90,000,000)
Exposure.........................
========================================================================================================================================================
a. Legal entity that is contractual counterparty to swaps...........................................................................................

b. Sum of mark-to-market value for all individual swaps with a respective counterparty that have a positive mark-to-market value (in-the-money-
swaps). Amount will be > = $0......................................................................................................................

c. Sum of mark-to-market value for all individual swaps with a respective counterparty that have a negative mark-to-market value (out-of-the-money
swaps). Amount will be
= $0..............................................................................................................................

f. Net Exposure for a respective counterparty should be calculated as the lesser of $0 and the sum of columns d. and e..............................

g. Amount of collateral posted to a respective counterparty and available to offset negative net exposure reported in column f. Amount will be > =
$0.................................................................................................................................................    h. Uncollateralized Exposure for a respective counterparty should be calculated as the lesser of $0 and the sum of columns f. and g.................  Aggregate Uncollateralized Outward Exposure equals the sum of column h. for entire portfolio of swap counterparties...................................                                                    Calculation of Potential Outward Exposure  Notional Principal Amount = notional underlying quantity in units (i.e., MWh, MMBtu, gallons, etc.) multiplied by current market price per unit.......    a. Indicator (Y/N) of daily margining...............................................................................................................    b. Applicable collateral threshold with respect to each counterparty. Amount will be
= $0...    e. Sum of Notional Principal Amount for all short swaps with a respective counterparty, categorized by applicable time period. For swaps that span
multiple applicable time periods, report Notional Principal Amount that would be applicable for each time period. Amount reported will be
= $0..............................................................................................................................    n. Amount of collateral posted to a respective counterparty and available to offset potential negative net exposure reported in column l. Plus
additional collateral representing initial margin, independent amounts, and the like. Amount will be > = $0........................................    o. Margining Adjustment (see below).................................................................................................................    p. Sum of columns l., m., n., and o. Amount will be
5 Years
5 Years
5 Years
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$35,000,000       $20,000,000      $15,000,000    ($25,000,000)    ($15,000,000)     ($5,000,000)      $10,000,000       $5,000,000      $10,000,000
$45,000,000       $25,000,000      $20,000,000    ($15,000,000)     ($5,000,000)     ($1,000,000)      $30,000,000      $20,000,000      $19,000,000
$15,000,000        $5,000,000       $1,000,000    ($45,000,000)    ($25,000,000)    ($20,000,000)    ($30,000,000)    ($20,000,000)    ($19,000,000)
$250,000,000      $100,000,000      $50,000,000    ($25,000,000)    ($10,000,000)     ($5,000,000)     $225,000,000      $90,000,000      $45,000,000
$950,000,000      $550,000,000     $450,000,000               $0               $0               $0      $70,000,000      $34,000,000      $15,000,000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Calculation of Potential Outward Exposure--Continued
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
g.  0.1              0.12             0.15                      h.            i.           j.           k.           l.           m.           n.           o.           p.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                                                                                              Pot.
Converted Amount per Table to  1.3(SSS)                    PFE Factor     Net Swap     NSV Plus    NSV Minus     Adjusted      Master       Posted     Margining     Outward
---------------------------------------------------------------------------               Value (NSV)   PFE Factor   PFE Factor      NSV        Netting     Collateral   Adjustment    Exposure

5 Years            Total
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$1,000,000           $600,000         $1,500,000         $3,100,000       $3,100,000  ($5,000,000  ($1,900,000  ($8,100,000  ($8,100,000           $0           $0           $0  ($8,100,000
)            )            )            )                                                   )
$3,000,000         $2,400,000         $2,850,000         $8,250,000       $8,250,000  ($30,000,00  ($21,750,00  ($38,250,00  ($38,250,00   $5,000,000   $5,000,000   $6,600,000  ($21,650,00
0)           0)           0)           0)                                                  0)
($3,000,000)       ($2,400,000)       ($2,850,000)       ($8,250,000)       $8,250,000  $30,000,000  $38,250,000  $21,750,000           $0           $0           $0           $0           $0
$22,500,000        $10,800,000         $6,750,000        $40,050,000      $40,050,000  ($15,000,00  $25,050,000  ($55,050,00  ($55,050,00           $0           $0  $28,040,000  ($27,010,00
0)                        0)           0)                                                  0)
$7,000,000         $4,080,000         $2,250,000        $13,330,000      $13,330,000  ($160,000,0  ($146,670,0  ($173,330,0  ($173,330,0  $10,000,000  $100,000,00  $10,664,000  ($52,666,00
00)          00)          00)          00)                         0                        0)
================================================================================================================================================================================================
Aggregate Uncollateralized Outward Exposure--Continued                                                                                                    ($109,426,0
00)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

exhibit b
Proposed Language Changes
Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(sss)(2)
(2) Aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure.
(i) In general. Aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure in
general means the sum of the current exposure, obtained by marking-to-
market using industry standard practices, of each of the person's swap
positions with negative value in a major swap category, less the value
of the collateral the person has posted in connection with those
positions.
(ii) Calculation of aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure. In
calculating this amount the person shall, with respect to each of its
swap counterparties in a given major swap category:

(A) Determine the dollar value of the aggregate current
exposure arising from each of its swap positions with negative
value (subject to the netting provisions described below) in
that major category by marking-to-market using industry
standard practices; and
(B) Deduct from that dollar amount the aggregate value of the
collateral the person has posted with respect to the swap
positions.
The aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure shall be the
sum of those uncollateralized amounts across all of the
person's swap counterparties in the applicable major category.

(iii) Relevance of netting agreements.

(A) If the person has entered into multiple swaps under a
single master agreement with a particular counterparty, or has
a master netting agreement in effect with a particular
counterparty to provide for netting of positions entered into
under multiple master agreements, the person may measure the
current exposure arising from its swaps in any major category
on a net basis, as applicable, applying the terms of the each
respective agreement. Calculation of net exposure may take into
account offsetting positions entered into with that particular
counterparty involving swaps (in any swap category) as well as
security-based swaps, and securities financing transactions
(consisting of securities lending and borrowing, securities
margin lending and repurchase and reverse repurchase
agreements), forward contracts, and any other qualified
contracts to the extent these are consistent with the offsets
permitted by the respective master agreement or master netting
agreement , as applicable.
(B) Such adjustments may not take into account any offset
associated with positions that the person has with separate
counterparties.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:      Calculations of aggregate outward exposure should reflect two
types of netting:        First, current exposure should be calculated on a net basis for
all swap positions entered into under the same master agreement
with a particular counterparty.
Second, to the extent that the person has a master netting
agreement in effect with a particular counterparty [as described in
(iii)(A) above], current exposure for that counterparty should be
calculated net of any potential offsetting positions under other
agreements pursuant to the master netting agreement. The Commission
should not limit the types of offsetting positions that may be
taken into account to those specifically described in (iii)(A).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(sss)(3)
(3) Aggregate potential outward exposure.
(i) In general. Aggregate potential outward exposure in any major
swap category means the sum of:

(A) The aggregate potential outward exposure for each of the
person's swap positions in a major swap category that are not
subject to daily mark-to-market margining and are not cleared
by a registered clearing agency or derivatives clearing
organization, as calculated in accordance with paragraph
(sss)(3)(ii); and
(B) The aggregate potential outward exposure for each of the
person's swap positions in such major swap category that are
subject to daily mark-to-market margining or are cleared by a
registered clearing agency or derivatives clearing
organization, as calculated in accordance with paragraph
(sss)(3)(iii) of this section.

(ii) Calculation of potential outward exposure for swaps that are
not subject to daily mark-to-market margining and are not cleared by a
registered clearing agency or derivatives clearing organization.

(A) In general.

(1) For positions in swaps that are not subject to
daily mark-to-market margining and are not cleared by a
registered clearing agency or a derivatives clearing
organization, potential outward exposure equals the
total notional principal amount of those positions,
calculated on a net basis for swaps entered into under
a single master agreement with a particular
counterparty, adjusted by the following multipliers on
a position-by-position basis reflecting the type of
swap. For any swap that does not appropriately fall
within any of the specified categories, the ``other
commodities'' conversion factors are to be used. If a
swap is structured such that on specified dates any
outstanding exposure is settled and the terms are reset
so that the market value of the swap is zero, the
remaining maturity equals the time until the next reset
date. In the same respect, if a swap is structured with
periodic settlement periods that occur over the life of
the swap, where the parties calculate a settlement
amount applicable only to that specific settlement
period, the total notional amount of such swap should
be bifurcated in calculations such that each settlement
period constitutes a residual maturity for the notional
amount applicable to that settlement period.

Table To  1.3(sss)--Conversion Factor Matrix for Swaps
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foreign
Residual maturity                Interest rate    exchange rate   Precious metals       Other
and gold      (except gold)     commodities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
One year or less............................            0.00             0.01              0.07             0.10
Over one to five years......................            0.005            0.05              0.07             0.12
Over five years.............................            0.015            0.075             0.08             0.15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Residual maturity                 Credit           Equity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
One year or less......................             0.10             0.06
Over one to five years................             0.10             0.08
Over five years.......................             0.10             0.10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(2) Use of effective notional amounts. If the stated
notional amount on a position is leveraged or enhanced
by the structure of the position, the calculation in
paragraph (sss)(3)(ii)(A)(1) of this section shall be
based on the effective notional amount of the position
rather than on the stated notional amount.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:      The Commission should clarify that ``notional amount'' simply
means the product of the notional underlying quantity in units (i.e.,
MWh, MMBtu, gallons, etc.) of the applicable commodity with respect
to each swap multiplied by current market price per unit of the
applicable commodity. The term ``notional amount'' should be used
consistently throughout the description of calculations. Notional
amount should be calculated on net basis among all swaps entered into
with a particular counterparty under a single master agreement.
Additionally, the Commission should clarify that, for a swap that
spans multiple time horizons specified in the Table to  1.3(sss)--
Conversion Factor Matrix for Swaps, the total notional amount for
that swap should be bifurcated among applicable time periods when
calculating potential outward exposure and not simply reported in the
last applicable time period.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(3) Exclusion of certain positions. The calculation
in paragraph (sss)(3)(ii)(A)(1) of this section shall
exclude:

(i) Positions that constitute the purchase of
an option, such that the person has no
additional payment obligations under the
position; and
(ii) Other positions for which the person has
prepaid or otherwise satisfied all of its
payment obligations.

(4) Adjustment for certain positions. Notwithstanding
paragraph (sss)(3)(ii)(A)(1) of this section, the
potential outward exposure associated with a position
by which a person buys credit protection using a credit
default swap or index credit default swap is capped at
the net present value of the unpaid premiums.
(B) Adjustment for master (B) Adjustment for master netting
agreements. Notwithstanding paragraph (sss)(3)(ii)(A) of this
section, for positions subject to master netting agreements the
potential outward exposure associated with the person's swaps
with each counterparty may be reduced by amounts applicable to
offsets permitted by the respective master netting agreement.
If such offsets represent physically settled forward contracts
pertaining to a non-financial commodity or security for
deferred shipment or delivery or similar such contract that is
not a swap, total notional amount of those positions calculated
on a net basis for such forward contracts entered into under a
single master agreement with a particular counterparty,
adjusted by the multipliers specified in the Conversion Factor
Matrix for Swaps specified above, on a position-by-position
basis reflecting the type of swap that would me most applicable
to such forward contract. For any forward contract that does
not appropriately compare to any of the specified categories
for swaps, the ``other commodities'' conversion factors are to
be used. The total notional amount of each forward contract
should be bifurcated in calculations such that each delivery
period constitutes a residual maturity for the notional amount
applicable to that delivery period. For other permitted
offsets, potential outward exposure may only be reduced by
amounts in excess of amounts included in calculations of
aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure. equals a weighted
average of the potential outward exposure for the person's
swaps with that counterparty as calculated under paragraph
(sss)(3)(ii)(A), and that amount reduced by the ratio of net
current exposure to gross current exposure, consistent with the
following equation as calculated on a counterparty-by-
counterparty basis:

PNet = 0.4 ) PGross + 0.6 ) NGR ) PGross

Note to paragraph (sss)(3)(ii)(B): PNet is the
potential outward exposure, adjusted for bilateral
netting, of the person's swaps with a particular
counterparty; PGross is that potential outward exposure
without adjustment for bilateral netting; and NGR is
the ratio of net current exposure to gross current
exposure.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:      The proposed methodology for calculating offsets attributable to
master netting agreements is overly simplistic and would not likely
produce reasonable results. Because the most likely type of offset to
swaps exposure applicable to a valid and enforceable master netting
agreement will be exposure related to forward contracts, the proposed
methodology would produce a more reasonable result.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(iii) Calculation of potential outward exposure for swaps that are
subject to daily mark-to-market margining or are cleared by a
registered clearing agency or derivatives clearing organization. For
positions in swaps that are subject to daily mark-to-market margining
or cleared by a registered clearing agency or derivatives clearing
organization:

(A) Potential outward exposure equals the potential exposure
that would be attributed to such positions using the procedures
in paragraph (sss)(3)(ii) of this section multiplied by 0.2.
(B) For purposes of this calculation, a swap shall be
considered to be subject to daily mark-to-market margining if,
and for so long as, the counterparties follow the daily
practice of exchanging collateral to reflect changes in the
current exposure arising from the swap (after taking into
account any other financial positions addressed by aoffsets
related to a master netting agreement between the
counterparties and the existence of any thresholds for which a
party is not required to post collateral). If the person is
permitted by agreement to maintain a threshold for which it is
not required to post collateral, only the total amount of that
person's potential outward exposure that, when added to the
person's aggregate outward exposure (prior to deducting
aggregate value of the collateral the person has posted) would
exceedof that threshold, (regardless of the actual exposure at
any time) shall be added to the person's aggregate
uncollateralized outward exposure for purposes of paragraph
(sss)(1)(i)(B), (ii)(B), (iii)(B) or (iv)(B) of this section,
as applicablemultiplied by 0.2. In addition, iIf the minimum
transfer amount under the agreement is in excess of $1 million,
the entirety of the minimum transfer amount shall be added to
the person's aggregate uncollateralized outward exposure for
purposes of paragraph (sss)(1)(i)(B), (ii)(B), (iii)(B) or
(iv)(B), as applicable.
(C) For purposes of this calculation, the dollar amount the
aggregate value of collateral the person has posted with
respect to the swap positions in excess of aggregate outward
exposure, including amounts that represent initial margin,
independent amounts, and the like, may be deducted when
calculating potential outward exposure.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:      The proposed methodology for addressing master netting agreements
should be revised to clarify that the lesser of (i) measured exposure
related to swaps, and (ii) specified threshold amounts, will be
included in calculations at 100%. Only measured exposure in excess of
specified amounts will be afforded the 80% discount (0.2 multiplier).
This would also clarify that threshold amounts with respect to
dormant master agreements would not be included in calculations. The
proposed methodology should also be revised to include a deduction
for initial margin, independent amounts, and the like since these
amounts would be available to offset potential future exposure on
applicable swaps.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

______

February 22, 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Joint Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Further Definition of ``Swap
Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,''
``Major Security-Based Swap Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract
Participant,'' RIN 3038-AD06

Dear Secretary Stawick:
I. Introduction
On behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms (the
``Working Group''), Hunton & Williams LLP submits the following in
response to the request for public comment set forth in the Joint
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,''
``Security-Based Swap Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major
Security-Based Swap Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract Participant''
(``Proposed Rule'') issued by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(``CFTC'') and the Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'')
(collectively, the ``Commissions'') and published in the Federal
Register on December 21, 2010,\1\ proposing to further define the term
``Swap Dealer.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap
Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap
Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract Participant,'' 75 Fed. Reg. 80174
(Dec. 21, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group is a diverse group of commercial firms in the
energy industry whose primary business activity is the physical
delivery of one or more energy commodities to others, including
industrial, commercial and residential consumers. Members of the
Working Group are energy producers, marketers and utilities. The
Working Group considers and responds to requests for public comment
regarding regulatory and legislative developments with respect to the
trading of energy commodities, including derivatives and other
contracts that reference energy commodities.
The Working Group appreciates the opportunity to provide these
comments in response to the Proposed Rule and respectfully requests
that the Commission consider the comments set forth herein. The Working
Group looks forward to working with the Commissions to further define
the term Swap Dealer prior to the effective date of Title VII. The
comments herein specifically address the proposed further definition of
Swap Dealer set forth in proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ppp), pursuant to
Section 1a(49) of the Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA''), as established
by Title VII, Subtitle A, Section 721 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the ``Act'').
II. Executive Summary
The Proposed Rule fails to consider the differences between the
energy commodity markets and the financial swap markets. Energy
commodity markets, in which parties enter into swaps with each other to
ensure physical delivery and manage price risk, are different from the
swap markets. The energy commodity markets comprise a minuscule portion
of the total national notional amount of swap transactions. The
Commissions' proposed ``one-size-fits-all'' rule fails to recognize the
unique nature of these markets. Unlike major financial institutions,
non-dealer commercial energy firms function primarily as principals by
transacting futures and energy-related swaps on a daily basis to
mitigate price risk associated with providing necessary electricity,
heating oil, natural gas, propane, gasoline and other energy
commodities at affordable prices.
The Proposed Rule incorrectly assumes that swap markets, including
energy commodity swap markets, do not operate without the involvement
of swap dealers. It is well recognized that non-dealer commercial
energy firms routinely enter into swap transactions with other non-
dealer commercial energy firms in over-the-counter (``OTC'') markets.
Further, the Proposed Rule directly contradicts other proposed rules
recently issued by the CFTC that clearly contemplate swap transactions
occurring between two non-Swap Dealer counterparties.
The proposed definition of Swap Dealer is over-broad and
inconsistent with the statutory terms and Congressional intent.
Congress intended to enhance substantially the regulation of those in
the business of being Swap Dealers, not expand the definition to
include almost any and all market participants in the swap markets.
Congress expressly provided that the term Swap Dealer shall have a
parallel meaning to the term ``dealer'' under the securities laws and
as is otherwise set forth in the Act.
Congress specifically listed four statutory criteria for Swap
Dealers, provided for a General Exception, and created a de minimis
test for those small or inconsequential Swap Dealers. The Commissions'
authority to further define Swap Dealer is limited to providing
certainty as to those listed criteria, not creating new criteria or
interpreting the definition contrary to the express terms or intent of
Congress. Thus, the definition of Swap Dealer must be construed
narrowly, based on commonly understood terms of dealing activity, and
must account for the existence of other market participants. Yet the
Commissions' proposed ``core'' criteria of accommodating demand, being
available to enter into swaps, entering into swaps with their own
standard terms, or arranging swaps at the request of others provides
for a broad definition of Swap Dealer that is not based on commonly
understood terms of dealing activity.
The Commissions' interpretation of ``market making'' is broad and
inconsistent with the CFTC's own definition and interpretation of the
term. Historically, ``market making'' is incident to dealing activity
by those holding themselves out as and known in the market to be Swap
Dealers. Swap Dealers are in the business of taking either side of a
swap to effectuate the trade, regardless of price or commodity. They
are not the producers or owners of commodities nor do they have
obligations to buy or deliver commodities as their primary business,
unlike non-dealer commercial firms. The Proposed Rule should be revised
to expressly exclude activity legitimately incidental to the businesses
of non-dealer commercial firms.
Rather than providing clarity on the General Exception to swap
dealing set forth by Congress, the Commissions proposed interpretation
actually uses the General Exception to redefine the statutory Swap
Dealer definition. The Proposed Rule ties the General Exception to
language in the Swap Dealer definition, referring to swap dealing
activity ``as an ordinary course of'' a ``regular business.'' However,
the Commissions' interpret this provision to say that any market
participant in the swap markets is doing so as part of its regular
business and thus is a dealer and unable to avail itself of the General
Exception. Clearly, Congress did not intend any user of swap markets to
be deemed a Swap Dealer. A better interpretation of the General
Exception is to exclude swaps entered into by producers, processors, or
commercial users of physical energy or agricultural commodities used as
prudent price and risk management tools as part of the business of such
producers, processors or commercial users of such commodities.
The proposed de minimis exemption swallows the rule. Rather than
determining which ``mom and pop'' or inconsequential Swap Dealers are
eligible for the statutorily provided exemption from the enhanced
regulatory regime for significant Swap Dealers, the Proposed Rule uses
this exemption to determine who is a Swap Dealer. The rule inexplicably
provides that any entity who enters into more than twenty swaps, has
more than fifteen counterparties, or holds more than $100 million in
notional amount is a Swap Dealer regardless of its regular business.
Such interpretation essentially makes every market participant in the
swap markets a Swap Dealer and renders the express statutory definition
superfluous. The Commissions should clarify that the de minimis
exemption applies to those Swap Dealers that hold no more than one one-
thousand of one percent (.001%) of the total notional amount of the
U.S. swap markets. Such definition would capture Swap Dealers with an
inconsequential position and activity in the markets.
Alternatively, the Commissions should reconsider its rejection of a
``relative test'' for applying the de minimis exemption. Because the
statutory definition of the de minimis exemption refers to
``customers,'' it is entirely appropriate that the Commissions consider
a relative test measuring the ratio of a firm's ``customer'' swaps
notional amount to its total swaps notional amount. If an entity's
ratio is less than 25%, it should be exempt from regulation as a Swap
Dealer.
The Proposed Rule should make clear that no affiliate transactions
be considered dealing activity, including application of the de minimis
criteria. Inter-affiliate transactions are used to manage and allocate
risk within a company and do not present any risk to the markets or
counterparties.
Consistent with the Commissions' practices, the Proposed Rule
should provide a safe harbor and process for market participants to
determine in good faith and with due diligence whether they need to
register as a Swap Dealer.
Finally, the cost and benefit analysis provided by the Commissions
in the Proposed Rule does not appear to be based on any empirical data
and does not appear to be consistent with the expected costs of
compliance anticipated by market participants. The Commissions should
therefore issue a supplemental rule in this proceeding setting forth
empirical data supporting its conclusions regarding the costs and
benefits of the Proposed Rule.
III. Comments of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms
The Working Group generally supports the efforts of Congress and
the Commissions to reform the derivatives markets to prevent abuses
that led to the current fiscal crisis. However, for reasons discussed
herein, the Working Group urges the Commissions to carefully construe
the definition of Swap Dealer and proposed interpretational guidance so
that it achieves the overarching policy goals of the Act without
imposing unwarranted burdens on domestic energy markets and undue costs
on the energy sector of the U.S. economy.
As drafted, the Commissions' proposed definition of Swap Dealer and
associated interpretive guidance are fundamentally flawed. The proposed
definition and guidance would implement a ``one-size-fits-all''
approach to commodities regulation, which fails to recognize the unique
characteristics of the various OTC commodity markets in which swaps are
traded, including energy markets. In this regard, the Commissions'
overly broad definition and guidance will sweep in a wide array of
market participants that do not hold themselves out as ``dealers'' or
engage in what has traditionally been viewed as ``dealer'' activity.
Such a result runs counter to the statutory language and Congress'
intent to limit application of the Swap Dealer definition to those
market participants engaged in what has historically been understood as
``dealing'' activity. Although Congress intended to enhance
substantially the regulation of such activity, Congress also envisioned
a regulatory framework conducive to the continued participation of
active non-dealer market participants. Without significant revision,
however, the Commissions' proposed definition and guidance will thwart
this effort and instead create unacceptable uncertainty, likely
resulting in adverse impacts to energy markets and energy providers and
their customers.
A. Application of the Definition of Swap Dealer Should Avoid Adversely
Impacting Domestic Energy Markets
Final regulations and interpretive guidance further defining the
term ``Swap Dealer'' should be appropriately construed to avoid adverse
impacts to domestic energy markets. Indeed, in the Proposed Rule, the
Commissions properly recognize that ``the swap markets are diverse and
encompass a variety of situations in which parties enter into swaps
with each other,'' such as in energy commodities markets, including
swap transactions involving oil and natural gas, and electricity
generation and transmission.\2\ The Commissions highlight the
complexities and unique characteristics of such energy markets and
correctly invite comment as to ``any different or additional factors
that should be considered in applying the swap dealer definition to
participants in these markets.'' \3\ In accordance with this request,
and to assist the Commissions in finalizing an appropriate definition
of Swap Dealer that will not unduly burden domestic energy markets, the
Working Group provides these comments regarding the unique
characteristics of energy markets and the participants operating within
these markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Proposed Rule at 80183.
\3\ Id. at 80183-184.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy markets possess unique characteristics in terms of the
instruments transacted, the market participants themselves, and the
underlying products transacted, such as certain commodities that are
not stored and are not capable of being stored.\4\ Distinct from
institutions in the banking and financial system, which play an
intermediary role in financial markets, nondealer commercial energy
firms typically do not play intermediary roles in financial markets,
and their swap trading activity is generally related to their
respective physical portfolios of energy commodities.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Such commodities are traded in markets typically regulated by
other state and federal regulators and governed by well-understood
market rules.
\5\ Non-dealer commercial energy firms primarily transact swaps to
support hedging and trading activity associated with their underlying,
primary physical business operations and/or that of their affiliates.
From a trading perspective, this business involves transactions
executed in physical energy markets, as well as hedges (which are often
undertaken on a portfolio basis) and proprietary price discovery
transactions executed in swap markets for energy commodities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unlike major financial institutions, non-dealer commercial energy
firms function primarily as principals by transacting futures and
energy-related swaps on a daily basis, among other things, to hedge
(i.e., mitigate or off-set) the price risk associated with their core
business of providing electricity, heating oil, natural gas, propane,
gasoline and other energy commodities at competitive prices to satisfy
current and future energy supply and demand. In this regard, the
operation of assets and related trading activities of one non-dealer
commercial energy firm are largely independent of other non-dealer
commercial energy firms in the same product market. Should one party
become unable to trade, its counterparties can easily enter the market
to match the resulting open positions.
Although significant external events can adversely impact multiple
energy firms at the same time, the failure of one energy provider has
never led to the systemic failure of the energy markets. Moreover, the
failure of a non-dealer commercial energy firm has neither resulted in,
nor raised concerns about, triggering a collapse of the U.S. banking
and financial system. The absence of any large scale, long-term
disruption of the operation of financial and physical energy markets
following the Enron and Amaranth failures provides clear evidence that
OTC derivatives in energy commodities do not create systemic risk to
the financial system or within the energy industry of the type and
nature that the Act is intended to prevent.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Dodd-Frank Act Conference Report Summary, available at
http://banking.senate.gov/public/
index.cfm?FuseAction=Issues.View&Issue_id=84d77b9f-c7ab-6fe2-4640-
9dd18189fb23. The summary explains that the goals of the Act, in part,
are to ``identify and address systemic risks posed by large, complex
companies, products, and activities before they threaten the stability
of the economy.'' Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, non-dealer commercial energy firms have a significant
incentive to manage their exposure to all counterparties and,
therefore, such firms are not materially at risk in the absence of
government assistance. If the credit risk management practices and
policies of non-dealer commercial energy firms are inadequate, the
impacts of any resulting failure would fall on the shareholders of such
entities, as was the case in the Enron and Amaranth failures. In the
case of a failure of a non-dealer commercial energy firm, the burdens
and obligations of the affected company will be borne by shareholders
and investors, not by the federal government or, ultimately, taxpayers.
In light of the above, applying the proposed definition of Swap
Dealer and interpretive guidance to non-dealer commercial energy firms
is inconsistent with Congressional intent and would result in the
imposition of unnecessary and burdensome transactional, operating, and
compliance costs.\7\ In order to cover such costs, non-dealer
commercial energy firms will be forced to divert resources away from
investment in innovation, infrastructure, growth and jobs. Further,
this will adversely affect liquidity, competition, efficiency and price
discovery in energy markets as market participants either withdraw or
no longer participate to the same extent. This, in turn, will result in
higher energy prices for commercial, industrial, and retail consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Comments of the Working Group submitted to the CFTC on
December 15, 2010 in response to the CFTC's request for comment
concerning the cost-benefit analysis conducted pursuant to CEA Section
15. See Regulations Establishing and Governing the Duties of Swap
Dealers and Major Swap Participants, 75 Fed. Reg. 71397 (Nov. 23,
2010). In those comments, the Working Group detailed the significant
costs likely to be imposed on commercial energy firms should such firms
be deemed Swaps Dealers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. The Application of the ``Core'' Swap Dealer Criteria to Energy
Markets Is Not Consistent With the Statutory Language
It is the extensive experience of the Working Group members that
non-dealer commercial energy firms and other ``traders'' routinely
enter into swap transactions where both parties are holding a position
to hedge or to benefit from a forward view of the market rather than
holding themselves out as ``dealers.'' However, under the broadly
worded and subjective ``core'' Swap Dealer criteria proposed by the
Commissions, such non-dealer commercial energy firms could be viewed as
``accommodating demand'' for these transactions--a key indicator of
``dealing activity'' in the Proposed Rule.\8\ As described in Part
III.C.2, below, this result is not consistent with the statutory
definition of Swap Dealer or the Congressional intent underlying Title
VII. Further, the mere fact that the terms and conditions are
customized should not change the role of that counterparty from that of
a commercial market participant to that of a Swap Dealer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Proposed Rule at 80176 (proposing that ``dealers tend to
accommodate demand for swaps . . . from other parties.''). See also
Part III.C.2.d., infra, discussing the proposed ``core'' Swap Dealer
criteria.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Energy Swap Markets Routinely Operate Without the Involvement of
Swap Dealers
The Working Group believes that the Commissions' assertion that
significant parts of the swap markets do not operate without the
involvement of Swap Dealers is both unsupported and flawed when applied
to energy markets. Specifically, instead of providing any analysis of
the issue, the Commissions offer only the following unsupported
opinion:

Some of the commenters appeared to suggest that significant
parts of the swap markets operate without the involvement of
swap dealers. We believe that this analysis is likely
incorrect, and that the parties that fulfill the function of
dealers should be identified and are likely to be swap
dealers.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Proposed Rule at 80177 n. 18.

Further, when discussing transaction activity in swap markets, the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commissions contend that:

in some markets, non-dealers tend to constitute a large portion
of swap dealers' counterparties. In contrast, non-dealers tend
to enter into swaps with swap dealers more often than with
other non-dealers.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Id. at 80177.

As detailed herein, the Working Group respectfully submits that these
conclusions (i) are inaccurate with respect to energy markets, and (ii)
are not supported by empirical data developed by, or provided at the
request of, the Commissions.
It is well recognized that non-dealer commercial energy firms
routinely enter into swap transactions with non-dealer counterparties
(e.g., other commercial firms) in OTC markets. Such transactions take
place (i) in bilateral markets directly between the counterparties or
where counterparties are matched by voice brokers, and (ii) on
electronic trading facilities operating as exempt commercial markets,
such as ICE. Indeed, a significant number of the transactions executed
on ICE are between two end-user counterparties or between other non-
dealer market participants.
In other proposed rules issued pursuant to the Act, the CFTC
expressly contradicts its assertion here that significant parts of the
swap markets do not operate without the involvement of Swap Dealers.
For instance, in the recently released notice of proposed rulemaking
addressing the end-user exception from mandatory clearing requirements,
the CFTC recognizes that in certain markets more than one counterparty
to a swap may be qualified to elect to use the end-user exception from
clearing.\11\ Because only ``non-financial entities'' can elect to use
this exception, the language proposed in the End-User NOPR supports the
proposition that portions of swap markets, notably energy markets,
operate without dealer involvement.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swap, 75 Fed. Reg.
80747 (Dec. 23, 2010) (``End-User NOPR'').
\12\ Id. (proposed CFTC Rule 39.6(a)). See also Real-Time Public
Reporting of Swap Transaction Data, 75 Fed. Reg. 76141 (Dec. 7, 2010)
(the proposed rule imposes reporting obligations on non-Swap Dealers
for transactions executed off-facility ``if neither party is a swap
dealer nor a major swap participant.''); Swap Data Recordkeeping and
Reporting Requirements, 75 Fed. Reg. 76574 (Dec. 8, 2010) (same).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With respect to energy markets, as detailed in the below examples,
non-dealer commercial energy firms will agree to enter into the ``other
side'' of a bilateral swap transaction proposed by another non-dealer
counterparty where both parties are hedging or taking a forward view of
the market. In this instance, neither party is engaged in swap dealing.
They do not enter into such transactions (i) as a ``service'' to, or
for the benefit of, their counterparty, (ii) to collect a fee, or (iii)
as a ``service'' to, or for the benefit of the market generally, i.e.,
to enhance liquidity. Because they enter into such transactions to take
a position for their own benefit, and not the benefit of their
counterparty, this trading activity does not constitute swap dealing.
Similarly, due to the unique characteristics of the underlying physical
energy markets, non-dealer commercial energy firms often enter into
swaps with customized terms and conditions. These terms are often
highly negotiated and are intended to address the specific needs of the
counterparties, i.e., hedging bespoke commercial risk or price
discovery.
2. Specific Examples of Transactions Occurring in Energy Markets
Without Swap Dealer Involvement
To assist the Commissions in better understanding the non-dealer to
non-dealer transactions described above, the Working Group provides the
following examples of transactions between non-dealer commercial energy
firms that are ancillary or as an incident to their business as
producers, processors, commercial users, or merchants of physical
energy commodities.
Example 1: Hedge Between Two Non-Dealer Commercial Energy Firms
The following example illustrates how two non-dealer commercial
energy firms seeking to hedge commercial risk can ``respond to the
interest of others'' without ``dealing.''

Company A is a natural gas producer that sells into the
natural gas spot market.
Company B is a retail seller of natural gas that sells
natural gas to its customers at fixed prices but purchases the
natural gas it sells in the spot market.
Company A desires to hedge its spot sales exposure by
entering into a swap where it is the floating price payer and
receives a fixed payment. Company B desires to hedge its spot
purchase exposure by entering into a swap where it is the fixed
price payer and receives a floating payment.
Company A and Company B have established bi-lateral trading
documents and agreed on credit terms. They are aware of each
others' business needs and regularly communicate regarding the
possibility of a mutually beneficial trade to hedge their
respective commercial risks.
Company A and Company B enter into a swap where Company A is
the floating price payer and Company B is the fixed price
payer. The swap is priced such that Company B makes a margin
between the fixed price it receives from its retail customers
and the fixed price it pays to Company A. The floating price is
the spot natural gas price.
Company A and Company B are not Swap Dealers. They are
entering into a swap to hedge their commercial risk. Company A
has fixed its output price. Company B has locked-in its margin
and hedged its purchase price. While the companies could
achieve the same result by using an intermediary such as a Swap
Dealer, their transaction is more economic as they have ``cut
out the middleman.''
Example 2: Structured Deals
The following illustrates an example of how structured deals do not
constitute ``dealing.''

Company A enters into a deal to purchase all of the power
off-take from a power plant for a period of 10 years. Company A
also enters into a 10-year natural gas swap with the power
plant, allowing it to fix its margins. The combination of those
two transactions allows the owner of the plant to secure
financing. Company A is not engaged in ``dealing.''
C. The Definition of Swap Dealer: Scope and Application
1. The Definition of Swap Dealer and Interpretive Guidance Must Promote
Legal and Regulatory Certainty
The definition of Swap Dealer is a critical element of the new
framework for the regulation of swaps in OTC markets embodied in Title
VII of the Act. Together with the proposed definition of Major Swap
Participant (``MSP''), the definition of Swap Dealer is one of the
``gateways'' through which the Commissions may exercise the new and
expanded regulatory oversight authority granted to them under Title
VII. The successful implementation of a new framework for the
regulation of swaps is tied, in large part, directly to the
Commissions' ability to further define and apply Swap Dealer in a
fashion that (i) promotes regulatory and legal certainty, (ii) is
faithful to the statutory provisions and intent of Congress, and (iii)
is consistent with the overarching objectives and structure of Title
VII.
If adopted as proposed, the Working Group is concerned that the
definition of Swap Dealer and related guidance could be interpreted in
a manner that effectively (i) limits the concept of an end-user to that
of a one-directional (i.e., buy-side only) hedger, and (ii) leaves
commercial market participants with active swap trading operations at
risk of being designated as a Swap Dealer, including commercial energy
firms that primarily transact swaps to hedge underlying physical
commodity portfolios, assets, or positions. Such an interpretation is
not faithful to the statute or Congressional intent, would create legal
and regulatory uncertainty, and would be highly disruptive to the
efficient operation of swap markets.
The regulations implementing the definition of Swap Dealer must
include a clear methodology that will allow market participants to
determine whether they, or the counterparties with whom they transact,
fall within this definition. This clarity and guidance is vital to
ensuring the legal certainty and stability necessary to facilitate an
orderly transition to new regulation under Title VII and avoid
disruptions to energy swap markets.
2. The Commissions Should Define and Interpret the Term Swap Dealer in
a Manner That Gives Effect to the Statutory Language and
Congressional Intent
a. Congress Intended the Definition of Swap Dealer to Capture Entities
Engaged in Traditional Dealing Activity
The statutory language of new CEA Section 1a(49) establishes an
unambiguous definition of Swap Dealer, including express exceptions and
exemptions, to reflect Congress' intent to (i) capture only those
entities engaged in sufficient ``dealing'' activities to necessitate
regulation under the Act, and (ii) to avoid inadvertently sweeping in
those entities that are responsibly managing commercial risk.\13\ At
the outset of Title VII of the Act, Congress expressly made clear that
the term Swap Dealer shall have the same meaning as used in the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (``1934 Exchange Act'') and as amended
by the Act.\14\ In this regard, Congress intended not to entirely
redefine the well-known and understood meaning of what constitutes a
``dealer,'' but rather Congress provided specific meaning and context
to the definition by drawing from the 1934 Exchange Act and principles
of the Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Letter from Sen. Dodd, Chairman, Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs and Sen. Lincoln, Chairman, Committee on
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry to Rep. Frank, Chairman, Committee
on Financial Services, and Rep. Peterson, Chairman, Committee on
Agriculture (June 30, 2010) (``Lincoln-Dodd Letter'') (explaining that
``this is also why we narrowed the scope of the Swap Dealer and Major
Swap Participant definitions. We should not inadvertently pull in
entities that are appropriately managing their risk.''). See also 156
Cong. Rec. H5248 (daily ed. June 30, 2010) (statements of Rep. Frank
and Rep. Peterson recognizing Lincoln-Dodd Letter and entering into
Congressional Record).
\14\ See Section 711 of the Act (stating that the term ``Swap
Dealer'' shall have the ``same meaning[] given the term[] in section 1a
of the Commodity Exchange Act . . . .''). The ``same meaning'' is the
meaning provided by Congress in setting forth the definition of Swap
Dealer in new CEA Section 1a(49), which parallels the meaning of
``dealer'' under existing securities laws and precedent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In setting forth the definition of a ``Swap Dealer,'' Congress
expressly used the word ``means'' immediately following the term it
intended to define, ``Swap Dealer.''\15\ Importantly, Congress did not
use the word ``includes'' or ``consists of,'' nor did Congress list
additional activities as illustrative, meaning Congress said what it
meant.\16\ Any general authority Congress provided to the Commissions
to further define Swap Dealer cannot exceed the bounds of the express
definition or ignore the intent of Congress.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ See, e.g., Wilson v. U.S. Parole Commission, 193 F.3d 195, 198
(3d Cir. 1999) (explaining that ``[a]s a rule, a definition which
declares what a term means is binding.'') (citing National City Lines,
Inc. v. LLC Corp., 687 F.2d 1122 (8th Cir. 1982); see also Colautti v.
Franklin, 439 U.S. 379, 392-93 (1979) (explaining that ``[a] definition
which declares what a term `means' . . . excludes any meaning that is
not stated.'') (citing 2A C. Sands, Statutes and Statutory Construction
 47.07 (4th ed., Supp. 1978).
\16\ See, e.g., United States v. Gertz, 249 F.2d 662, 666 (9th Cir.
1957) (explaining that ``the word `includes' is usually a term of
enlargement, and not of limitation.''); Federal Election Commission v.
Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 769 F.2d 13 (1st Cir. 1985);
Argosy Ltd. v. Hennigan, 404 F.2d 14 (5th Cir. 1968).
\17\ The Commissions cite to Sections 712(d) and 721(b) of the Act
as providing authority to redefine the term Swap Dealer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specifically, Congress set forth the statutory elements for
determining whether a person is a Swap Dealer, explicitly providing
that ``the term `swap dealer' means any person who'':

(i) holds itself out as a dealer in swaps;

(ii) makes a market in swaps;

(iii) regularly enters into swaps with counterparties as an
ordinary course of business for its own account; or

(iv) engages in any activity causing the person to be commonly
known in the trade as a dealer or market maker in swaps,
provided however, in no event shall an insured depository
institution be considered to be a swap dealer to the extent it
offers to enter into a swap with a customer in connection with
originating a loan with that customer.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ New CEA Section 1a(49)(A).

Accordingly, any person engaged in activities consistent with the
express statutory criteria shall be deemed a Swap Dealer, and be
subject to the applicable compliance obligations established in the
Act. As detailed below, however, the Commissions went well beyond the
express language of the statute, instead establishing additional
``core'' and ``secondary'' Swap Dealer criteria that are wholly
inconsistent with the express statutory definition of Swap Dealer.
As part of the definition of Swap Dealer, Congress also included a
General Exception to the definition, providing that the term Swap
Dealer ``does not include a person that enters into swaps for such
person's own account, either individually or in a fiduciary capacity,
but not as a part of a regular business.'' \19\ The inclusion of the
General Exception again reflects Congress' intent to capture entities
engaged in traditional ``dealing'' activities, and thus the proper
interpretation and application of the General Exception will avoid
capturing entities not intended to be regulated as Swap Dealers,
particularly those entities transacting in swap markets but not as a
part of a regular business. To ensure the final rule and interpretive
guidance properly reflect the statutory language and the intent of
Congress, the Working Group provides, in Part III.D.1, below, specific
comments and alternatives to the Commissions' definition and
interpretation of the General Exception and the term ``regular
business.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ New CEA Section 1a(49)(C).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, pursuant to the de minimis exemption established by
Congress, entities that meet the swap dealing criteria set forth in new
CEA Section 1a(49)(A) will nevertheless be exempt from the regulations
of the Act applicable to Swap Dealers because their dealing activities
would be so minimal as to not warrant regulation as a Swap Dealer.\20\
In contrast, the Commissions' interpretation of this exemption suggests
that if an entity fails to satisfy the de minimis criteria proposed by
the Commissions, such entity would be deemed a Swap Dealer. Thus,
rather than further limiting the scope of entities subject to the Act's
Swap Dealer regulations, as intended by Congress, such an
interpretation establishes additional criteria by which to identify
entities as Swap Dealers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Specifically, new CEA Section 1a(49)(D) provides that the
``Commission shall exempt from designation as a swap dealer an entity
that engages in a de minimis quantity of swap dealing in connection
with transactions with or on behalf of its customers.'' Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. The Statutory Definition of Swap Dealer is Based on the Definition
and Interpretation of ``Dealer'' Under the Securities Laws and
Rules
All four elements contained in the definition of Swap Dealer set
forth in new CEA Section 1a(49)(A) are based upon the definition of
``dealer'' set forth in Section 3(a)(5) of the 1934 Exchange Act \21\
and upon key elements of the SEC's long-standing and well-known
``Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule.'' \22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See 15 U.S.C.  78c(a)(5).
\22\ See Definition of Terms in and Specific Exemptions for Banks,
Savings Associations, and Savings Banks Under Sections 3(a)(4) and
3(a)(5) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 68 Fed. Reg. 8685,
Final Rule, SEC Release No. 34-47364 (Mar. 2003) (``Dealer/Trader
Distinction Rule''); Definition of Terms in Specific Exemptions for
Banks, Savings Associations, and Savings Banks Under Sections 3(a)(4)
and 3(a)(5) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Proposed Rule, SEC
Release No. 34-46745 (Dec. 2002).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first two prongs of the statutory definition of Swap Dealer--
holding oneself out as a dealer in swaps and making a market in swaps,
respectively--were clearly relied upon by Congress in crafting the
definition of Swap Dealer.\23\ Specifically, the Dealer/Trader
Distinction Rule provides, in part, that a dealer is someone who is
``holding itself out as a dealer or market maker or as being otherwise
willing to buy or sell one or more securities on a continuous basis.''
\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ The SEC explained, in part, in the Dealer/Trader Distinction
Rule that ``. . . the dealer definition has been interpreted to exclude
`traders.' The dealer/trader distinction recognizes that dealers
normally have a regular clientele, hold themselves out as buying or
selling securities at a regular place of business, have a regular
turnover of inventory (or participate in the sale or distribution of
new issues, such as by acting as an underwriter), and generally provide
liquidity services in transactions with investors (or, in the case of
dealers who are market makers, for other professionals).'' See Dealer/
Trader Distinction Rule at 8688 (citations omitted).
\24\ See Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule at 8689 n. 26 (citing OTC
Derivatives Dealers, Release No. 34-40594, Section II.A.1., n.61, 63
Fed. Reg. 59,362, 59,370 (Nov. 3, 1998)) (emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In relevant part, Section 3(a)(5) of the 1934 Exchange Act defines
a ``dealer'' as ``any person that is engaged in the business of buying
and selling securities for its own account through a broker or
otherwise.'' This definition has clear overlap with the third prong of
the definition of Swap Dealer, particularly the key element of engaging
in, or entering into, activities for one's ``own account.''
Additionally, the ``Exception'' from the definition of dealer
provided in the 1934 Exchange Act provides that ``[t]he term `dealer'
does not include a person that buys or sells securities for such
person's own account, either individually or in a fiduciary capacity,
but not as a part of a regular business.'' Importantly, this exception
is virtually identical to the General Exception included in the
definition of Swap Dealer in new CEA Section 1a(49)(C).
The above comparison illustrates that Congress, in drafting the
definition of Swap Dealer, adopted specific language and principles
from the definition of ``dealer'' under the 1934 Exchange Act. Notably,
Congress also chose not to adopt other SEC statutory language or
principles based on SEC precedent. Accordingly, Congress intended that,
in interpreting and implementing the term Swap Dealer, such
interpretation should be modeled after the SEC's Dealer/Trader
Distinction Rule, taking into account applicable differences between
swaps and securities markets. Consequently, in further defining the
term Swap Dealer, the Commissions were required to fully consider the
SEC's interpretive guidance of the term ``dealer.'' \25\ However, as
discussed below, the Commissions did not thoroughly consider existing
precedent, choosing instead to adopt unsupported ``core'' and
``secondary'' criteria, which resulted in a proposed definition and
interpretation of Swap Dealer that fails to follow the statute or
effectuate the intent of Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See note 14, supra.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, the Working Group believes that the Commissions'
decision in the Proposed Rule to adopt Dealer/Trader Distinction--like
guidance for security-based swaps, but not for swaps traded in
commodity markets, is unreasonable in light of the statutory language
and Congressional intent. The Commissions attempt to justify their
distinction, in part, by explaining that:

The definition of swap dealer should be informed by the
differences between swaps, on the one hand, and securities and
commodities, on the other. Transactions in cash market
securities and commodities generally involve purchases and
sales of tangible or intangible property. Swaps, in contrast,
are notional contracts requiring the performance of agreed
terms by each party.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Proposed Rule at 80176.

This is not, however, an informed basis to justify the SEC and CFTC
adopting diametrically opposed positions for security-based swaps and
swaps traded in commodity markets.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Notably, the SEC applies the Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule to
options, which, like swaps, are a derivative for which there is no
limitation on the quantity of the underlying asset and there is no
requirement to hold inventory in order to be a dealer. Thus, the basis
for the Commissions' distinction lacks a thorough understanding of the
swaps and securities markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To be sure, the definitions of ``Swap Dealer'' and ``Security-based
Swap Dealer'' set forth in the Act are virtually identical and, as
discussed above, modeled in large part on existing SEC precedent.\28\
Yet, with limited explanation, the Commissions reach opposite results.
Thus, the distinction is contrary to the express statutory language and
Congressional intent, which support definitions of Swap Dealer and
Security-based Swap Dealer that are consistent with SEC precedent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Compare new CEA Section 1a(49) and new 1934 Exchange Act
Section 3(a)(71).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
c. The Definition of Swap Dealer Must Account for the Existence of
Other Market Participants
The Commissions should establish guidance interpreting the
definition of Swap Dealer that appropriately recognizes the existence
of other market participants transacting in different types of swap
markets. The regulatory framework adopted in Title VII is based upon
the existence of, at a minimum, four classes of market participants:
(i) Swap Dealers; (ii) MSPs; (iii) non-financial end-users (i.e., those
eligible to use the clearing exception); and (iv) all other market
participants that are not Swap Dealers, MSPs, or non-financial end-
users. Pursuant to the framework contemplated by Congress, the
Commissions are required to further define Swap Dealer in a manner that
gives meaning and effect to each distinct class of market participant.
The proposed definition of Swap Dealer and the interpretational
guidance in the Proposed Rule are based upon a very broad reading of
the four disjunctive prongs of new CEA Section 1a(49)(A)(i)-(iv).
Rather than proposing interpretational guidance for each of the four
disjunctive prongs of the statutory definition of Swap Dealer, the
subjective identifying characteristics promoted by the Commissions
appear to apply to all prongs. This approach to identifying Swap
Dealers, as well as the qualified guidance interpreting the General
Exception to the definition of Swap Dealer, creates uncertainty
regarding the universe of market participants that must register as a
Swap Dealer.
To minimize such uncertainty, to the greatest extent possible,
concrete and objective fact-based guidance should be included in the
final rule that clearly illustrates swap trading activity that falls
either within (i) the definition of Swap Dealer or (ii) the General
Exception. Because the Proposed Rule unequivocally places the
obligation on market participants to self-select whether they must
register as a Swap Dealer, this guidance is particularly important to
mitigate potential non-compliance risk.
d. The Proposed ``Core'' Swap Dealer Criteria Do Not Distinguish
Between the Roles of Different Swap Market Participants
Citing the unique characteristics of swap markets, the Commissions
decline to adopt interpretive guidance distinguishing the activities of
dealers from traders in swap markets.\29\ In lieu of adopting such
guidance, the Commissions propose certain ``core'' criteria for
identifying Swap Dealers (``Core S/D Criteria''), as well as other
additional criteria (``Secondary S/D Criteria'').\30\ As noted above,
in order to demonstrate consistency with the express statutory
definition, the underlying Congressional intent, and the regulatory
framework embodied in Title VII, the guidance interpreting the
definition of Swap Dealer should distinguish the roles of different
swap market participants in a meaningful manner. Moreover, such
guidance should recognize that, in certain instances, dealers and
traders engage in overlapping types of conduct; however, this fact
alone should not result in a trader being subject to dealer
regulation.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Proposed Rule at 80177-178.
\30\ Id. at 80,176, 80,178. The Commissions' proposed Core S/D
Criteria provide that:

dealers tend to accommodate demand for swaps and
security-based swaps from other
parties;

dealers are generally available to enter into swaps or
security-based swaps to facilitate
other parties' interest in entering into those instruments;

dealers tend not to request that other parties propose
terms of swaps or security-based
swaps; rather, dealers tend to enter into those instruments on
their own standard terms
or terms they arrange in response to other parties' interest;
and

dealers tend to be able to arrange customized terms
for swaps or security-based swaps
upon request, or create new types of swaps or security-based
swaps at the dealer's own
initiative.

\31\ It is instructive to look at the definitions of ``swap
dealer'' and ``producer/merchant/processor/user'' set forth in the
explanatory notes of the CFTC's Disaggregated Commitment of Traders
Report:

Producer/Merchant/Processor/User: An entity that predominantly
engages in the produc-
tion, processing, packing or handling of a physical commodity and
uses the futures markets
to manage or hedge risks associated with those activities.

Swap Dealer: An entity that deals primarily in swaps for a
commodity and uses the futures
markets to manage or hedge the risk associated with those swaps
transactions. The swap
dealer's counterparties may be speculative traders, like hedge funds,
or traditional commercial
clients that are managing risk arising from their dealings in the
physical commodity.

See Disaggregated Commitments of Traders Report, Explanatory Notes,
available at http://www.cftc.gov/MarketReports/CommitmentsofTraders/
DisaggregatedExplanatoryNotes/index.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The proposed Core and Secondary S/D Criteria do not accomplish
these objectives. To be sure, Congress intended for the CFTC to
regulate only those swap market participants who engage in dealing, a
concept well-understood and recognized in securities markets. The
proposed Core and Secondary S/D Criteria instead provide only vague
concepts that will potentially sweep in numerous other market
participants within the definition of Swap Dealer--a result clearly not
contemplated by Congress given the distinct classes of market
participants established by Title VII. Indeed, to avoid such an
unintended result, Congress purposely based the definition of Swap
Dealer on applicable SEC precedent in order to limit the term's
application to only those market participants engaged in what has
historically been understood as dealing activity.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ See Part III.C.2.b., supra, discussing Congress' intent to
base the definition of Swap Dealer on the 1934 Exchange Act definition
of ``dealer'' and the Dealer/Trader Distinction Rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. The Commissions Should Interpret ``Market Making'' Consistent With
Existing CFTC Interpretation
The Working Group is concerned that the Commissions' interpretation
of the ``market making'' language in new CEA Sections 1a(49)(A)(ii) and
1a(49)(A)(iv) is overly broad and inconsistent with CFTC precedent. The
Commissions should therefore reconsider their interpretation and issue
interpretative guidance in the final rule clarifying the meaning and
scope of this language. Such guidance should clearly recognize that the
activity of ``market making'' is an incident of dealing activity in
swap markets.
Consistent with the CFTC's glossary definition of ``Market Maker,''
``dealing activity'' generally occurs when a party acts as an
intermediary for others to access a market.\33\ A hallmark of dealing
activity is that a party's business is to continually stand ready,
willing, and able to take either side of a transaction and trade with
its customers in accordance with a ``bid/ask'' spread on its own
account. In fact, the CFTC's definition of ``Market Maker'' connotes
this ``obligation'' to buy or sell.\34\ In general, a dealer seeks to
remain neutral to price movements with respect to the swap at issue, as
well as the underlying commodity. Dealers, in large part, profit from
intermediation fees and ancillary services to their dealing activity
(e.g., providing investment advice), not from realizing changes in the
value of the swaps transacted or the underlying commodities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ The CFTC's online glossary, titled ``A Guide to the Language
of the Futures Industry,'' sets forth the Commission's own definition
of the term ``Market Maker.'' As highlighted below, the CFTC views a
market maker as an entity that has an obligation to buy or sell when
there is an excess of sell or buy orders (as the case may be):

[P]rofessional securities dealer or person with trading
privileges on an exchange who has
an obligation to buy when there is an excess of sell orders and to
sell when there is an excess
of buy orders. By maintaining an offering price sufficiently higher
than their buying price,
these firms are compensated for the risk involved in allowing their
inventory of securities to
act as a buffer against temporary order imbalances. In the futures
industry, this term is some-
times loosely used to refer to a floor trader or local who, in
speculating for his own account,
provides a market for commercial users of the market. Occasionally a
futures exchange will
compensate a person with exchange trading privileges to take on the
obligations of a market-
maker to enhance liquidity in a newly listed or lightly traded
futures contract. (Emphasis
added).

See https://www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/EducationCenter/
CFTCGlossary/index.htm.
\34\ See note 33, supra. See also SEC online guidance interpreting
a ``Market Maker'' as:

a firm that stands ready to buy and sell a particular stock on a
regular and continuous
basis at a publicly quoted price. You'll most often hear about market
makers in the context
of the NASDAQ or other ``over the counter'' (OTC) markets. Market
makers that stand ready
to buy and sell stocks listed on an exchange, such as the New York
Stock Exchange, are called
``third market makers.'' Many OTC stocks have more than one market-
maker. Market-makers
generally must be ready to buy and sell at least 100 shares of a
stock they make a market
in. As a result, a large order from an investor may have to be filled
by a number of market-
makers at potentially different prices.

See http://www.sec.gov/answers/mktmaker.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In contrast, a non-dealer commercial energy firm, on occasion, may
take either side of any particular swap transaction, depending on its
needs. This behavior is distinct from dealing activity as it is driven
by the commercial energy firm's underlying commercial business
operations, including specific customer-related obligations in physical
markets. Given this direct nexus to the commercial energy firm's
primary business operations in physical markets, such activity does not
constitute ``market making'' and is not incident to dealing activity in
swap markets.
The Commissions should interpret ``market making'' in a manner that
is generally consistent with the CFTC's own glossary definition of
``Market Maker.'' This may be accomplished by the development of
enumerated criteria that identifies different activities that
constitute ``market making'' in swap markets, i.e., a person who has an
obligation to buy when there is an excess of sell orders and to sell
when there is an excess of buy orders.
The Commissions should not, however, treat ``market making''
activity as the sole measure of whether an entity engaged in such
activity is a Swap Dealer. An occasional two-way trade made by a market
participant, when offered for customary commercial purposes, such as to
briefly test a market for price discovery purposes or as an adjunct to
an underlying physical business, does not constitute the type of
``continuous, ready, willing and able'' trading activity that is a key
indicium of a ``professional'' market maker.
4. The Working Group Offers a Proposed Alternative Definition of Swap
Dealer
In light of the numerous statutory and policy concerns outlined
above with respect to the Commissions' proposed definition of Swap
Dealer and interpretive guidance, the Working Group offers the
following alternative definition of Swap Dealer that will mitigate many
of the identified concerns and bring the definition and its
interpretation back within the limited scope originally intended by
Congress:
17 CFR 1.3(ppp) Swap Dealer.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Note, proposed new language is underlined. This alternative
definition revises only new CEA Section 1a(49)(A). The Working Group
offers revised language to the General Exception and the de minimis
exemption in Sections III.D.1 and 2, herein. See also Attachment A,
attached hereto.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) In general. The term ``swap dealer'' means any person
who:

(i) Holds itself out as a dealer in swaps;
(ii) Makes a market in swaps;

``Makes a market'' means regularly providing two-
sided pricing:

(a) for a particular swap for execution for a
person's own account; or
(b) pursuant to a contractual obligation.

(iii) Regularly enters into swaps with counterparties
as an ordinary course of business for its own account;
or
(iv) Engages in any activity causing it to be
commonly known in the trade as a dealer or market maker
in swaps.

provided, however, that an entity shall not be considered to be
a swap dealer to the extent that it offers to enter into, or
enters into, a swap:

(a) to hedge or mitigate commercial
risk;
(b) for the purpose of benefiting
from future changes in the commodity
reference price (i.e., the price to
which the floating leg of a swap is
indexed);
(c) on a designated contract market
or swap execution facility, unless
suchentity is making a market in that
swap; or
(d) that is a physical option that
includes the obligation to deliver or
receive a commodity if the option is
exercised.
(d) to provide two-sided pricing in a
market of limited or episodic liquidity
for the purpose of:

(I) discovering a price for
the swap or the underlying
commodity, or
(II) eliciting bids and
offers for the swap from other
marketparticipants.

Given that the Commissions' have interpreted the principle ``market
making'' in a broad fashion, the first proposed change is to provide
specificity to the second prong of the Swap Dealer definition by
expressly defining the term ``makes a market'' as regularly providing
two-sided pricing: (i) for a particular swap for execution for a
person's own account, or (ii) pursuant to a contractual obligation. As
previously described, making a market often means a party continually
stands ready, willing, and able to take either side of a transaction
and trade with its customers in accordance with a ``bid/ask'' spread on
its own account.\36\ The proposed additional language will ensure the
market making prong is applied narrowly so as to limit the scope of
entities subject to regulation as Swap Dealers to those entities
engaged in the sort of dealing activity intended to be regulated by
Congress under the Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ See Part III.C.3, infra, discussing the need for a consistent
interpretation of ``market making.'' See also note 34, infra, regarding
SEC online guidance interpreting a ``market maker,'' in part, as: ``a
firm that stands ready to buy and sell a particular stock on a regular
and continuous basis at a publicly quoted price'' (emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The additional language offered by the Working Group--proposed
subsections (a)-(d)--would expressly exclude from the definition those
activities historically understood as not constituting dealing. Namely,
the proposed language would exclude the following activities:

Swaps for Hedging Commercial Risk: The Commissions should
expressly exclude from the Swap Dealer definition swaps offered
or entered into for purposes of hedging or mitigating
commercial risk. The Working Group recognizes that this
principle is generally accepted by the Commissions; however,
providing express language to this effect in the final rule
would provide greater certainty to market participants and
would effectuate Congressional intent.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ The phrase ``hedge or mitigate commercial risk'' could
ultimately be tied to proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ttt), but only if the
Commissions adopt the framework recommended by the Working Group with
respect to proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ttt) in comments submitted
contemporaneously with this comment letter on the Commissions' proposed
definitions of ``Major Swap Participant'' and ``End-User.''

Swaps for Making a Profit: The Commissions should expressly
exclude from the definition of Swap Dealer swaps offered or
entered into for purposes of benefiting from a forward view of
the market, such as profits sought from future changes in the
price of the underlying commodity. Doing so will ensure that
the definition of Swap Dealer captures only those market
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
participants involved in ``dealing'' activities.

Swaps Traded On-Facility: The Commissions should expressly
exclude from the definition of Swap Dealer swaps offered or
entered into on designated contract markets and swap execution
facilities, unless the entity entering into or offering the on-
facility swap is making a market in that swap. Such an
exclusion will provide certainty that market participants who
are anonymously matched on a swap execution facility are not
accommodating demand. This scenario clearly should not be
considered as accommodating demand and yet because the
Commissions' Core S/D Criteria are broad, the Working Group
believes an express exclusion would better serve the market.

Physical Options: The Commissions should expressly exclude
from the definition of Swap Dealer swaps offered or entered
into that are physical options that include an obligation to
deliver or receive a commodity if the option is exercised. Such
an exclusion is consistent with the definition of ``swap'' in
new CEA Section 1a(47), which, if interpreted properly,
excludes these physical options. Thus, without evidence to the
contrary, the Commissions have no authority to regulate
physical market participants as Swap Dealers simply for
transacting in physical commodity options.

Providing Two-Sided Pricing in Markets of Limited or
Episodic Liquidity: The Commissions should exclude from the
definition of Swap Dealer swaps offered or entered to provide
two-sided pricing in a market of limited or episodic liquidity
either for the purpose of (i) discovering a price for the swap
or the underlying commodity, or (ii) eliciting bids and offers
for the swap from other market participants. Such activity is
distinct from dealing activity because the fundamental purpose
is price discovery. Nor is this ``market making'' given that
the market participant is not functioning specifically for the
purpose of being a liquidity provider, but rather the activity
is intended to be in furtherance of its commercial
business.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ For example, a natural gas company holds natural gas inventory
when the natural gas markets are thin at a value it believes to be
$4.00/MMbtu. It posts a bid price of $3.80 and an offer of $4.20 for a
portion of its inventory. If the bid price hits and the offer lifted,
it now knows the $4.00/MMbtu estimation was low and it is in a better
position to sell its full physical inventory at the higher price. If
the company wanted to hold its inventory but try to execute its hedge
position, it would engage in similar behavior to discover a true market
price.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. The Commissions Must Provide Greater Clarity and Guidance Regarding
the Proposed General Exception and the De Minimis Exemption
1. The General Exception
a. The Interpretive Guidance Explaining ``Regular Business'' Is
Circular and Creates Uncertainty
The Working Group believes that the decision of the Commissions to
tie prong three of the definition of Swap Dealer to the General
Exception, i.e., to entities that regularly enter into swaps for their
own account, is inconsistent with the clear Congressional intent of the
General Exception and will result in significant legal and regulatory
uncertainty for market participants. Specifically, the Proposed Rule
states that:

. . . clause [1a(49)](A)(iii) of the definition should be read
in combination with the express exception in subparagraph (C)
of the swap dealer definition, which excludes ``a person that
enters into swaps for such person's own account, either
individually or in a fiduciary capacity, but not as a part of a
regular business.'' Thus, the difference between the inclusion
in clause (A)(iii) and the exclusion in subparagraph (C) is
whether or not the person enters into swaps as a part of, or as
an ordinary course of, a ``regular business.'' \39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Proposed Rule at 80177.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commissions continue, explaining that:

We believe that persons who enter into swaps as a part of a
``regular business'' are those persons whose function is to
accommodate demand for swaps from other parties and enter into
swaps in response to interest expressed by other parties.
Conversely, persons who do not fulfill this function should not
be deemed to enter into swaps as a ``regular business'' and are
not likely to be swap dealers.\40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ Id. (emphasis added).

As evidenced by the above excerpts, rather than developing an
independent basis by which to interpret ``regular business,'' the
Commissions define the General Exception by simply citing to the
definition of Swap Dealer, resulting in circular reasoning that does
not assist market participants in determining whether their activities
meet the exception. Said differently, the Commissions rely upon the
Swap Dealer definition to define what ``regular business'' is not,
which, given the broad interpretation of Swap Dealer proposed by the
Commissions, will undoubtedly create significant legal and regulatory
uncertainty. The Commissions should avoid this circular logic and
instead develop clear guidance as to what constitutes ``regular
business.''
Additionally, the Commissions attempt to provide further guidance
as to how the CFTC will determine whether an entity is a Swap Dealer,
explaining that:

In sum, to determine if a person is a swap dealer, we would
consider that person's activities in relation to other parties
with which it interacts in the swap markets. If a person is
available to accommodate demand for swaps from other parties,
tends to propose terms, or tends to engage in the other
activities discussed above, then the person is likely to be a
swap dealer. Persons that rarely engage in such activities are
less likely to be deemed swap dealers.\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ Id. (emphasis added).

The Working Group believes that this interpretation, and the use of
a number of qualifiers, such as the terms ``not likely,''
``available,'' ``tends to,'' ``likely,'' ``less likely,'' and
``rarely,'' creates significant uncertainty regarding the scope and
applicability of the General Exception. Congress provided an exception
for those entities that engage in swap dealing activities that are
incidental to their non-swap dealing businesses. Congress recognized
that many businesses use swap markets to manage their financial and
physical delivery obligations and commercial risk. This use is
incidental to their primary businesses and their use of the swap
markets in this manner does not make them Swap Dealers. Thus, the
Commissions should clarify this language in order to (i) help more
clearly define the universe of market participants that fall within the
definition of Swap Dealer, and (ii) provide the legal and regulatory
certainty required for market participants to rely in good faith on the
General Exception.
b. In the Alternative, the Commissions Should Provide a Commodity-Based
Exception
Given the shortcomings of the Commissions' proposed interpretation
of ``as a part of a regular business,'' the Working Group recommends
that the Commissions revise the proposed General Exception. In doing
so, the Commissions should make it clear that swap transactions entered
into for customary economic purposes relating to a market participant's
primary underlying business as a producer, processor, commercial user,
or merchant of a physical energy or agricultural commodity should not
be considered part of an entity's ``regular business'' for purposes of
the General Exception.
To this end, the Working Group proposes the following revised
definition of ``Exception'' for the Commissions' consideration:
17 CFR 1.3(ppp)(2).\42\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Note, proposed new language is underlined. See also Attachment
A, attached hereto.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exception. The term ``swap dealer'' does not include a person
that enters into swaps for such person's own account, either
individually or in a fiduciary capacity, but not as a part of a
regular business.

(i) The following swap transactions shall not be
considered in determining a person's Regular Business:

(a) Swaps entered into by a producer,
processor, or commercial user of, or a merchant
handling a physical energy or agricultural
commodity that are ancillary or as an incident
to the person's business as a producer,
processor, or commercial user of, or a merchant
handling a physical energy or agricultural
commodity.

(ii) ``Regular Business'' means a usual and
significant business activity of a person as measured
by, among other things, revenues, profits, volume,
value-at-risk, exposure and resources devoted to the
business.
2. De Minimis Exemption
a. Proposed Alternative Approach to the De Minimis Exemption
The Commissions' interpretation of the de minimis exemption
suggests that if an entity fails to satisfy the de minimis criteria
proposed by the Commissions, such entity would be deemed a Swap Dealer.
In this manner, the Commissions' proposed definition effectively
establishes additional criteria by which to identify entities as Swap
Dealers. Such an application of the exemption was not the intent of
Congress. The Working Group believes Congress intended the de minimis
exemption to apply to those Swap Dealers who engage in limited amounts
of swap dealing or whose notional amount of exposure is small.
Further, the Working Group recognizes the widely accepted reports
that at least 92% of the total value of the notional amounts of the
outstanding OTC swaps is held by the 25 largest bank holding
companies.\43\ Such entities are Swap Dealers and should be covered by
the Proposed Rule. The de minimis exemption should therefore be crafted
to distinguish the remaining notional exposure in the entire U.S. swap
market. The Commissions' proposed de minimis definition does not
accomplish this objective.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ See Public Hearing to Review Implementation of Title VII of
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act: Hearing
Before the House Committee on Agriculture, 112th Cong. (Feb. 10, 2011)
(testimony of CFTC Chairman Gary Gensler explaining that the size of
the U.S. swaps market is approximately $300 trillion and that ``the
largest 25 bank holding companies currently have $277 trillion notional
amount of swaps.''). Based on Chairman Gensler's figures, the largest
25 bank holding companies control approximately 92 percent of the U.S.
swaps market. See also ``Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley Would Be Least
Affected by Swaps Proposal,'' Bloomberg News (June 23, 2010), available
at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-06-23/goldmansachs-morgan-
stanley-would-be-least-affected-by-swaps-proposal.html (concluding that
the five major U.S. commercial banks and their subsidiaries held 97
percent of the notional amount of outstanding derivatives in the fourth
quarter of 2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this context, the Working Group offers the following alternative
approach to the de minimis exemption:
17 CFR 1.3(ppp)(4).\44\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ Note, proposed new language is underlined. See also Attachment
A, attached hereto.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
De minimis exception.

(i) A person shall not be deemed to be a swap dealer
for any major category of swaps as a result of swap
dealing in connection with transactions with or on
behalf of its customers if the notional amount of the
swap positions connected with those activities did not
exceed one one-thousandth of one percent (.001%) of the
total notional amount of swaps in the United States.
The total notional amount of swaps in the United States
shall be determined by the Commission on an annual
calendar basis.
(ii) For purposes of this section, the measure of the
percent of the total notional amount of swaps in the
United States during a calendar quarter shall equal the
arithmetic mean at the close of each business day,
beginning the first business day of each calendar
quarter and continuing through the last business day of
that quarter.
(iii) A person that is not registered as a swap
dealer, and which does not qualify for the exception in
Section 1.3(ppp)(2) above, but which exceeds the
criterion in this section as a result of its swaps
dealing will not be deemed to be a swap dealer until
the earlier of the date on which it submits a complete
application for registration as a swap dealer or two
months after the end of the calendar quarter in which
it first exceeds this criterion. Notwithstanding the
previous sentence, if a person that is not registered
as a swap dealer meets the criteria in this section to
be a swap dealer but does not exceed the threshold in
(ii) by more than twenty percent in that quarter that
person will not be subject to the timing requirements
unless and until at the end of the next fiscal quarter
that person exceeds the criterion.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Please note that in comments on the definition of ``Major Swap
Participant'' submitted contemporaneously with this comment letter, the
Working Group recommends different registration timing for MSPs than
the timing presented here for Swap Dealers (i.e., two consecutive
quarters vs. two months after the end of the calendar quarter). In this
comment letter, the Working Group maintains the CFTC's proposed Swap
Dealer registration timing requirements in order to demonstrate the
framework analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(iv) A person that is deemed to be a swap dealer in
this section shall continue to be deemed a swap dealer
until such time that its swap positions in (i) do not
exceed the criterion for four consecutive quarters.

The Working Group suggests the alternative language as it provides
an appropriate threshold to identify swap dealing which is above a de
minimis level. The Working Group respectfully submits that one one-
thousandth of one percent of the total notional amount of swaps in the
U.S. is by definition a de minimis amount. Further, the calculation, as
set forth above, mirrors the Commissions' proposal for determination of
a MSP.
b. Rejection of a Relative Test for Applying the De Minimis Exemption
Is Not Based on Reasoned Decision-Making
The Working Group has concerns with the Commissions' rejection of
proposals to apply the de minimis exemption using a test that measures
the size of an entity's customer-facing, dealing activities relative to
the size its overall swap trading operations.\46\ As support for this
decision, the Commissions take the view that the use of a ``relative
test'' for applying the de minimis exemption would favor larger, more
active traders over smaller, less active traders. Specifically, the
Proposed Rule states that:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ Proposed Rule at 80180.

Aside from the fact that the statute does not explicitly call
for a relative test, such an approach would lead to the result
that larger and more active companies, which presumably would
be more able to influence the swap markets, would be more
likely to qualify for the exemption than smaller and less
active companies. Also, a relative test would require a means
of measuring the person's dealing activities, but also would
require a means of measuring the larger scope of activities to
which its swap dealing or security-based swap dealing
activities are to be compared, thus introducing unnecessary
complexity to the exemption's application.\47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Id. (emphasis added).

Notwithstanding the Commissions' position that the adoption of a
relative test would favor companies with larger, more active swap
trading operations, the Working Group contends that the rejection of
such a test actually could competitively disadvantage such companies.
Moreover, the basis for qualifying for the de minimis exemption appears
to be fundamentally different from the basis for determining whether an
entity is a trader and thus the Working Group requests that the
Commissions reconsider a relative test.
The statement in the Proposed Rule that use of a ``relative test''
would harm smaller companies with less active trading operations is
flawed. Regardless of an entity's size, if a dominant portion of its
overall trading activities involve customer-facing transactions and the
entity otherwise meets the definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' then that
entity's functional role in swap markets should be viewed as that of a
``dealer.'' If the Commissions do not wish to impose the onerous
prudential, business conduct, record-keeping and reporting requirements
applicable to Swap Dealers on smaller companies with less active
trading operations, then the Commissions should establish an exemption
from such regulatory requirements, rather than exempting them from Swap
Dealer status.
In this context, the Working Group recommends the Commissions
consider replacing the proposed mechanism to define the de minimis
threshold with an approach that examines the ratio of a firm's
``customer'' swaps notional amount (on a delta-equivalent basis) to
total swaps notional amount (delta-equivalent), and excludes from the
Swap Dealer definition any entity for which this ratio is less than
25%.\48\ For banks subject to the Volcker rule, the value for the
proposed metric should never be less than 0.5. This is the value of the
metric in a world in which (1) the bank's customer deals do not provide
any diversification of risk, (2) the bank hedges all of the risk from
the customer deals with non-customer deals, and (3) the bank does no
other non-customer deals because they would be prohibited by the
Volcker rule. To the extent customer deals hedge each other and the
bank hedges only the residual with non-customer deals, the metric will
approach one (1.0). As a result, the proposed critical value of 0.25
provides ample room to assure that entities properly viewed as swap
dealers cannot resort to the de minimis exception.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ A definitional distinction that is critical for this
alternative metric is that between ``customer'' and ``counterparty.''
This distinction is created by the statutory language--new CEA Section
1a(49)(A)(iii) of the Swap Dealer definition refers to
``counterparties,'' while the de minimis provision in Section 1a(49)(D)
refers to ``customers.'' However, the statute itself provides no
definitional guidance for this distinction. The concept of ``customer''
seems to imply some manner of relationship that extends beyond the bare
terms of the particular transaction, as distinct from the relationship
of mere trading counterparties, where two entities have met in the
market place and transacted, each for its own reasons. One element
suggestive of a ``customer'' relationship might be a concept of
``solicitation,'' in the sense that a counterparty would be an entity's
customer if such entity solicits the counterparty to do a transaction
on the grounds that it will be beneficial to the counterparty. This
``solicitation'' concept must be distinguished from a ``Request for
Proposal'' or ``Request for Quote'' process, in which an entity
solicits transactions, but for the purpose of benefiting the entity
itself, rather than for the benefit of the solicited counterparty or
counterparties. In addition, a counterparty would seem to be an
entity's customer if such entity provided advice on the transaction
that was material to the counterparty's decision to transact, or with
whom.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
c. The Proposed Aggregate Gross Notional Amount Is Unsupported and
Unduly Restrictive
Should the Commissions forego adopting the Working Group's proposed
alternative de minimis definition or a relative test and instead
maintain their proposed framework, the Working Group submits that the
proposed hard cap on aggregate notional amount of $100 million is
unsupported and unduly restrictive. Indeed, under the Commissions'
proposal, a non-dealer commercial firm or end-user that has, for
example, four customer-facing swaps with an aggregate notional amount
of over $100 million would be required to register as a Swap Dealer.
Such a result is at odds with Congressional intent to regulate as Swap
Dealers only those entities commonly understood to engage in dealing
activity.
The Commissions attempt to justify this cap with an unsupported
assumption that the average amount of a small swap transaction is $5
million.\49\ The Commissions, however, fail to set forth in the
Proposed Rule the underlying data to support this claim, and thus the
Commissions' decision to set the cap at $100 million lacks a proper
evidentiary foundation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ Proposed Rule at 80180. The Proposed Rule provides that ``[w]e
understand that in general the notional size of a small swap or
security-based swap is $5 million or less . . . .'' Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a further attempt to justify the $100 million notional amount
threshold, the Commissions explain that:

given the customer protection issues raised by swaps and
security-based swaps--including the risks that counterparties
may not fully appreciate when entering into swaps or
securities-based swaps--we believe that this notional amount
reflects a reasonable limit for identifying those entities that
engage in a de minimis level of dealing activity.\50\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\50\ Id.

This rationale, however, does not hold up to closer scrutiny. The Act
expressly prohibits unsophisticated parties from entering into
inappropriate derivatives transactions by limiting the types of
counterparties that can participate in those markets.\51\ As such, only
eligible contract participants (``ECP'') are eligible to participate in
off-facility swap transactions. Given that ECPs are sophisticated
parties that fully appreciate the attendant risks involved when
engaging in swaps in physical markets, the Commissions' assertion that
such parties require ``customer protection'' is contrary to the market
participant framework contemplated by Congress and established by the
Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\51\ See new CEA Section 2(e).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Due to the current economic recession in the U.S., energy prices
remain depressed compared to periods of strong and sustained economic
growth. Consequently, commercial energy firms that presently meet the
requirements of the de minimis exemption may no longer meet this
exemption if the aggregate notional amount of their existing deals
exceed the $100 million threshold simply due to rising energy prices.
As such, the Commissions should increase the hard cap for aggregate
notional amount of customer-facing transactions beyond the proposed
$100 million threshold, or otherwise provide some form of flexibility
to market participants. At a minimum, the Commissions should include in
the final rule any data related to its determination that the average
value of a small swap transaction is $5 million.
d. The Commissions Should Revisit the Scope and Application of the
Twenty Transaction Threshold
Based on guidance in the Proposed Rule interpreting proposed CFTC
Rule 1.3(ppp)(3) as covering different ``types, classes, and categories
of swaps,'' \52\ the Working Group believes that the twenty transaction
threshold of the de minimis exemption is grossly insufficient and
should be significantly higher. To be sure, market participants
exceeding the twenty transaction threshold, including non-dealer
commercial firms and end-users, will be deemed Swap Dealers simply for
transacting in swap markets for their customary business purposes.
Certainly Congress did not intend for such a far-reaching result. In
the absence of any supporting data from the Commissions, the Working
Group is unable to contemplate any justification for this number and
requests the Commissions to identify their reasoning. To the extent the
Commissions do not have a reasonable basis, the Working Group requests
the Commissions to develop a more appropriate transaction threshold
based on empirical swap market data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ Proposed Rule at 80182.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Should the Commissions fail to significantly increase the proposed
threshold in the final rule, the Working Group seeks clarification
regarding the scope and application of the proposed threshold embedded
in the de minimis exemption. In the energy context, it is not clear
whether the twenty transaction threshold would apply to all energy
commodities combined (i.e., energy swaps or metals swaps), or on a
commodity-by-commodity basis (i.e., power swaps, natural gas swaps,
silver swaps, etc.). If the Commissions apply the threshold to all
energy commodities combined, a commercial energy firm that engaged in
the following customer-facing swaps would be required to register as a
Swap Dealer: (i) three customer-facing crude swaps, (ii) three fuel
swaps, (iii) three heating oil swaps, (iv) three gasoline swaps, (v)
three natural gas swaps, (vi) three natural gas liquids swaps, and
(vii) two power swaps. Such a result is clearly not intended by
Congress, as numerous commercial energy firms will surpass the twenty
transaction threshold simply by engaging in swaps for customary
business activities, unrelated to any dealing activity whatsoever. At a
minimum, therefore, the Commissions should apply the threshold on a
commodity-by-commodity basis.
E. The Proposed Limited Designation Requirement Creates a Presumption
Contrary to the Statute
The Commissions' proposed limited designation requirement creates a
presumption that a person who is a Swap Dealer ``shall be deemed to be
a swap dealer with respect to each swap it enters into regardless of
the category of the swap or the person's activities in connection with
the swap.'' \53\ Accordingly, the CFTC intends to view an entity deemed
a Swap Dealer for one category of swaps to be deemed a Swap Dealer for
all other activities, unless and until such entity seeks and obtains
CFTC approval that its Swap Dealer designation should be limited to
certain activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ Proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ppp)(3).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This presumption, however, is contrary to the express statutory
language of the Act, which provides that:

A person may be designated as a swap dealer for a single type
or single class or category of swap activities and considered
not to be a swap dealer for other types, classes, or categories
of swaps or activities.\54\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ New CEA Section 1a(49)(B).

The statute expressly presumes that an entity may be deemed a Swap
Dealer for some activities without being considered a Swap Dealer for
other activities, thus creating a presumption in favor of the market
participant, meaning an entity deemed to be a Swap Dealer for a swap or
category of swaps should be presumed to be a Swap Dealer only for that
particular activity. The Commissions have effectively flipped the
statute on its head, establishing a presumption in direct contrast to
the express statutory language. As such, the Working Group respectfully
requests the Commissions to abandon proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ppp)(3) or,
alternatively, to revise the rule to reflect the fact that entities
designated as a Swap Dealer for one category of swaps shall not be
deemed a Swap Dealer or any other financial entity (as defined under
CEA 2(h)(7)(C)) for other swaps.
F. Additional Issues Requiring Clarification With Respect to the
Proposed Definition of Swap Dealer
1. Issues Related to Affiliate Transactions
The Commissions invite comment with respect to how the Swap Dealer
definition should be applied to swaps executed between members of an
affiliated group. The Working Group generally supports the approach
taken by the Commissions with respect to affiliate transactions,
particularly the Commissions' recognition that transactions between
affiliates are used for risk management purposes and that swaps between
affiliates ``may not involve the interaction with unaffiliated persons
that we believe is a hallmark of the elements of the definitions that
refer to holding oneself out as a dealer or being commonly known as a
dealer.'' \55\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\55\ Proposed Rule at 80183.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, given that transactions between affiliates are used for
the ``allocation of risk within a corporate group,'' the Working Group
requests the Commissions to clarify that in no case shall any
transactions between corporate affiliates be considered dealing
activity for purposes of determining whether an entity is a Swap
Dealer, including application of the de minimis criteria. As noted by
the Commissions, inter-affiliate transactions do not carry any of the
elements of dealing activity given that the transactions are used to
manage and allocate risk within a holding company system or other
organizational structure.
2. Safe Harbor for Good Faith Efforts To Comply With the Proposed Rule
The Proposed Rule's requirement that market participants self-
select whether registration as a Swap Dealer is required raises
significant compliance risks. Consequently, the Commissions should seek
to facilitate compliance with the Proposed Rule and work with industry
members as the definition of Swap Dealer becomes effective. Market
participants that exercise due diligence and make good faith efforts to
determine whether registration is required, but do not register, should
not be subject to enforcement action. Thus, the CFTC should enhance
relevant guidance, including the No Action Letter process, for
providing comfort to market participants that enforcement would not be
recommended under specific fact-based scenarios.
G. The Commission's Cost-Benefit Analysis Is Insufficient and
Inconsistent With Anticipated Compliance Costs
Section 15(a) of the CEA requires the CFTC, before promulgating a
rule, to ``consider the costs and benefits of the action of the
Commission.'' \56\ As a general matter, the cost and benefit analysis
specific to regulations regarding Swap Dealers does not appear to be
based on any empirical data and does not appear to be consistent with
the expected costs of compliance anticipated by market
participants.\57\ In particular, the Swap Dealer cost-benefit analysis
does not evaluate the costs to be imposed on the numerous additional
market participants likely to be swept into the Swap Dealer category as
a result of the overly broad definition of Swap Dealer proposed by the
Commissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\56\ 7 U.S.C.  19(a).
\57\ Proposed Rule at 80204.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If these market participants choose to exit the swap markets rather
than absorb the costs of potential regulation as a Swap Dealer, such
departures will adversely impact liquidity as remaining swap
transactions become concentrated in a smaller number of market
participants, notably financial institutions. Accordingly, the
Commissions should perform a liquidity cost analysis that assesses the
probability and impacts of such a result. Such an analysis also should
consider the number of non-dealer market participants expected to be
designated as Swap Dealers simply for exceeding the low thresholds set
forth in the Commissions' proposed de minimis framework.
The Working Group therefore requests that the Commissions (i)
consider the costs and benefits associated with the Proposed Rule in
the manner prescribed by CEA Section 15(a), (ii) issue a supplemental
rule in this proceeding setting forth empirical data supporting its
conclusions regarding the costs and benefits of the Proposed Rule, and
(iii) notice the supplemental rule in the Federal Register for public
comment.
IV. Conclusion
The Working Group supports appropriate regulation that brings
transparency and stability to the energy swap markets in the United
States. The Working Group appreciates this opportunity to comment and
respectfully requests that the Commission consider the comments set
forth herein as it develops a final rule in this proceeding. If you
have any questions, please contact the undersigned.
Respectfully submitted,

Mark W. Menezes;
R. Michael Sweeney, Jr.;
David T. McIndoe;
Counsel for the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms.
attachment a
Proposed Revised Definition of Swap Dealer
17 CFR 1.3(ppp) Swap Dealer.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Please note that the underscored text reflects the Working
Group's proposed revisions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) In general. The term ``swap dealer'' means any person who:

(i) Holds itself out as a dealer in swaps;
(ii) Makes a market in swaps;
``Makes a market'' means regularly providing two-sided
pricing:

(a) for a particular swap for execution for a
person's own account; or
(b) pursuant to a contractual obligation.

(iii) Regularly enters into swaps with counterparties as an
ordinary course of business for its own account; or
(iv) Engages in any activity causing it to be commonly known
in the trade as a dealer or market maker in swaps.

provided, however, that an entity shall not be considered to be a swap
dealer to the extent that it offers to enter into, or enters into, a
swap:

(a) to hedge or mitigate commercial risk; \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The phrase ``hedge or mitigate commercial risk'' could
ultimately be tied to proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ttt), but only if the
Commissions adopt the framework recommended by the Working Group with
respect to proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(ttt) in comments submitted
contemporaneously with this comment letter on the Commissions' proposed
definitions of ``Major Swap Participant'' and ``End-User.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(b) for the purpose of benefiting from future changes
in the commodity reference price (i.e., the price to
which the floating leg of a swap is indexed);
(c) on a designated contract market or swap execution
facility, unless such entity is making a market in that
swap;
(d) that is a physical option that includes the
obligation to deliver or receive a commodity if the
option is exercised; or
(e) to provide two-sided pricing in a market of
limited or episodic liquidity for the purpose of:

(I) discovering a price for the swap or the
underlying commodity, or
(II) eliciting bids and offers for the swap
from other market participants.

(2) Exception. The term ``swap dealer'' does not include a person
that enters into swaps for such person's own account, either
individually or in a fiduciary capacity, but not as a part of a regular
business.

(i) The following swap transactions shall not be considered
in determining a person's Regular Business:

Swaps entered into by a producer, processor, or
commercial user of, or a merchant handling a physical
energy or agricultural commodity that are ancillary or
as an incident to the person's business as a producer,
processor, or commercial user of, or a merchant
handling a physical energy or agricultural commodity.

(ii) ``Regular Business'' means a usual and significant
business activity of a person as measured by, among other
things, revenues, profits, volume, value-at-risk, exposure and
resources devoted to the business.

(3) Scope. [No proposed changes.]
(4) De minimis exception.

(i) A person shall not be deemed to be a swap dealer for any
major category of swaps as a result of swap dealing activity in
connection with transactions with or on behalf of its customers
if the notional amount of the swap positions connected with
those activities did not exceed one one-thousandth of one
percent (.001%) of the total notional amount of swaps in the
United States. The total notional amount of swaps in the United
States shall be determined by the Commission on an annual
calendar basis.
(ii) For purposes of this section, the measure of the percent
of the total notional amount of swaps in the United States
during a calendar quarter shall equal the arithmetic mean at
the close of each business day, beginning the first business
day of each calendar quarter and continuing through the last
business day of that quarter.
(iii) A person that is not registered as a swap dealer, and
which does not qualify for the exception in Section 1.3(ppp)(2)
above, but which exceeds the criterion in this section as a
result of its swap dealing activity will not be deemed to be a
swap dealer until the earlier of the date on which it submits a
complete application for registration as a swap dealer or two
months after the end of the calendar quarter in which it first
exceeds this criterion. Notwithstanding the previous sentence,
if a person that is not registered as a swap dealer meets the
criteria in this section to be a swap dealer but does not
exceed the threshold in (ii) by more than twenty percent in
that quarter that person will not be subject to the timing
requirements unless and until at the end of the next fiscal
quarter that person exceeds the criterion.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ In comments on the definition of ``Major Swap Participant''
submitted contemporaneously with this comment letter, the Working Group
recommends different registration timing for MSPs than the timing
presented here for Swap Dealers (i.e., two consecutive quarters vs. two
months after the end of the calendar quarter). In this comment letter,
the Working Group maintains the CFTC's proposed Swap Dealer
registration timing requirements in order to demonstrate the framework
analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(iv) A person that is deemed to be a swap dealer in this
section shall continue to be deemed a swap dealer until such
time that its swap positions in (i) do not exceed the criterion
for four consecutive quarters.
______

March 22, 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Rulemaking under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act.

Dear Secretary Stawick:

On behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms (the
``Working Group''), Hunton & Williams LLP respectfully submits this
letter to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (the ``Commission'')
to offer certain observations regarding the approach by which the
Commission might implement regulations under Title VII of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the ``Dodd-Frank
Act'').\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ This letter sets out general observations about the
Commission's rulemaking process to date. The Working Group intends to
submit a separate letter on the topic of sequencing the final rules and
their implementation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group is a diverse group of commercial firms in the
energy industry whose primary business activity is the physical
delivery of one or more energy commodities to others, including
industrial, commercial and residential consumers. Members of the
Working Group are energy producers, marketers and utilities. The
Working Group considers and responds to requests for public comment
regarding regulatory and legislative developments with respect to the
trading of energy commodities, including derivatives and other
contracts that reference energy commodities.
Because the Commission has not finalized the regulatory definition
of the terms such as ``swap dealer,'' ``major swap participant'' and
``swap,'' members of the Working Group have commented on proposed
rulemakings applicable to swap dealers and major swap participants and
offer their thoughts contained herein on requirements imposed on ``swap
dealers'' and ``major swap participants.'' While members of the Working
Group have never considered themselves, or been viewed by others as
swap dealers or major swap participants, they are concerned with the
breadth and vagueness of the proposed rules and, thus, have commented
on proposed rules imposing obligations on swap dealers and major swap
participants.
I. Comments of the Working Group
Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act places a substantial burden on the
Commission. The Commission is tasked with constructing a new regulatory
regime for swap markets based on the contours set forth in the Dodd-
Frank Act. It is charged with completing this monumental task in less
than a year with limited resources. The Commission must balance the
timing requirements set forth by Congress with the need to construct
rules that (1) accomplish the goals of the Dodd-Frank Act, (2) are
enforceable by the Commission and (3) cause the least disruption in,
and impose the lowest possible costs on swap markets.\2\ The Working
Group respectfully submits this letter to assist the Commission in
satisfying these three goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Satisfying these three goals would not only fulfill the
Commission's obligation under Section 15(a) of the Commodity Exchange
Act (``CEA'') to consider and evaluate the costs and benefits of a
proposed rule, but it would also adhere to the intent of President
Obama's Executive Order on Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review.
Exec. Order No. 13563, 76 Fed. Reg. 3821 (January 18, 2011) (the
``Executive Order''). The Working Group acknowledges, that as an
independent agency, the Commission is not subject to the Executive
Order. However, the Working Group encourages the Commission to adhere
to President Obama's intent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Market Analysis
As a threshold matter, when proposing a rule, the Commission should
conduct a careful analysis of the markets and market participants to
which the rule will apply. Without a comprehensive understanding of the
relevant market and its participants, the Commission will be unable to
ensure that such proposed rule will meet the three goals set forth
above. Further, analysis of the relevant market and its participants is
necessary to satisfy the Commission's cost benefit obligations under
Section 15(a) of the CEA. Such analysis is warranted particularly for
swap markets that traditionally have not been regulated pervasively by
the Commission, such as the energy swap markets.
The current approach taken by the Commission to the regulation of
swap markets does not appear to have the benefit of such careful market
analysis. For example, as Chairman Gensler has stated repeatedly, over
$277 trillion in notional amount of domestic swaps are held by 25 bank
holding companies.\3\ Said another way, those 25 bank holding companies
are party to 91-99% of domestic swaps. Despite these compelling
statistics, the proposed definition of ``swap dealer'' appears to be
based on the premise that the universe of swap dealers extends far
beyond this group of financial institutions.\4\ Drafting the definition
of ``swap dealer'' in a manner that captures entities far beyond these
25 bank holding companies will have serious implications for swap
markets. As noted above, in crafting rules, the Commission must take
into account the costs of regulation. In this instance, the Commission
must weigh (a) the costs of extending the comprehensive regulation
imposed on swap dealers to entities beyond the 25 bank holding
companies against (b) the potential benefits of this additional
regulation. If the Commission extends the definition of ``swap dealer''
beyond such bank holding companies, it will impose substantial
additional costs on consumers and the overall swap markets, while
providing little or no benefit to the economy. Further, extending the
designation of swap dealers beyond these core bank holding companies
will not further the underlying intent of the Dodd-Frank Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, Public Hearing to Review Implementation of Title VII of
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, 112th
Cong. (Feb. 10, 2011) (statement of Hon. Gary Gensler, Chairman, CFTC).
Chairman Gensler stated that, based on OCC estimates, the largest 25
bank holding companies held $277 trillion in notional amount of swaps
and that the domestic swap market was approximately seven times larger
than the $40 trillion futures market. Based on those figures, the 25
largest bank holding companies would hold 99% of the domestic swap
market. See also, Chairman Gensler's Budget Transmission Letter (Feb.
14, 2011). Chairman Gensler stated that, based on OCC estimates, the
largest 25 bank holding companies held $277 trillion in notional amount
of swaps and that some estimates placed the size of the U.S. swap
market at ``as big as $300 trillion.'' Based on those figures, the 25
largest bank holding companies would hold 91% of the domestic swap
market.
\4\ See, Gary Gensler, Chairman, CFTC, Remarks Before ISDA Regional
Conference (Sept. 16, 2010). Chairman Gensler stated ``initial
estimates are that there could be in excess of 200 entities that will
seek to register as swap dealers.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. The Commission Should Continue Its Principles-Based Approach
1. The Dodd-Frank Act Generally Allows the Commission To Adopt
Principles-Based Regulations
The Commission has an established history of effective oversight
through a principles-based approach to regulation. The Working Group
believes that the Commission should remain squarely within this
tradition. This tradition results in clear statements of the goals and
requirements of regulation and is based upon the market participants'
deep experience and knowledge of the swap markets to create efficient
compliance solutions. It also reduces the burden on the Commission to
craft and monitor compliance with granular criteria.
While the Dodd-Frank Act is prescriptive in many of the
requirements that it imposes,\5\ many of the rules proposed by the
Commission have been prescriptive when the Dodd-Frank Act allows the
Commission ample latitude to craft rules consistent with a principles-
based approach. For example, Section 731 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires
the Commission to set basic duties of, and business conduct standards
for, swap dealers and major swap participants, including disclosure of
material risks associated with swaps and having processes in place to
ensure compliance with position limits. However, the rules proposed by
the Commission to implement such duties and business conduct standards
go well beyond setting a general compliance, risk management, and
disclosure framework for swap dealers and major swap participants. The
Proposed Rule on Duties of Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants
would codify a set of detailed aspirational ``best practices,''
arguably appropriate only as guidance for financial entities, as legal
requirements for all swap dealers and major swap participants. The
Proposed Rule on Business Conduct Standards for Swap Dealer and Major
Swap Participants with Counterparties would impose a suitability
standard on swap dealers and major swap participants and also seeks to
codify a set of detailed aspirational ``best practices'' intended as
guidance for financial entities as legal requirements for all swap
dealers and major swap participants.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, for example, the requirement in Section 731 of the Dodd-
Frank Act for swap dealers and major swap participants to provide daily
marks to counterparties on uncleared swaps.
\6\ See Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Business Conduct Standards
for Swap Dealer and Major Swap Participants with Counterparties 75 Fed
Reg. 81519 (Dec. 28, 2010), notes 47, 50, 52. The ``best practices''
upon which the Commission relies on in certain circumstances are the
work of the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group, which was
comprised almost entirely of representatives from the largest banks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In these two rulemakings, among others, the Commission has taken an
unnecessary prescriptive approach. This approach will not result in
market participants taking the proper approach to compliance, i.e.,
developing an organic ``culture of compliance'' within the company to
constantly improve compliance as markets evolve and react to
conditions. A prescriptive approach limits the judgment of entities and
their personnel to essentially binary decisions, and, thus, leads to
robotic compliance practices that seek only to assure compliance with
the letter of the Commission's regulations and not the intent. Under
such prescriptive approach, market participants might know what they
can and cannot do but will not fully understand the policy behind the
rules.
2. Overly Prescriptive Rules Will Limit Participation in Swap Markets
Adopting prescriptive rules for all market participants based on
aspirational ``best practices'' for financial entities will limit
competition in swap markets. Markets function best when there is a
large and diverse group of participants. This is particularly true in
the energy swap markets, where many large commercial energy firms are
active traders. This activity brings liquidity to the markets, and it
also helps disperse counterparty credit risk. As drafted, many of the
proposed rules might not be workable for non-financial swap market
participants and, even if they prove workable, they would likely impose
substantial costs on such market participants.
A prescriptive approach to rulemaking might lead to a perverse
result of promoting the further concentration of market activity and
risk in certain swap markets to institutions that are ``too big to
fail.'' The consequence of being a swap dealer or a major swap
participant for a non-financial entity, such as a commercial energy
firm, is that it will be regulated as a financial entity. Accordingly,
depending on the scope and compliance burden imposed under the final
regulations, it is possible that non-financial entities will decrease
or discontinue their participation in swap markets.
Only entities that can structure their businesses to meet the
prescriptive requirements included in many of the Commission's proposed
rules will have the ability to be central players in markets. The
burdens of regulatory compliance as a swap dealer or major swap
participant effectively will become a substantial barrier to entry to
those non-financial entities looking to become active, sophisticated
traders in swap markets. Non-financial entities that are currently
active market participants will have to reevaluate their activity in
the swap markets. Some may continue as major market participants.
Others may not. In such cases, the relative role of financial firms in
the operation of the swaps market will increase and, as other entities
leave the market, liquidity will likely decrease and volatility will
increase.
This concern is especially relevant in swap markets that currently
rely on non-dealer market participants for a substantial amount of
transaction volume. In energy swap markets, many parties trade directly
without the involvement of a swap dealer or other intermediary. An
overly broad definition of ``swap dealer'' or rules that force all
energy swaps to be done through swap dealers or other intermediaries
likely will harm an otherwise mature and efficient market. Swaps
between commercial energy firms where neither party plays the role of a
dealer bring cost savings to the market and energy consumers, valuable
liquidity to the market and help disperse credit risk among a wide
number of market participants that are generally outside the core of
the U.S. financial system. Without certainty that they will not be
regulated like financial entities, commercial energy firms will be
reluctant to enter into swaps with each other. The end result will be a
market dominated by financial firms that are ``too big to fail,'' a
loss of liquidity, a possible increase in consumer energy prices and a
loss of market expertise.
C. Elective Rule Makings
As noted above, by requiring the Commission to issue numerous
rulemakings in a short period of time, the Dodd-Frank Act tasks the
Commission with a substantial undertaking. Given these mandatory
obligations, the Working Group advises the Commission to postpone the
consideration of any proposed rules not explicitly required by the
Dodd-Frank Act (``Elective Rulemakings'') until all of the required
rulemakings have been completed, and more importantly, until the
effects of the required rulemakings on swap markets are known.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Elective Rulemakings include, but are not limited to, proposed
rules on portfolio compression, portfolio reconciliation, the
suitability standard for non-swap dealer and non-major swap participant
counterparties and the provision of scenario analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delaying the consideration of the Elective Rulemakings would have
multiple advantages. First, delaying these rulemakings will allow the
Commission and market participants to dedicate their limited resources
to only those undertakings required by Congress. Second, by waiting
until the regulatory paradigm set forth by Title VII of the Dodd-Frank
Act is in place, the Commission can determine if the Elective
Rulemakings are in fact necessary. Third, if the Commission finds that
the Elective Rulemakings are necessary, the delay will enable the
Commission to focus on the Elective Rulemakings. Delay and subsequent
consideration will ensure that the Elective Rulemakings further the
intent of the Dodd-Frank Act, will work in swap markets, and will
accomplish the desired result without imposing undue burdens on the
Commission and swap market participants. In this light, the Working
Group respectfully requests that the Commission postpone all Elective
Rulemakings until the entire mandatory Dodd-Frank Act regulatory
paradigm is in place.
D. Working Group Recommendations
In light of the difficulties that the Commission faces in creating
rules that (1) accomplish the goals of the Dodd-Frank Act, (2) are
workable for the Commission and market participants and (3) accomplish
these two goals while limiting the negative impacts on swap markets,
the Working Group has the following three suggestions.
First, the Working Group suggests that the Commission limit the
scope of the definition of ``swap dealer'' in a manner that captures
only those 25 bank holding companies that hold over 90% of the notional
value of domestic swaps.\8\ Doing so will accomplish the intent of the
Dodd-Frank Act in that it will capture the overwhelming majority of the
U.S. swap market and will do so in a manner that limits the costs to
market participants. Adopting such a definition will allow the
Commission to focus its limited resources on a small number of market
participants and will allow traders who are not thought of by the
market as swap dealers to remain active market participants. Setting a
definition of swap dealer that captures the remaining minimal
percentage of the market will impose substantial marginal costs on the
Commission and on the many market participants that will be captured.
Therefore, to do so, the Commission should determine that there is a
compelling benefit to the market that outweighs the additional costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The Working Group is not suggesting that the definition of
``swap dealer'' be constructed to capture these 25 bank holding
companies because they are large bank holding companies. The definition
should focus on the role played in the market by potential ``swap
dealers'' and should be calibrated to capture these 25 bank holding
companies because they are party to a vast majority of domestic swaps.
The Commission, of course, has the authority to expand the definition
if it is necessary with regards to the post-Dodd-Frank Act market
structure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, where possible, the Commission should retain its
traditional principles-based approach to regulation. The Dodd-Frank Act
is prescriptive in some specific areas, but it generally does not limit
the Commission's ability to write rules that provide discretion to
market participants to design and implement compliance measures. Such
adaptability is necessary to allow a diverse community of active
traders to remain in swap markets so that such markets remain liquid
and well functioning. Permissive rules will allow market participants
to put in place compliance and risk management infrastructure that is
most efficient for their individual circumstances. Issuing permissive
rules will also allow the Commission to easily adapt such rules to
changing market conditions. Said differently, prescriptive rules will
likely be too rigid to adapt to changing market conditions, and it is
probable that the Commission will have to reissue such rules to account
for such changes. Finally, if the Commission issues permissive rules,
it will allow market participants to approach compliance from a
holistic perspective. Market participants will be able to construct
compliance and risk management programs that encourage self-governing
and self-reporting and create a culture of compliance rather than the
``check-the-box'' approach that is the logical outgrowth of
prescriptive rules.
If the Commission elects to retain its traditional principles-based
approach, the Working Group respectfully submits that the Commission
develop a formal policy statement with respect to compliance under the
rules it proposes under the Dodd-Frank Act. The statement should
identify the policy objectives for the overall regulatory effort, the
proper design of regulations to support those policy objectives and the
factors by which the Commission will determine if its proposed
regulations adhere to Congress' intent. This statement would be the
``blueprint'' for effective regulation of swap dealers and major swap
participants. Adopting a policy statement will send a clear message to
market participants of the Commission's policy goals and expectations,
which will facilitate regulatory certainty as well as uniform and
orderly enforcement of the existing and new rules and regulations
adopted by the Commission.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ There is a good amount of academic writing supporting the
Working Group's suggestion for an integrated, principles-based
regulatory paradigm. See, John S. Moot: Compliance Programs, Penalty
Mitigation and the FERC, 29 Energy Law Journal 547 (2008); Donald C.
Langevoort, Monitoring: The Behavioral Economics of Corporate
Compliance with Law, 2002 Colum. Bus. L. Rev. 71 (2002); Kimberly D.
Krawiec, Corporate Decisionmaking: Organizational Misconduct: Beyond
the Principal-Agent Model, 32 Fla. St. L. Rev. 571 (2005); and Jennifer
Arlen and Reinier Kraakman, Controlling Corporate Misconduct: An
Analysis of Corporate Liability Regimes, 72 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 687 (1997).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third, the Working Group respectfully suggests that the Commission
prioritize drafting sound and functional regulations over promulgating
rules within a certain time period. Rulemaking should be a deliberate,
methodical and iterative process. If the Commission, in its attempt to
satisfy Congressionally mandated deadlines, issues rules that leave
significant legal uncertainty, are unworkable or impose substantial
unnecessary costs on swap markets, then it is likely that the
Commission will have to revisit a number of rulemakings. If this is the
case, not only would the Commission have to expend additional resources
to do so, but swap markets will be confronted with an extended period
of legal uncertainty.
Thankfully, Congress provided the Commission with two tools with
which it can take the time necessary to draft regulations that (1)
accomplish the goals of the Dodd-Frank Act, (2) are enforceable by the
Commission and (3) satisfy these latter two goals while causing the
least disruption in and imposing the lowest possible costs on swap
markets, without departing significantly from the timing requirements
set forth in Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act.
Section 754 of the Dodd-Frank Act provides ``the provisions of this
subtitle shall take effect on the later of 360 days after the date of
the enactment of this subtitle or, to the extent a provision of this
subtitle requires a rulemaking, not less than 60 days after the
publication of the final rule or regulation implementing such
provisions of this subtitle.'' Section 754 would allow the Commission
to delay the effective date of any final rule promulgated under Title
VII of the Dodd-Frank Act until the Commission determines the market is
ready to comply. In addition, Section 723 of the Dodd-Frank Act grants
the Commission the authority to allow market participants to remain
subject to current Section 2(h) of the CEA for up to a year after the
Dodd-Frank Act becomes effective.\10\ The Working Group respectfully
submits that by using the authority granted to it under Sections 754 or
723 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Commission can take the time necessary
to construct sound rules without violating Congress' required time
frame.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ If the Commission elects to use the 2(h) extension in Section
723 to help phase in Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act's compliance
requirements, it is possible that the implementation dates for certain
rules will be extended beyond the maximum one year 2(h) extension
period. In such an event, the Working Group suggests that the
Commission use its existing statutory authority to address any gaps in
the regulatory treatment of swaps and swap market participants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II. Conclusion
The Working Group supports tailored regulation that brings
transparency and stability to the swap markets in the United States. We
appreciate the balance the Commission must strike between effective
regulation and not hindering the uncleared energy-based swap markets.
The Working Group offers its advice and experience to assist the
Commission in implementing the Act. Please let us know if you have any
questions or would like additional information.
Respectfully submitted,

David T. McIndoe;
R. Michael Sweeney, Jr.;
Mark W. Menezes;
Alexander S. Holtan;
Counsel for the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms.
______

March 23, 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Sequencing of Release of Final Rules under the Dodd-Frank Act

Dear Secretary Stawick:

On behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms (the
``Working Group''), Hunton & Williams LLP respectfully submits this
letter regarding the order in which the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (the ``Commission'') might issue final rules under the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the ``Dodd-Frank
Act''). The Working Group appreciates the opportunity to share its
views with the Commission.
The Working Group is a diverse group of commercial firms in the
energy industry whose primary business activity is the physical
delivery of one or more energy commodities to others, including
industrial, commercial and residential consumers. Members of the
Working Group are energy producers, marketers and utilities. The
Working Group considers and responds to requests for public comment
regarding regulatory and legislative developments with respect to the
trading of energy commodities, including derivatives and other
contracts that reference energy commodities.
In developing the suggestions contained herein, the Working Group
has focused on what it believes are the best interests of the swap
markets, the Commission, other regulators, market participants, and the
U.S. economy. The suggestions are based on the Working Group's
experience in the energy markets, but can be applied to all swap
markets. The ideas expressed herein are not intended to promote the
interests of any one group. We firmly believe that the well-being of
any market participant benefits the swap markets as a whole.
I. General Comments
The Working Group fully supports the Commission's focus on the
sequencing of its rules under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act and the
solicitation of input from market participants. A considered approach
to the release of the final rules will greatly assist the transition of
many market participants to the new regulatory paradigm, particularly
for participants in swap markets such as the energy swaps market that
the Commission largely has not regulated previously. If the Commission
releases final rules, sets effective dates and sets implementation
dates in a logical manner, market participants will have a meaningful
opportunity to review such rules, evaluate their compliance obligations
under such rules, and design and implement measures to meet such
obligations in a reasonably efficient manner.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The use of different effective dates (the date on which a rule
becomes effective) and implementation dates (the date on which market
participants must comply with the relevant rule) will allow the
Commission to gradually phase-in the regulatory requirements imposed by
Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act while providing the market with
regulatory certainty as to regulatory obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group urges the Commission to not sacrifice sound
reasoning for expediency and to take the time necessary to implement
Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act properly.\2\ The Working Group
recommends the Commission not release rules under title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act before such rules, taken in related subject matter
groups, are fully developed. The market place is far better served if
the Commission considers all of the final rules in a comprehensive and
organized fashion. Doing so promotes consistency in terms and the
overall design across the rules. Thus far, the rulemaking process has
occurred piecemeal and not in a logical order, creating significant
uncertainty in swap markets. A significant challenge in commenting on
the rules proposed thus far is the impossibility for any market
participant to understand how all of the rules fit together.\3\ It will
be substantially burdensome and costly if market participants must
design and implement regulatory compliance and risk management programs
without knowing all of the requirements of the Commission's regulations
issued under the Dodd-Frank Act. The burden and cost are amplified as
market participants face compliance deadlines that are too close in
time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ A similar request was made by Senator Stabenow, Chairman of the
Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry. Senator
Stabenow stated ``We must consider how new rules will fit together in a
way that makes sense for the markets; whether that is phasing-in
implementation or carefully sequencing the rules, . . . We must make
sure the market infrastructure is in place, the technology is ready,
and that market participants are able to meet the requirements of this
law. The new accountability and transparency we have created is clearly
in the public interest and the most important thing is to get it right,
not do it quickly.'' Implementation of Title VII of the Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition and Forestry, 112th Cong. (Mar. 3, 2011) (statement of
Senator Stabenow).
\3\ The Working Group also is concerned that the proposed rules
released to date mandate requirements that do not work well together.
For example, in the proposed rule on Swap Trading Relationship
Documentation Requirements for Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants
(76 Fed. Reg. 6715 (Feb. 8, 2011)), all documentation must be completed
before or contemporaneous with trade execution, including the
confirmation. (Proposed CFTC Rule  23.504). However, in the proposed
rule on Confirmation, Portfolio Reconciliation and Portfolio
Compression Requirements for Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants
(75 Fed. Reg. 81519 (Dec. 28, 2010)), confirmations are done after
trade execution. (Proposed CFTC Rule  23.501).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A comprehensive review of the Commission's proposed rules shows
that additional rulemakings are likely needed to further define key
requirements and terms and how they will impact market participants.\4\
In certain cases it might be appropriate for the Commission to reissue
substantially revised versions of a proposed rule as comments received
might demonstrate the need for significant changes from the initial
proposed rule. Also, under established principles of administrative
law, final rules are susceptible to challenge if (a) they did not
provide parties with sufficient notice that the proposed rule might
apply to them, thereby providing that person with a meaningful
opportunity to comment or otherwise participate in the rulemaking
process, or (b) do not constitute a logical outgrowth of the proposed
rule. The Working Group encourages the Commission to facilitate
continued public comment as it develops regulations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ For example, the term ``processed electronically'' as used in
proposed CFTC Rule 23.501 (swap confirmation) and the term ``notional
amount'' as used in the proposed definition of ``major swap
participant'' in proposed CFTC Rule 1.3(qqq) also must be further
defined.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the close of the comment period of the last rule to be proposed
under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Commission should allow
market participants a period of time to consider all of the rules
proposed under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act in the aggregate.\5\
Following the review period, the Commission should provide a period in
which market participants can comment on all of the rules. These
comments would not only address the merits and impacts of the rules on
a holistic basis, but also the ultimate cost of implementation and the
time it will take to comply with all requirements. The comments will no
doubt be substantiality more informed and complete as market
participants will have the benefit of placing each rule within the
overall context of the Commission's new regulatory regime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ We note that the Commission has informally continued to accept
comments even though stated deadlines have passed. The Working Group
proposes an official ``open comment period.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II. Market Participants Need Ample Time To Comply With Proposed Rules
Market participants have not had sufficient time to prepare to
comply with rules to be issued by the Commission under Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act. Title VII is a fundamental redesign of the derivative
markets, particularly for the energy swap market. Title VII by itself
did not provide an adequate basis for market participants to foresee
all the implications of the market redesign. Uncertainty continues as
to certain key definitions, such as the definition of ``swap'' and the
definition of ``swap dealer.'' Under the many proposed rules, entities
face a myriad of potential requirements, many of which are interrelated
and potentially redundant. While it might be reasonable to expect an
entity to be in a position to quickly comply with one rule, it is not
reasonable to expect an entity to be in immediate or almost immediate
compliance with a substantial number of new rules at the same time or
in rapid succession.
III. Two Important Observations About the Rules and the Marketplace
When considering the order in which the Commission might issue
rules and the dates by which such rules become effective, the
Commission should consider two concepts.
First, the Commission's regulations can be structured as building
blocks, one set of rules providing the necessary foundation for
subsequent rules. Said a bit differently, the Commission should issue
final rules in a manner that allows an entity to allocate resources,
hire personnel and design and test systems to meet the requirements of
one rule that then prepares such entity to address the requirements of
a subsequent rule. For example, entities should be able to first hire a
chief compliance officer who should have a reasonable period of time in
which to write, test and implement policies and procedures that, in
turn, allow that entity to provide compliant disclosure to its
counterparties. In addition, many of the requirements imposed by the
Dodd-Frank Act depend on the existence of other new regulatory
entities. For example, the reporting requirements largely depend on
swap data repositories being fully operational.
Second, not all entities that come within the definitions of ``swap
dealer'' and ``major swap participants'' are the same or even similar.
Some will have large swap portfolios and a substantial market share,
presenting unique risks to the U.S. financial system. As these entities
likely have been subject to prudential regulation by a financial
regulator, their compliance and risk management infrastructure might be
easily modified to meet the new requirements imposed by the Commission.
Thus, compliance with the Commission's rules may be a minor incremental
cost.\6\ In contrast, many entities that might come within the
definitions of ``swap dealer'' and ``major swap participant,''
particularly those never subject to prudential regulation by a
financial regulator, will likely have to make substantial or wholesale
changes to their corporate structure and their compliance and risk
management infrastructure. For these entities, the requirements of the
Dodd-Frank Act and the Commission's rules represent a fundamental
redesign of their operations and, in some cases, their business. In
particular, many commercial energy firms still do not know if they are,
and do not anticipate being, swap dealers. However, if they are deemed
as such, this will be the first time many of them will be subject to
prudential regulation and coming into compliance will be a costly, time
consuming process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ For example, if the Commission adopts capital and margin
requirements modeled after those imposed on banks, a vast majority of
such institutions are banks and will likely have systems in place to
comply with such capital and margin requirements with minimal
modifications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recognizing that all entities potentially designated as swap
dealers are not similar: the Commission should concentrate its
attention and resources to overseeing compliance by market participants
previously subject to prudential regulation by a financial regulator,
and that are commonly known today as swap dealers. The Commission
should allow other entities that come within the definitions of ``swap
dealer'' and ``major swap participant'' a longer period to meet their
compliance obligations.
There is no standard test for determining which market participants
are traditionally recognized as swap dealers. However, the Commission
might focus on those bank holding companies that hold a vast majority
of the market share in the swap markets. In his testimony before the
House Committee on Agriculture, Chairman Gensler noted that 25 bank
holding companies in the United States are a party to $277 trillion
notional in swaps, which constitutes over 90% of domestic swaps.\7\ In
addition, these bank holding companies are already subject to some
degree of prudential regulation by a financial regulator. If the
Commission concentrates on those 25 bank holding companies first, the
Commission will capture a vast majority of U.S.-based swap activity as
an initial matter and will likely be imposing regulation on those
entities most prepared to comply in short order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Public Hearing to Review Implementation of Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, House
Committee on Agriculture, 112th Cong. (Feb. 10, 2011) (statement of
Hon. Gary Gensler, Chairman, CFTC).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the Dodd-Frank Act and the Commission's regulations place
most compliance obligations on swap dealers and major swap
participants, many requirements will fall on entities that are not swap
dealers or major swap participants. The Working Group recommends the
Commission, to the greatest extent possible, impose compliance
obligations on these market participants last, and only if necessary.
Said differently, a swap dealer should come into compliance ahead of
the end-users with which it trades swaps.
Even after the definitions of ``swap dealer'' and ``major swap
participant'' are finalized, some entities still might not have a clear
understanding if they are covered by the definitions and will need to
seek guidance from the Commission as to their status or attributes of
about their businesses. Such a consultation process should be developed
in light of the vague and overly broad definitions that have been
proposed.
IV. Recommended Implementation Process
As alluded to above, each of the Commission's rules have at least
three dates that the Commission should coordinate in the sequencing of
the final rules it issues under the Dodd-Frank Act: (a) the date the
rule is issued; (b) the date the rule is effective and (c) the
implementation date(s) on which the compliance obligations must be
satisfied. The distinction between these dates is important. The
Commission should issue final rules with sufficient notice and, by
careful structuring of effective dates and compliance deadlines,
provide ample time for entities to come into compliance. As an
alternative, the Commission could make the implementation date of one
or more rules contingent on the implementation date of other rules that
should logically come first in the series of rulemakings.
The Working Group recommends that the Commission issue final rules
and set their effective and related compliance dates as set forth in
Exhibit A. Exhibit A is comprehensive, but not exhaustive, list of all
of the rules the Commission has proposed under the Dodd-Frank Act. In
constructing Exhibit A, the Working Group first determined the major
goals of the Dodd-Frank Act, such as putting in place a mandatory
clearing requirement and reporting regime. The Working Group then
determined which rules must be in place to reach that goal and put such
rules in groups for sequencing purposes. The Working Group next
determined the order in which such rule groups should be implemented in
order to allow the market to adapt and continue to function. Finally,
the Working Group combined the implementation plans for each individual
goal into a macro-implementation plan, or critical path for
implementation, which is reflected in Exhibit A.
The Working Group developed its recommendations based on the
observation above that the rules work together in an iterative,
building block manner. Accordingly, the Commission should first release
the definitional rules, including the definition of swap, (with ample
periods to facilitate entities engaging with the Commission to resolve
uncertainties and otherwise reorganize or restructure their
businesses). The definitional rules will allow parties to make critical
determinations about their regulatory status and the derivatives
transactions into which they enter. In addition, the Commission should
issue final rules for the institutions, such as swap data repositories
and derivatives clearing organizations, that will lay the ground work
for the new regulatory regime as soon as practicable. Three months
after issuing the final definitions, the Commission should issue the
registration rules. This will allow the Commission to identify those
entities that warrant immediate and longer term regulatory oversight.
About the same time or shortly thereafter, the Commission should
release rules for governance and internal business conduct standards.
Swap dealers and major swap participants should have a period of time
to organize and develop their systems and personnel to comply with
regulations that do not entail counterparty interface. Only after swap
dealers and major swap participants have their corporate structure,
systems, policies and procedures in place should the Commission's rules
governing transactions with counterparties become effective. Finally,
rules that may place compliance obligations on entities that are not
swap dealers or major swap participants should become effective.
It is our expectation that, once all of the regulatory requirements
are known, entities will immediately begin working to implement
measures in an attempt to comply with all rules applicable to them.
However, it would be unreasonable to expect entities to implement all
of these measures at the same time. Time is needed to allow thoughtful
design and preparation. In addition, a phased-in approach will allow
entities to incur costs over time.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The Working Group of Commercial of Energy Firms, in its
comments to the Commission's Proposed Rules on Real-Time Public
Reporting of Swap Transaction Data, Swap Data Recordkeeping and
Reporting Requirements, and Reporting, Recordkeeping, and Daily Trading
Records Requirements for Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants, all
filed with the Commission on February 7, 2011, suggested a phase-in
approach for the multiple reporting and record keeping requirements
that might serve as a model for an overall phase-in approach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, where a proposed rule requires substantial changes to
existing information technology infrastructure or the creation of new
information technology infrastructure, the Working Group requests that
the Commission adopt a ``beta testing'' period coupled with a good
faith safe harbor. During the beta testing period, market participants
should be required to attempt to comply with the rule in question.
However, if a market participant attempts to comply with such rule and
fails because the relevant technology fails, the market participant
should not face any sanction.
V. Chairman Gensler's Suggested Approach to Implementation
In his speech before the Futures Industry Association, Chairman
Gensler set forth a three group approach to the implementation of the
final rules implementing Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act.\9\ The
Working Group sees value in the Chairman's suggested approach. However,
there are three issues about which the Working Group disagrees with the
Chairman's plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ CFTC Chairman Gary Gensler, Implementing the Dodd-Frank Act,
Remarks before the Futures Industry Association's Annual International
Futures Industry Conference, Boca Raton, Florida (Mar. 16, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, the definition of ``swap'' should be issued at the beginning
of the implementation process along with all other definitions. For
many market participants, the scope of the definition of ``swap'' will
be a substantial factor in the determination of whether they are a swap
dealer or major swap participant. For example, without knowing which
derivatives will be included in the definition of ``swap,'' market
participants will be unable to perform the tests necessary to determine
whether they are a major swap participant. Waiting to the end of the
implementation process to issue the final definition of ``swap'' will
introduce significant uncertainty into the swap markets.
Second, the rules that address the institutions that will serve as
the foundation of the post Dodd-Frank Act market infrastructure should
be introduced as soon as practicable. Without those rules in place,
market participants might be required to put in place expensive, though
temporary, changes to systems in order to comply with the Dodd-Frank
Act requirements.\10\ The Chairman's proposed implementation plan would
place many of these rules in the middle group. The Working Group
suggests that these rules be addressed as a threshold matter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ For example, if there are no SDRs in place, market
participants could be required to put in place technology to report
swaps directly to the Commission. Once SDRs come online, market
participants will be required to put in place technology to report to
SDRs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third, the Chairman's proposal anticipates being able to issue all
final rules within the next six months. The Working Group believes that
Commission staff will need a substantial period of time to consider
market participants comments on many rules and will need additional
time to make necessary changes to such rules. The Chairman's suggested
timing would severely limit Commission staff's ability to draft well
reasoned and sound final rules.
VI. Statutory Support for Extended Compliance Periods
Congress gave the Commission discretion in designing and
implementing rules under the Dodd-Frank Act. In particular, Section 723
of the Act provided that the Commission, upon petition by market
participants, could continue the availability of the exclusion of
Section 2(h) of the CEA with respect to certain commodity transactions
for up to one year after the general effectiveness of Title VII of the
Dodd-Frank Act. Several entities applied to the Commission for the
continued application of Section 2(h). The Commission might provide
such continuation of Section 2(h) to facilitate an orderly transition
to a new regulatory regime under the Dodd-Frank Act.\11\ In addition,
Section 754 of the Act allows the Commission to set effective dates for
rules required under Title VII to be set at no earlier than sixty days
after the publication of such rules. The authority granted to the
Commission under Sections 723 and 754 of the Act should allow the
Commission to provide the time necessary for market participants to
come into compliance with the requirements of the new regulatory
regime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ If the Commission elects to use the 2(h) extension in Section
723 to help phase in Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act's compliance
requirements, it is possible that the implementation dates for certain
rules will be extended beyond the maximum one year 2(h) extension
period. In such an event, the Working Group suggests that the
Commission use its existing statutory authority to address any gaps in
the regulatory treatment of swaps and swap market participants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VII. Conclusion
The Working Group supports regulation that brings transparency and
stability to the swap markets in the United States. The Working Group
appreciates the balance the Commission must strike between effective
regulation and not hindering the swap markets. Please let me know if
you have any questions or would like additional information, including
a working version of Exhibit A. In addition, members of the Working
Group can be made available to meet with Commissioners or Commission
staff to further discuss how the recommendations contained herein were
reached.
Respectfully submitted,

David T. McIndoe;
Mark W. Menezes;
R. Michael Sweeney, Jr.;
Alexander S. Holtan;
Counsel for the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms.

exhibit a
Sequencing of Issuance of Final Rules Under the Dodd-Frank Act
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------This chart shows the order in which the Working Group suggests the Commission issue final rules.The suggested schedule for the issuance of final rules does not include a hard start date. The Working Group recommends that the Commission start
releasing the final rules in the sequence set forth below when each group of rules is ready to be considered.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Month             0                1                2                3                4                5                6                7
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Definitions       Propose                           Comment Period                    Issue Final
Definition of                     Closes for All                    Rules
Swap and                          Definitions
Reopen Comment
Period on
Other
Definitions
Duties                                                                                                 Reopen Comment   Comment Period   Issue Final
Period           Closes           Rules
Capital and       Propose Rules                     Comment Period                    Issue Final
Margin                                              Closes                            Rules
Institutions                                        Issue Final
Rules Before
the End of
This Period
Mandatory                                           Issue Final
Clearing                                            Rules Before
the End of
This Period
Position Limits                                     Reissue          Comment Period                    Issue Final
Proposed Rule    Closes                            Rules
Reporting                                           First TAC        Second TAC       Third TAC        Reopen Comment   Comment Period   Issue Final
Meeting *        Meeting *        Meeting *        Period           Closes           Rules
Market Practices                                                                      Issue Final
Rules
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Definitions--Given that the definition of ``swap'' has yet to be proposed and the comment period is closed on all other definitions, the Working Group
requests that the Commission reopen the comment period for the other definitions upon proposing a definition of ``swap,'' with such comment period for
all such proposed rules closing in 60 days.Duties--After all the final definitions are issued, market participants will have a clearer picture as to which entities the definitions cover. Market
participants, armed with knowledge of the scope of the definitions, should be given an opportunity to comment on the proposed rules that might impose
duties on them. Therefore, the Commission should reopen the comment period on those rules that impose duties on swap dealers and major swap
participants after the final definitions have been published.Capital and Margin--Capital and margin requirements should be made final (though not effective) on about the same day the definitions are finalized.Institutions--The Working Group urges the Commission to issue final rules for market institutions as soon as practicable. The existence of entities such
as SDRs and SEFs is integral to the new regulatory framework for swap markets. These institutions must be in place before market participants can begin
to comply with requirements such as mandatory clearing and reporting.Mandatory Clearing--As with market institutions, mandatory clearing rules should be finalized as soon as possible. The Commission should determine which
swaps will be subject to the mandatory clearing requirements soon as possible. To make this process efficient, the Working Group recommends the
Commission, as an initial matter, address only those swaps currently being cleared.Position Limits--The Working Group, as discussed in its forthcoming comments on the proposed rule on position limits, anticipates that certain parts of
the proposed position limits rules will have to be amended to such a degree that the proposed rule will have to be reissued. Once reissued, market
participants should have at least an additional 30 days during which to comment on that proposed rule.Reporting--Reporting will be a complex logistical undertaking. As a threshold matter, to even begin this process, an SDR must be registered for the
relevant class of swaps. The Working Group recommends the Commission hold multiple Technology Advisory Committee meetings to walk through
implementation issues with regard to the proposed reporting rules. After those meetings, market participants should be given the chance to file
additional comments on such proposed rules.Market Practices--Market practice rules should be issued by July 21, 2011, as required by Section 753 of the Act.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Assuming there is an SDR.

Sequencing of Implementation Dates for Rules Under the Dodd-Frank Act Box Opening = Final Rule Released (or operation begun).Box Closing = Implementation DateThe Implementation Date represents the time at which market participants must be in compliance with the relevant rule. For example, on the
Implementation Date for the proposed rules on Registration and Core Principles for SDRs, any potential SDRs would have to be operational. The suggested
implementation process does not include a hard start date. The Working Group recommends that the Commission start the suggested process when the final
rules are ready to be issued in the sequenced manner suggested by the Working Group.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Sequencing of Implementation Dates for Rules Under the Dodd-Frank Act--Continued 1 In its comments to the Commission's proposed rule on the registration of swap dealers and major swap participants, the Working Group recommended that
the Commission allow market participants a one year period in which they could determine if they would have to register as a swap dealer or major swap
participant. Following the registration period, the Working Group suggests a phased in approach to the certification of compliance for rules applicable
to swap dealers and major swap participants.2 The Working Group recommends that the Commission require market participants first hire a CCO, then allow the CCO to put in place internal business
conduct standards and then put in place business conduct standards for interaction with counterparties.3 The Working Group recommends that the Commission delay issuing any rules regarding portfolio compression and reconciliation until after the compliance
deadline for all rules required under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act have been issued. If the Commission chooses to issue such rules, the Working
Group estimates that the compliance deadline for such rules would be up to 12 months after what is currently depicted given the likely intensive IT
modifications that will be required to comply.4 Capital Requirements may be one of the most costly regulatory requirements under Title VII. Market participants should be afforded the opportunity to
review these rules prior to making elections as to whether to continue trading that results in such entity being designated a swap dealer or major swap
participant. Such entities should also be afforded ample time to take corporate actions necessary to meet the capital requirements.5 The implementation of margin requirements will require documentation standards to be in place.6 The Working Group suggests that DCOs be operational within ten months of the effective date of the Dodd-Frank Act. Such a time frame will allow the
Commission to complete action to effect the mandatory clearing requirement as soon as practicable.7 The Working Group realizes that this proposed rule might require existing DCOs to alter their current ownership structure, so the implementation time
period is set at 26 months. However, rules that are not affected by the ownership structure of the DCO should be implemented earlier.8 The Working Group realizes that the Commission has not issued a proposed rule on this topic. To allow market participants to understand the
implications of central clearing of swaps, segregation requirements for DCOs must be in place prior to the mandatory clearing requirement.9 SDRs would have to be operational on this date to allow market participants to begin to comply with reporting requirements in a timely fashion.10 This short implementation period assumes that (a) the Commission only initially reviews swaps that are currently cleared to determine if they should
be subject to the mandatory clearing requirement and (b) the DCOs clearing these swaps will quickly be able to comply with the requirements imposed on
DCOs by the Dodd-Frank Act. Those swaps should be deemed submitted to the Commission on the effective date of Dodd-Frank and the Commission should
review them within the statutorily required 90 day period. The proposed timeline would allow the Commission to start the implementation process as late
as June of 2012 and still meet the G20 goal of clearing all standardized derivatives by the end of 2012.11 The Working Group is still reviewing the Commission's Proposed Rule on Position Limits and will provide comment on the implementation timing in
comments on that proposed rule.12 All traditional swap dealer reporting parties previously subject to prudential regulation by a financial regulator (``Traditional Swap Dealers'').13 All other reporting parties.14 All swaps executed on facility or cleared through a DCO.15 All standardized swap executed off-facility and not centrally cleared entered into by Traditional Swap Dealers.16 All other standardized swap executed off-facility and not centrally cleared and all non-standardized swaps executed off-facility and not centrally
cleared entered into by Traditional Swap Dealers.17 All other non-standardized swaps executed off-facility and not centrally cleared.

Rule Categories
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Capital and                 Mandatory   Position                 Market
Definitions     Duties       Margin    Institutions   Clearing     Limits     Reporting   Practices     Other
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Definition    NOPR on      Capital      NOPR on Core  NOPR on     Position    IFR on      ANOPR on    JNOPR on
of Swap       Swap         Requiremen   Principles    Process     Limits      Reporting   Disruptiv   Reporting
Trading      ts           and Other     for                     of Pre-     e Trading   by
Relationsh                Requirement   Review of               Enactment   Practices   Investmen
ip                        s for SEFs    Swaps for               Swaps                   t
Documentat                              Mandatory                                       Advisors
ion for                                 Clearing                                        to
SDs and                                                                                 Private
MSPs                                                                                    Funds and
Certain
Commodity
Pool
Operators
and
Commodity
Trading
Advisors
on Form
PF
NOPR on       JNOPR on     Margin       NOPR on       NOPR on                 IFR on      NOPR on     NOPR on
Further       Orderly      Requiremen   Governance    Requireme               Reporting   Prohibiti   Commodity
Definitions   Liquidatio   t            and           nts for                 of Post-    on of       Pool
of SD, MSP    n                         Additional    Processin               Enactment   Market      Operators
and ECPs      Terminatio                COI           g,                      Swaps       Manipulat   and
n                         Requirement   Clearing,                           ion         Commodity
Provisions                s for DCOs,   and                                             Trading
in Swap                   DCMs, and     Transfer                                        Advisors:
Trading                   SEFs          of                                              Amendment
Relationsh                              Customer                                        s to
ip                                      Positions                                       Complianc
Documentat                                                                              e
ion for                                                                                 Obligatio
SDs and                                                                                 ns
MSPs
NOPR on End-  NOPR on                   NOPR on Core                          NOPR on                 NOPR on
User          Designatio                Principles                            Real-Time               Conformin
Exception     n and                     and Risk                              Public                  g
to            Duties of                 Management                            Reporting               Amendment
Mandatory     Chief                     Requirement                           of Swap                 s to
Clearing      Compliance                s for DCOs                            Transacti               Regulatio
Officer                                                         on and                  ns
Pricing                 Applicabl
Data                    e to
Commodity
Pool
Operators
and
Commodity
Trading
Advisors
NOPR on       NOPR on                   NOPR on                               NOPR on                 NOPR on
Commodity     Conflict                  Reporting                             Swap Data               Removing
Options and   of                        and                                   Reporting               Reference
Agricultura   Interest                  Recordkeepi                           and                     s to
l Swaps       Policies                  ng                                    Recordkee               Credit
for SDs &                 Requirement                           ping                    Ratings
MSPs                      s for DCOs                            Requireme               from
nts                     Commissio
n
Regulatio
ns
NOPR on       NOPR on                   NOPR on                               NOPR on                 NOPR on
Definition    Internal                  Registratio                           Reporting               Business
of            Business                  n of                                  ,                       Affiliate
Agricultura   Conduct                   Intermediar                           Recordkee               Marketing
l Commodity   Standards                 ies                                   ping and                and
for SDs                                                         Daily                   Disposal
and MSPs                                                        Trading                 of
Records                 Consumer
for SDs &               Informati
MSPs                    on Rules
NOPR on                   NOPR on                               NOPR on                 NOPR on
Registrati                Requirement                           Position                Privacy
on of Swap                s for DCOs,                           Reports                 of
Dealers                   DCMs, and                             for                     Consumer
and Major                 SEFs                                  Physical                Financial
Swap                      Regarding                             Commodity               Informati
Participan                the                                   Swaps                   on
ts                        Mitigation
of
Conflicts
of Interest
NOPR on                   NOPR                                                          NOPR on
Protection                Regarding                                                     Conflict
of                        Investment                                                    of
Collateral                of Customer                                                   Interest
of                        Funds and                                                     Policies
Counterpar                Credit                                                        for FCMs
ties to                   Ratings
Uncleared
Swaps
NOPR on                   NOPR on
Whistleblo                Financial
wer                       Resources
Provisions                Requirement
s for DCOs
NOPR on                   NOPR on
Business                  Provisions
Conduct                   Common to
Standards                 Registered
with                      Entities
Counterpar                (Certificat
ties                      ion and
Approval
Procedures
for New
Products,
Rules and
Rule
Amendments
Submitted
to the CFTC
by
Registered
Entities)
NOPR on                   ANOPR on
Confirmati                Protection
on,                       of Cleared
Portfolio                 Swaps
Reconcilia                Customers
tion, and                 Before and
Portfolio                 After
Compressio                Commodity
n                         Broker
Requiremen                Bankruptcie
ts for                    s
Swap
Dealers
and Major
Swap
Participan
ts
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

______

March 28, 2011

David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Position Limits for Derivatives, RIN 3038-AD15 and 3038-AD16

Dear Secretary Stawick:
I. Introduction
On behalf of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms (the
``Working Group''), Hunton & Williams LLP hereby submits these comments
in response to the request for public comment set forth in the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission's (the ``CFTC'' or ``Commission'')
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Position Limits for Derivatives (the
``Proposed Rule''), published in the Federal Register on January 26,
2011,\1\ which establishes position limits for certain physical
commodity derivatives pursuant to newly amended Section 4a(a) of the
Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA''), as established by Section 737 the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (``Dodd-
Frank'' or the ``Act'').\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Position Limits for Derivatives, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,
76 Fed. Reg. 4752 (Jan. 26, 2011).
\2\ Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub.
L. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group is a diverse group of commercial firms in the
energy industry whose primary business activity is the physical
delivery of one or more energy commodities to others, including
industrial, commercial, and residential consumers. Members of the
Working Group are energy producers, marketers, and utilities. The
Working Group considers and responds to requests for public comment
regarding regulatory and legislative developments with respect to the
trading of energy commodities, including derivatives and other
contracts that reference energy commodities.
II. Executive Summary
The Working Group strongly supports the goals of the Act to enhance
transparency and reduce systemic risk in the swap markets. The Working
Group appreciates the opportunity to provide the comments set forth
herein and requests the Commission's consideration of such comments in
order to adopt, if at all, position limits that are effective and
workable for market participants.
As an initial matter, and as discussed in Part III.A, below, the
Working Group submits that, prior to establishing and imposing
speculative position limits in any specific market, the CEA requires
the Commission to analyze the relevant markets and find that such
position limits are indeed necessary. If implemented without sufficient
study, speculative position limits will disrupt today's highly
efficient energy commodity markets by (i) reducing liquidity, (ii)
impairing price discovery, and (iii) preventing market participants
from effectively and efficiently hedging their commercial risk
exposure.
Additionally, as set forth in Part III.A, below, the Commission's
proposal for Phase II single-month and all-months-combined (``AMC'')
position limits are entirely unnecessary, and accordingly, should be
rejected. The Working Group submits that such limits could have
significant adverse impacts on derivatives markets. As such, the
Working Group strongly urges the Commission to use the discretion
afforded to it pursuant to new CEA Section 4a(a) and decline the
adoption of single-month and AMC position limits in any final rule
issued in this proceeding at this time.
As discussed in Part III.B, below, the Working Group believes that
there are several flaws in the proposed definition of a bona fide
hedging transaction that could disrupt the efficient operation of
energy commodity markets. In failing to provide a vehicle for market
participants to apply for, and receive, an exemption from speculative
position limits for ``non-enumerated hedges,'' the Commission, contrary
to the intent of Congress, has eliminated several important classes of
transactions from the definition of a bona fide hedging transaction
that are routinely undertaken in energy markets to hedge or mitigate
commercial risk. The Working Group provides in Parts III.B.1, below,
several examples of such excluded transactions. As illustrated by these
examples, this proposed definition simply does not reflect the hedging
practices generally used in commodity markets, especially energy
markets. Specifically, as discussed in Part III.D, below, to qualify
for a bona fide hedging exemption, the proposed definition appears to
require market participants to match on a one-to-one basis a swap
transaction to a specific physical transaction. Participants in energy
commodity markets, however, frequently enter into swaps and futures to
hedge underlying physical assets on a portfolio or aggregate basis. The
Working Group submits that any final rule adopted by the Commission in
this proceeding must preserve the ability of commercial energy firms to
effectively and efficiently hedge their commercial risk exposure.
The Working Group further requests in Part III.C, below, that the
Commission provide certainty to market participants as to how the
process will work for applying for exemptions from speculative position
limits should the Commission adopt one in any final rule. As written,
the Proposed Rule provides an insufficient application process for
exemptions and instead requires market participants to file daily
reports on their cash market commodity activities upon exceeding any
position limit. The Working Group submits that this creates not only an
unnecessary compliance burden on market participants but also a
significant burden on the Commission who will have to review and
evaluate daily such position reports. Should the Commission adopt an
application process in any final rule, the Working Group strongly
suggests that it provide market participants an opportunity to comment
on such process.
As discussed more thoroughly in Part III.F, below, the Working
Group believes the Phase I spot-month position limits must (i) be
reconsidered in many respects and (ii) more appropriately accommodate
the hedging needs of market participants. As recommended in Part
III.F.1, below, the process for determining deliverable supply must be
fully transparent and provide market participants the opportunity to
comment on the DCM estimates of deliverable supply and any Commission
proposal for spot-month position limits. Further, as set forth in Part
III.F.2, below, with respect to the proposed spot-month position limits
for cash-settled contracts, the Working Group submits that (i) the
Commission's proposal to set the limit for cash-settled contracts equal
to the level for physically-settled contracts is not grounded in a
sound regulatory foundation, (ii) the proposal unduly restricts the
position of cash-settled referenced contracts that may be held by
market participants, and (iii) the proposed conditional exemption for
cash-settled contracts inappropriately requires market participants to
hold no physically settling futures contracts in order to qualify for
such exemption. In Part III.F.3, below, the Working Group recommends
that the Commission initially identify the universe of referenced
paired contracts based only on those contracts that are cleared, and
after such initial identification, identify which swaps constitute a
referenced paired contract during its process for determining whether a
swap must be mandatorily cleared pursuant to the Act.
Regarding the proposed visibility levels and related reporting
requirements, the Working Group submits in Part III.G, below, that such
are unnecessary in light of the transparency created by the Act and the
Commission's existing special call authority. The Working Group
believes that such requirements will result in a substantial and
disproportionate burden on bona fide hedgers without providing any
benefit to the markets.
Moreover, as discussed in Part III.I, below, the Working Group
generally supports the proposed aggregation rules and disaggregation
exemption as applied to ``owned'' non-financial entities. Yet it
respectfully requests that the Commission (i) provide guidance on the
required showing a market participant must make in demonstrating
independent control, (ii) permit market participants discretion in
using internal or external personnel to make any assessments relating
to the independence of its owned non-financial entities, and (iii)
confirm that the positions of owned non-financial subsidiaries or
affiliates demonstrating independent control will not be aggregated
with a parent financial entity.
Finally, and not of least importance, as discussed in Part III.J,
below, the Working Group strongly recommends that the Commission
conduct a thorough cost-benefit analysis of this Proposed Rule, which
should include the costs presented in the Paper Reduction Act section
of the Proposed Rule.
III. Comments of the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms
A. The Commission Has Not Established the Foundation for the Imposition
of Federal Speculative Position Limits for Exempt and All
Agricultural Commodities
As a threshold matter, the Working Group respectfully submits that
Congress did not mandate the establishment of speculative position
limits for exempt and all agricultural commodities or authorize the
Commission to so impose them without an analysis and finding of the
need for, or appropriateness of, speculative position limits in any
specific market.\3\ This issue has been addressed in comment letters
filed in response to the Commission's January 26, 2010 Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, Federal Speculative Limits for Referenced Energy
Contracts and Associated Regulations,\4\ and in pre-rulemaking comments
filed in connection with the potential implementation of speculative
position limits under Dodd-Frank.\5\ Moreover, the Working Group is
informed that other interested parties will address this issue in their
comments submitted in this rulemaking proceeding. The Working Group
supports the principle that the CEA requires additional analysis before
the Commission can finalize a speculative position limit rule for
exempt and all agricultural commodities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See CEA Sections 4a(a)(2)-(5) (requiring that the Commission
establish position limits ``as appropriate'').
\4\ See Federal Speculative Limits for Referenced Energy Contracts
and Associated Regulations, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 75 Fed. Reg.
4144 (Jan. 26, 2010); The Futures Industry Association, Inc., Comment
Letter (Mar. 8, 2010); International Swaps and Derivatives Association,
Inc. (``ISDA''), Comment Letter (April 16, 2010); Working Group of
Commercial Energy Firms, Comment Letter (April 26, 2010).
\5\ See CME Group, Pre-Rulemaking Position Limit Comments (Oct. 25,
2010); The Futures Industry Association, Inc., Pre-Rulemaking Position
Limit Comments and Recommendations (``FIA Pre-Rulemaking Comments'')
(Oct. 1, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Section III.F, below, the Working Group presents its concerns
regarding the proposed spot-month limits for referenced contracts
should the Commission move forward and implement such limits using the
phased approach outlined in the Proposed Rule. In addition to its
concerns regarding the proposed Phase I spot-month limits, the Working
Group submits that imposing position limits for non-spot months and AMC
could result in significant, unintended adverse impacts on derivatives
markets, particularly markets for energy commodities.
The Proposed Rule fails to provide any verified, empirical data, or
cost-benefit analysis justifying the imposition of Phase II non-spot-
month and AMC limits that can be reviewed and commented upon by
interested parties--even on a prophylactic basis. Notwithstanding this
lack of analysis, non-spot month and AMC position limits are
unnecessary if the Commission develops appropriate spot-month limits.
As such, the Working Group strongly recommends the Commission use the
discretion afforded under new CEA Section 4a(a) and forego the
implementation of Phase II non-spot month and AMC position limits in
any final rule issued in this proceeding.
The comments that follow are submitted by the Working Group to
address concerns with respect to specific provisions in the Proposed
Rule so that a final rule, if one is ultimately adopted, will contain
the clearest and most workable provisions.
B. The Proposed Definition of a Bona Fide Hedging Transaction Is
Seriously Flawed
The Working Group submits that there are several, very specific and
somewhat technical, flaws in the proposed definition of a bona fide
hedging transaction that threaten its utility for commercial energy
firms. As such, the Working Group provides the following comments
addressing its concerns with specific provisions of the Proposed Rule
and respectfully requests that the Commission address each of them
prior to the adoption of any final rule. Doing so will ensure that any
final rule adopted by the Commission in this proceeding will be clearer
and more workable (i.e., commercially practicable).
1. There is No Basis for the Elimination of ``Non-Enumerated'' Hedges
Without much explanation, the Commission excluded from proposed
CFTC Rule 151.5 provisions that would define ``non-enumerated hedges''
or provide a vehicle for a commercial energy firm to apply for, and
receive, an exemption from speculative position limits for ``non-
enumerated hedges.'' \6\ In contrast, the Proposed Rule provides that
the only transactions or positions that would be recognized as bona
fide hedges would be those described under proposed CFTC Rule
151.5(a)(2) as ``enumerated hedges.'' Specifically, the proposed rule
states, in relevant part:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The analogs in existing Commission regulations are Sections
1.3(z)(3) and 1.47. Under the Proposed Rule, Section 1.3(z) would not
apply to speculative position limits for exempt and agricultural
commodities and Section 1.47 would be deleted altogether.

``[N]o transactions or positions shall be classified as bona
fide hedging for purposes of  151.4 unless . . . the
provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this section have been
satisfied.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(1).

In taking this position (hereinafter referred to as the
``Enumerated Hedges Only'' provision), the Commission has eviscerated
the general definition of bona fide hedging transactions or positions
as set forth in proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(1), which came directly
from CEA Section 4a(c)(2), as amended by Dodd-Frank. Significantly, the
Commission has effectively eliminated from the bona fide hedging
definition numerous classes of transactions that Congress intended to
include.\8\ The Working Group identifies and describes several of these
transactions in subparts III.B.1.i-III.B.4, below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ In addition, the Commission's proposal simultaneously
establishes and eliminates the availability of the so-called ``pass-
through'' exemption identified in proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(1)(iv)(A)
and CEA Section 4a(c)(2)(B). To be certain, proposed CFTC Rule
151.5(a)(1)(iv)(A) is nearly identical to the discretionary pass-
through provision in new CEA Section 4a(c)(2)(B). As such, the
Commission clearly sought to establish a pass-through exemption. And
yet the Commission's proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2) would eliminate the
use of any such exemption. The Working Group believes that the
Commission likely did not intend such a result.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group respectfully submits that it is neither in the
public interest nor is it in the Commission's interest as a market
regulator to structure a rule that eliminates its flexibility to allow
hedge exemptions based on ``non-enumerated hedging transactions.''
Markets are dynamic. Many of the proposed rules being implemented by
the Commission pursuant to Dodd-Frank, particularly this Proposed Rule,
may have the result of diminishing liquidity in certain markets. Thus,
the Working Group submits that the Commission should preserve its
ability to allow exemptions based upon non-enumerated transactions.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ This does not mean that the Commission is compelled to grant
exemptions--it will retain its discretion on a case-by-case basis based
on the market's ability to support it, among other things. What it does
mean, however, is that if the Commission believes an exemption may be
warranted to add liquidity to a particular market at a particular time
it would not be forced to promulgate an amendment to Part 151.5 in
order to do so.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accordingly, in order to ensure consistency with the statutory
language of new CEA Section 4a(c) and avoid harmful impacts to markets
for Referenced Contracts, the Working Group suggests that the
Commission (i) strike the last clause in proposed CFTC Rule
151.5(a)(1)(iv)(B)--``and the provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this
section have been satisfied;'' and (ii) revise the lead-in language of
proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2) to add following the word ``includes''
the phrase ``, but is not limited to,''. Specifically, the Working
Group proposes the following revisions:
Sec. 151.5  Exemptions for referenced contracts.
(a) Bona fide hedging transactions or positions.

(1) Any trader that complies with the requirements of
this section may exceed the position limits set forth
in Sec. 151.4 to the extent that a transaction or
position in a referenced contract:
* * * * *
(iv) Reduces risks attendant to a position
resulting from a swap that--
* * * * *
(B) Meets the requirements of
paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through
(a)(1)(iii) of this section.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
transactions or positions shall be
classified as bona fide hedging for
purposes of Sec. 151.4 unless such
transactions or positions are
established and liquidated in an
orderly manner in accordance with sound
commercial practices and the provisions
of paragraph (a)(2) of this section
have been satisfied.

(2) Enumerated hedging transactions. The definition
of bona fide hedging transactions and positions in
paragraph (a)(1) of this section includes, but is not
limited to, the following specific transactions and
posi-
tions: . . .

Subparts III.B.1.i-III.B.4, below, address the identified flaws
with the Commission's current proposal for the definition of a bona
fide hedge, and support the Working Group's recommendation to revise
the proposed language of the bona fide hedging transaction definition.
i. Hedges Relating to Assets That a Person Anticipates Owning or
Merchandising Would Not Constitute Bona Fide Hedges Under the
Proposed Rule
Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(1) includes as a bona fide hedge the
anticipated ownership, production, manufacture, processing, or
merchandising of an exempt or agricultural commodity.\10\ Yet proposed
CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2), which sets forth ``Enumerated Hedging
Transactions,'' does not contain a parallel provision. Indeed, only
``unsold anticipated production'' \11\ and ``unfilled anticipated
requirements,'' including requirements for ``processing, manufacturing,
and feeding'' \12\ qualify as enumerated hedges. Thus, as a result of
the Enumerated Hedges Only provision, certain transactions entered into
to hedge anticipated ownership or merchandising of an exempt or
agricultural commodity would not qualify as bona fide hedging
transactions under the Proposed Rule.\13\ The Working Group provides
two such examples.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See analogous new CEA Section 4a(c)(2).
\11\ Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2)(i)(B).
\12\ Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2)(ii)(C).
\13\ To the extent that language in the enumerated hedging section
of the proposal parallels language in the enumerated hedging section of
current Rule 1.3(z), the Working Group submits that the impact is
different as a result of the elimination of the availability of an
exemption for non-enumerated hedges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Example 1.
At 8:00 a.m. commercial energy firm X becomes aware of the
availability of a spot cargo of heating oil moving from Europe to the
United States. Firm X believes that it can acquire the cargo over the
next few hours or days, manage the discharge of the product at the end
of the voyage, and re-sell the heating oil to a distributor in the
northeast at the end of the month. While Firm X begins negotiations to
purchase and re-sell the cargo, it is not concerned about upward price
risk during the period of its purchase negotiations but is seriously
concerned about downward price risk between now and the time it
establishes its sale price. It sells New York Mercantile Exchange
(``NYMEX'') heating oil futures contracts for its expected delivery
month. Under the Commission's proposal, this transaction would not
qualify as a bona fide hedge.
Example 2.
Utility X periodically issues requests for proposals (``RFP'')
looking to obtain fixed price electricity supply for groups of its
customers. For example, it may be looking for a fixed price for
electricity for a term of three (3) years for its commercial customer
class. In its RFP, Utility X requires that Bidders provide firm
electricity at a fixed price and at designated locations on its
electrical system. As it is for Full Requirement, Bidders must ensure
that enough electric supply is delivered to Utility X so that it can
meet the load requirements of its commercial customers. Actual
deliveries of electricity are equal to actual usage of electricity by
Utility X's commercial customers and results in physical delivery of
electricity. Finally, the RFP requires that the fixed price offer be
provided on or before the close of business, March 31, and be left
open; that is, the price quoted must remain firm while Utility X
evaluates and then selects the winning bidder on April 3.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Often times, commercial energy firms competing to serve load
under similar RFP arrangements have been required to leave in place
fixed price quotes longer than the four (4) day window set forth in the
example above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Power Marketer Y is preparing to respond to Utility X's RFP. It
believes it can arrange for a physical supply of electricity supply on
competitive terms. However, Power Marketer Y is concerned that prices
in the electricity market will increase while it is holding open its
fixed price for Utility X and then completing the transaction for the
physical supply. Power Marketer Y enters into an electricity swap to
protect against increases in prices while it leaves open the bid during
the three day evaluation period and thereafter completes negotiations
for the physical electricity purchase if Utility X accepts its price
quote. Under the Commission's proposal, the electricity swap
transaction would not qualify as a bona fide hedge. If Power Marketer Y
faces position limit restrictions in this situation, it would have to
raise its fixed price quote to Utility X to account for the risk of the
price moving and this could result in higher costs to Utility X's
customers.
The Working Group notes that the variance in the treatment of
marketing or merchandising activities and the treatment of producers or
processors in the Proposed Rule is remarkably similar to the
differential treatment of cash market ``trading'' positions provided in
footnotes 23 and 128 of the proposed rules implementing the End-user
Exception and further defining the term Major Swap Participant,
respectively, and upon which the Working Group commented in the
relevant proceedings.\15\ The Working Group's concern was that in those
proposed rules, the Commission appeared to take the position that a
marketer or merchandiser that acquired a commodity for resale (i.e., a
cash market ``trading'' position) would not be entitled to treat a
hedge of that position as ``mitigating or reducing commercial risk'' in
order to avail itself of the end-user exception or certain calculations
in connection with the definition of Major Swap Participant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swaps, Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, 75 Fed. Reg. 80747 (Dec. 23, 2010) (``Proposed
End-User Exception Rule''); Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms,
Comment Letter (Feb. 22, 2011); Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,''
``Security-Based Swap Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major
Security-Based Swap Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract
Participant,'' 75 Fed. Reg. 80174 (Dec. 21, 2010); Working Group of
Commercial Energy Firms, Comment Letter (Feb. 22, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As in the instant proceeding, such differential treatment in those
proposed rules wouldeffectively eliminate ``merchant,'' \16\
``merchandiser,'' \17\ or ``middlemen'' \18\ from the litany of
commercial parties historically recognized as part of the chain from
the production to the consumption of commodities. These parties own
physical commodities and bear significant price risk as a result. The
Working Group respectfully submits that this result is contrary to the
CEA and that the use of derivatives by these firms to hedge that risk
should qualify as bona fide hedges and as ``hedging and mitigating
commercial risk'' under the Commission's rules.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See 17 CFR  32.4(a) (2010) (``a producer, processor, or
commercial user of, or a merchant handling, the commodity'' may be an
offeree of an option under the trade option exemption) (emphasis
added).
\17\ Exemption for Certain Contracts Involving Energy Products, 58
Fed. Reg. 21286 (Apr. 20, 1993) (granting exemptive relief in response
to an application filed by a group of entities which represented that
each was a producer, processor and/or merchandiser of crude oil,
natural gas and/or crude oil and natural gas products, or was otherwise
engaged in a commercial business in these commodities).
\18\ See Section 4a(c) of the CEA (``producers, purchasers,
sellers, middlemen, and users of a commodity or product derived
therefrom'' should be eligible for hedge exemptions) (emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. Hedges of Services Would Not Constitute Bona Fide Hedges Under the
Proposed Rule
Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(1) would include as a bona fide hedging
transaction ``services that a person provides or purchases, or
anticipates providing or purchasing.'' \19\ However, proposed CFTC Rule
151.5(a)(2), which sets forth Enumerated Hedging Transactions, does not
contain a parallel provision. Thus, under the Enumerated Hedges Only
provision, hedges of the potential change in value of services would
not constitute as bona fide hedging under the Commission's proposal.
The Working Group provides the following two examples to illustrate
such hedges.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See analogous new CEA Section 4a(c)(2).
\20\ Without impacting their illustrative value, these examples
have been simplified, and certain factors, such as the time value of
money, have been eliminated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Example 1.
Commercial energy firm Z is a wholesale marketer of natural gas. It
has an opportunity to acquire one year of firm transportation on
Natural Gas Pipeline (``NGPL'') from the Texok receipt point to the
Henry Hub delivery point for an all-in cost of $.30/mmbtu. The
``value'' of that service at that time is $.33/mmbtu, measured as the
difference between the price at which one can sell the natural gas at
the delivery point minus the price at which one can purchase the gas at
the receipt point. At that time, commercial energy firm Z can enter
into a swap locking in the calendar 2012 strip at Texok at a price of
$4.00/mmbtu and sell a calendar strip of NYMEX Henry Hub natural gas
futures contracts locking in a sale price at a weighted average of
$4.33/mmbtu. Entering into those two separate transactions without
having actually purchased or sold natural gas to transport has allowed
commercial energy firm Z to hedge the value of the firm transportation
service that it holds or can acquire.\21\ However, under the
Commission's proposal, the transaction would not qualify as a bona fide
hedge transaction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Note that this ``value'' exists whether commercial energy firm
Z ever owns or intends to own the physical commodity. In some
circumstances, the firm might choose to release the capacity to a
third-party and realize the value of the transportation service from
the capacity release transaction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Example 2.
Natural Gas Producer X has new production coming on line over the
next few years in the Gulf of Mexico. The production is located near
Point A on Pipeline Y's interstate natural gas pipeline system.
Producer X has the desire to sell gas to customers in Region B as the
price for natural gas in Region B is significantly higher than at Point
A, where natural gas would currently be delivered into Pipeline Y's
system. Producer X contacts Pipeline Y and negotiates a Precedent
Agreement with the pipeline under which Pipeline Y will build new
transportation capacity from Point A to Region B. Under the Precedent
Agreement, Producer A is obligated to pay demand charges to the
pipeline for a term of 5 years from the date the pipeline goes into
commercial operation, if Pipeline Y is able to complete a successful
open season and obtains the necessary permits to construct and operate
the new section or expansion of its pipeline system from Point A to
Region B. The open season is designed to attract commitments from other
potential shippers to help support the cost of building and operating
the pipeline expansion. The schedule calls for a completion of
construction and commercial operation of the pipeline expansion on
March 31, 2013.
Producer X is concerned that the natural gas price differential
between Point A and Region B could collapse and is fairly confident the
expansion project will be completed. In order to manage the risk
associated with the 5-year financial commitment to Pipeline Y, i.e.,
pipeline demand charges, Producer X enters into swaps at Point B for a
term of April 1, 2013 to March 31, 2018, to lock-in the price spread
between Point A and Region B. Under the Commission's Proposed Rule, the
swap transactions would not qualify as bona fide hedges. In this case,
the expansion of the pipeline system that would afford customers in
Region B more access to lower priced gas might not occur without the
ability to count the swaps associated with this transaction as a bona
fide hedge.
Example 3.
Commercial energy firm A is an electric utility that owns coal-
fired generation facilities. Firm A enters into contracts with major
railroads to transport coal from producing regions to its various
generating facilities. One or more of these contracts are subject to a
fuel surcharge, whereby rates paid by firm A to transport coal are
indexed to the price of diesel fuel. As prices for the diesel fuel
rise, the rate paid by firm A to transport coal also rises. To mitigate
this risk, firm A could enter into a long position in futures contracts
or swaps for the diesel fuel, whereby gains realized on these
instruments should prices rise would off-set any increase in the rate
paid by firm A to transport coal. Under the Proposed Rule, however,
these transactions would not qualify as bona fide hedge transactions
since they would be entered into as a hedge of services--in this case,
coal transportation services.
2. Spreads and Arbitrage Positions Would Not Qualify as Bona Fide
Hedges Under the Proposed Rule
Section 4a(a) of the CEA both before and after the passage of Dodd-
Frank authorizes the Commission to ``exempt[] transactions normally
known to the trade as `spreads' or `straddles' or `arbitrage' or from
fixing limits applying to such transactions or positions different from
limits fixed for other transactions or positions.'' Under the regimes
for speculative position limits currently administered by both NYMEX
and the IntercontinentalExchange (``ICE''), exemptions from speculative
position limits are available for arbitrage, intra-commodity spread,
inter-commodity spread, and eligible option/option or option/futures
spread positions.\22\ Under the Proposed Rule, these classes of
transactions would not qualify for an exemption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ See NYMEX Rule 559.C and ICE OTC Regulatory Rulebook for
Significant Price Discovery Contracts, Rule 1.17 (``ICE OTC Rule
1.17'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arbitrage and spread positions create a limited risk of causing
sudden or unreasonable fluctuations or unwarranted changes in the price
of a commodity. In fact, they are universally recognized as
transactions that limit unwarranted changes in price by tying the price
of one instrument to another, creating a market efficiency that reduces
the risk of aberrational pricing. The Working Group submits that there
has never been an issue of sudden or unreasonable fluctuations or
unwarranted changes in price attributable to arbitrage or spread
positions that would justify the elimination of exemptions for such
transactions at this time.
The Working Group respectfully suggests that the fact that these
positions currently exist in the market and may be the basis for an
exemption from limits on both NYMEX and ICE requires that the
Commission consider the potential negative impact on liquidity if such
positions were no longer to be permitted such treatment. Therefore, as
provided for under CEA Section 4a(a), the Commission should permit
exemptions from position limits for transactions such as spreads or
arbitrage.
3. Cross-Commodity Hedges Would Not Be Permitted To Be Carried Into the
Spot Month
Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2)(v) would permit cross-commodity
hedges ``provided that the positions shall not be maintained during the
five last trading days of any referenced contract.'' This would result
in transactions, such as the one set forth in the following example,
being excluded from treatment as a bona fide hedging transaction.
Example.
Commercial energy firm J supplies jet fuel to airlines at a variety
of airports in the United States, including Houston Intercontinental
Airport. It has a fixed-price contract to purchase jet fuel from a
refinery on the gulf coast during early June. Because there is no
liquid jet fuel futures contract, commercial energy firm J uses the
June NYMEX physically-delivered WTI crude oil futures contract to hedge
its price risk. Under the Proposed Rule, commercial energy firm J would
be required to liquidate its hedge during the last five trading days of
the June contract and either remain unhedged or replace its June hedge
with a contract that represents a completely different delivery period
and, therefore, a different supply/demand and pricing profile.
4. The Working Group Questions the Phraseology Used in the Proposed
Rule that Would Treat as Bona Fide Hedges ``Purchases of
Referenced Contracts'' on the One Hand, and ``Sales of Any
Commodity Underlying Referenced Contracts'' on the Other
The purpose and effect of the distinction presented in proposed
CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2) are unclear to the Working Group. Specifically,
the lead-in language to proposed subpart 151.5(a)(2)(ii) states that
``purchases of referenced contracts'' may qualify as bona fide hedges
provided certain conditions are met. In contrast, the lead-in language
to proposed subpart 151.5(a)(2)(i) states that ``sales of any commodity
underlying referenced contracts'' may qualify as bona fide hedges
provided the right conditions are met. Nowhere in the Proposed Rule
does the Commission explain the purpose behind this distinction. Under
the analogous provisions of Section 1.3(z) of the Commission's current
regulations,\23\ purchases and sales are treated equally--that is,
purchases or sales of futures contracts (and not the underlying
commodity) may qualify as bona fide hedging transactions. Thus, it
appears that the phrase ``any commodity underlying'' ought not to be
included in proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(2). The Working Group
respectfully requests that in any final rule issued in this proceeding
the Commission either (i) harmonize the two provisions in the Proposed
Rule, or (ii) clarify the intent and purpose behind the distinction
should the Commission adopt such language.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ 17 CFR  1.3(z).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. The Process for Applying for, and Receiving, Exemptions From
Speculative Position Limits Is Also Flawed
1. The Proposed Rule Unnecessarily Abandons the Current Energy Market
Process of Applying in Advance for Exemptions From Speculative
Position Limits
Current practice on both NYMEX and ICE permits a commercial energy
firm to apply, in advance, for an exemption from speculative position
limits. With the exception of exemptions for ``anticipated unsold
production'' and ``anticipated unfilled requirements,'' \24\ the
Proposed Rule abandons that construct. The Working Group respectfully
submits that such an approach is flawed for the reasons set forth
below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ See proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(c) (with respect to hedging
anticipated unsold production or anticipated unfilled requirements, a
trader must submit to the Commission a 404A filing at least ten days in
advance of the date that such transactions or positions would exceed
the applicable position limits). See also proposed CFTC Rule
151.5(c)(1)(ii), (iv), and (v) (each subsection contains the phrase
``which may not exceed one year''). This restriction, however, should
only be applied to referenced agricultural commodities. The Working
Group is also concerned that this proposed rule could be read to
effectively restrict the ability of participants in exempt commodity
markets to hedge exposure to price volatility for transactions that are
more than one year in duration. The Commission should clarify and, as
necessary, rectify, the language of proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(c)(1)(ii),
(iv), and (v) to avoid such a result.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
i. The Proposed Rule Creates Uncertainty for Market Participants
Under current practice, a market participant would apply for an
exemption from speculative position limits that would allow it to hold
positions subject to the exemption up to a stated quantity. Such
practice provides commercial energy firms with certainty and precise
knowledge as to what the exchange (i.e., NYMEX) or exempt commercial
market (``ECM'') with significant price discovery contracts (i.e.,
ICE), as applicable, will permit. Unlike current practice, the Proposed
Rule leaves the upper limit of an exemption undefined.\25\ Unless the
Commission is proposing that there is no upper limit for bona fide
hedge transactions, which is highly doubtful, then the proposed process
leaves a market participant without any knowledge as to when its
positions will be deemed by the Commission to be ``too much.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ The Commission would be fully justified under the CEA to make
such a determination to leave the upper limit of an exemption
undefined. See CEA Sections 4a(a)(2)(A) and 4a(a)(5)(A). If that was
the Commission's intention behind this proposed exemption process, the
Working Group would fully support it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By way of example, assume the speculative position limit for an
energy commodity is 1,000 contracts, and a commercial energy firm with
significant inventory could justify an exemption to allow it to hold
6,000 contracts. In NYMEX's view, however, the market could support an
exemption only to a level of 3,000 contracts. Under current practice,
the commercial energy firm would know, in advance, that the potential
acquisition of additional cash market risk would not result in
additional room to hedge on NYMEX and could make a considered decision
to make, or not make, the acquisition, knowing it might have to hold it
unhedged.
In contrast, the Proposed Rule does not provide a market
participant the opportunity to know in advance what the Commission
would determine to be the upper limit that the market could support.
Pursuant to the Proposed Rule, a market participant must make the
required filings with the Commission upon reaching the position limit
of 1,000 contracts. In accordance with its internal policies and
business practice, a market participant would continue to increase its
position and make the corresponding required filings without ever
knowing when and at what level the Commission would say ``enough.''
The Working Group believes that, at some point, the Commission
would say ``enough'' on the same basis that NYMEX currently limits
exemption levels even when they would be fully justified based upon a
participant's cash market exposure. Yet the Proposed Rule makes no
provision for when or how the Commission would establish an upper
bound, and fails to state whether a market participant would be
required to liquidate or offset positions established in good faith
before an upper bound was communicated. Commercial energy firms cannot
afford to operate under this process, or lack thereof, as it creates a
high level of uncertainty.
ii. The Commission Should Provide Clear Guidance on the Application
Process for Hedge Exemptions Should It Adopt One in Any Final
Rule Issued in the Proceeding
Should the Commission adopt an application process for bona fide
hedge exemptions in any final rule issued in this proceeding, the
Working Group suggests that the Commission provide clear guidance on
such process and permit market participants an opportunity to
comment.\26\ Any application process adopted by the Commission should
require market participants to apply for exemptions only once.
Currently, market participants seek exemptions from the exchanges. Yet,
under any final rule adopted by the Commission, market participants
should not be required to apply for exemptions from both the CFTC and
the exchanges. Such a requirement would impose significant burdens on
market participants.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ The Working Group notes that in a prior rulemaking to
establish federal speculative position limits, the Commission sought to
establish an application process for bona fide hedge exemptions. See
Federal Speculative Position Limits for Referenced Energy Contracts and
Associated Regulations, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 75 Fed. Reg.
4144 (Jan. 26, 2010).
\27\ In addition to providing market participants with the ability
to provide comments on the application process in the context of the
instant rulemaking, the Working Group suggests that the Commission also
host a technical conference or other forum to permit market
participants to interface with the Commission and make recommendations.
Upon issuance of a proposed application process, the Commission should
then provide an appropriate opportunity for comment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. Daily Reporting of Cash Market and Other Positions Is Burdensome
and Unnecessary
Under current practice on both NYMEX and ICE, a party with a hedge
exemption is not required to make regular filings with the exchange or
ECM. Nevertheless, a market participant remains subject to inquiry by
NYMEX or ICE \28\ and the requirement to justify the use of the
exemption. Additionally, the market participant remains subject to the
special call authority of the CFTC \29\ and an enforcement action if
such market participant used an exemption to hold speculative positions
in excess of the position limit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ See NYMEX Rule 559; ICE OTC Rule 1.16.
\29\ See 17 CFR  18.05; 21 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under the Proposed Rule, a party will be required to submit daily
reports itemizing the following information with respect to such
position: (1) the cash market commodity hedged, the units in which it
is measured, and the corresponding referenced contract that is used for
hedging the cash market commodity; (2) the number of referenced
contracts used for hedging; (3) the entire quantity of stocks owned of
the cash market commodity that is being hedged by a position in a
referenced contract; (4) the entire quantity of open fixed price
purchase commitments in the hedged commodity outside of the spot month
of the corresponding referenced contract; (5) the entire quantity of
open fixed price purchase commitments in the hedged commodity in the
spot month of the corresponding referenced contract; (6) the entire
quantity of open fixed price sale commitments in the hedged commodity
outside of the spot month of the corresponding referenced contract; and
(7) the entire quantity of open fixed price sale commitments in the
hedged commodity in the spot month of the corresponding referenced
contract.\30\ Building the system to perform such reporting will be a
significant and unnecessary expense, and the management and execution
of the system to satisfy the daily reporting obligation an unnecessary
burden.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ See proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iv. Daily Review of Positions Is a Burden that the Commission Does Not
Need To Impose Upon Itself
In order to manage the speculative limit regime that the Commission
is proposing to establish, CFTC staff will be required to review and
evaluate daily the positions of all market participants that exceed the
speculative position limits. First, as described in Part III.C.1.i,
above, CFTC staff will need to do so to determine when to say
``enough'' to a bona fide hedger with legitimate hedging needs that may
be greater than the market for a particular instrument can bear.
Second, staff will also need to do so to verify the veracity of a
market participant's claim of eligibility for a hedge exemption,
something that is currently only done on a periodic basis. The Working
Group respectfully submits that the monitoring and verification
obligations placed on CFTC staff will require the expenditure of
considerable Commission resources and are unnecessary, especially at a
time of significant budgetary constraint.
D. The Proposed Framework for Bona Fide Hedge Exemptions Should Reflect
the Hedging Practices of Commodity Markets
In addition to the Working Group's specific concerns regarding the
technical flaws with the proposed definition of the bona fide hedging
exemption and the process of applying for an exemption, the Working
Group respectfully requests the Commission to recognize that, although
market participants in physical energy commodity markets use swaps and
futures to hedge underlying physical positions, they frequently do not
execute such transactions specifically for the purpose of hedging a
specified underlying physical position (i.e., on a one-for-one basis).
Prudent risk management practices generally involve hedging underlying
physical assets and related positions on a portfolio or aggregate
basis.\31\ A commercial firm will normally hedge these exposures
utilizing physical transactions, futures, and swaps, the exact
combinations of which will be determined by various characteristics
that may be unique to such firm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ The Working Group notes that, in the CFTC's proposed rule on
the end-user exception from mandatory clearing, the Commission
recognizes that whether a position is used to hedge or mitigate
commercial risk should be determined by the facts and circumstances at
the time the swap is entered into, and should take into account the
person's overall hedging and risk mitigation strategies. See Proposed
End-User Exception Rule, at 80753. In relevant part, the Proposed End-
User Exception Rule states:

As a general matter, the Commission preliminarily believes that
whether a position is used
to hedge or mitigate commercial risk should be determined by the
facts and circumstances
at the time the swap is entered into, and should take into account
the person's overall hedging
and risk mitigation strategies. The Commission expects that a
person's overall hedging and
risk management strategies will help inform whether or not a
particular position is properly
considered to hedge or mitigate commercial risk for purposes of the
clearing exception.

The Working Group respectfully submits that the Commission should
take this same approach herein and recognize that the determination of
what is a bona fide hedge transaction is informed by a market
participant's overall hedging and risk management strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, in order to effectively and efficiently mitigate
commercial risk associated with underlying physical assets and related
positions, commercial energy firms will also dynamically hedge their
aggregate exposures on a regular and on-going basis to optimize the
value of underlying physical assets or portfolios. A key aspect of
dynamic hedging is the ability to modify the hedging structure related
to the physical asset or positions when the relevant pricing
relationships applicable to that asset change. Dynamic hedging may
involve leaving an asset or position unhedged when necessary to
mitigate the risk of lost opportunity costs, which may require hedges
to be established, unwound, and re-established on an iterative basis
over time.
In this context, the concept of bona fide hedging should include
all hedging activity that maximizes the value of the asset. The
adoption of a prescriptive one-to-one matching requirement of each swap
to a specific physical transaction or an asset position is inconsistent
with the hedging practices of many participants in commodity markets,
particularly energy markets, and is thus unnecessary and overly
burdensome.\32\ As such, the Working Group requests that the Commission
modify its hedge exemptions and their related reporting requirements to
reflect more appropriately the actual hedging practices of participants
in energy markets in any final rule it adopts in this proceeding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ For example, a commercial energy firm may enter into several
swap transactions to hedge a single physical position. This approach is
used to spread out risk among different counterparties and to obtain
the best overall pricing possible for the hedge. Given the dynamic and
volatile nature of energy markets, it is very difficult for a
commercial energy firm or any other market participant to assert on an
intra-day, real-time basis or at a later point in time whether a
particular swap or futures transaction is functioning as a hedge. Under
this example, it would be difficult, if even possible, for a swap
dealer to step into the shoes of its commercial counterparty on a
transaction-by-transaction-basis for purposes of applying the pass-
through provisions of CEA Section 4a(c)(2)(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
E. The Pass-Through Provision Is Not Required, and Therefore, the
Commission Should Adopt an Alternative Approach: Permit Risk
Management Exemptions From Position Limits
As amended by Title VII of the Act, new CEA Section 4a(c)(2)(B)
permits the pass-through of a bona fide hedge exemption from
speculative position limits to swap dealers taking the other side of a
hedge transaction from an end-user. In relevant part, new CEA Section
4a(c)(2)(B) states:

(2) For the purposes of implementation of subsection (a)(2)
for contracts of sale for future delivery or options on the
contracts or commodities, the Commission shall define what
constitutes a bona fide hedging transaction or position as a
transaction or position that--
* * * * *
(B) reduces risks attendant to a position resulting
from a swap that--

(i) was executed opposite a counterparty for
which the transaction would qualify as a bona
fide hedging transaction pursuant to
subparagraph (A); or
(ii) meets the requirements of subparagraph
(A).

This discretionary provision effectively allows a swap dealer to
``step into the shoes'' of a commercial firm or end-user counterparty
for purposes of being exempted from applicable speculative position
limits.
1. The Pass-Through Is No Longer Required; the Concerns Over Risk
Management Exemptions Have Been Ameliorated
The Working Group submits that the transparency created in exempt
commodity markets by Title VII of the Act, together with the
Commission's exemptive authority under new CEA Section 4a(a)(7), render
this pass-through provision unnecessary.
The Working Group supports pre-rulemaking comments submitted by
other interested parties \33\ recommending that the Commission continue
its practice of granting arbitrage and risk management exemptions from
position limits for positions that serve the same or similar function
as a bona fide hedge position, but do not fall squarely within the
definition of a bona fide hedge.\34\ Risk management exemptions from
position limits are essential to the risk management practices of
commercial energy firms; however, such exemptions had come under
scrutiny because they allowed a swap dealer to get a hedge exemption to
hedge the risk of swaps opposite speculative traders whose swap
positions were unknown to the Commission and were subject to neither
position limit nor accountability rules. Under Dodd-Frank, those
concerns are no longer present. That is, virtually all swap
transactions will be reported to swap data repositories (``SDRs''),
prices will be reported to the public, and the parties will be subject
to large trader reporting rules. Accordingly, the Commission may grant
risk management exemptions on the basis of a party's need, ability to
manage the positions, and the ability of the market to support the
positions, all without concern that it has enabled a ``dark market''
with attendant risks of ``excessive speculation.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ See FIA Pre-Rulemaking Comments at 8; Morgan Stanley, Position
Limits Pre-Rule Proposal Comments and Recommendations, at 10 (Oct. 25,
2010).
\34\ Section 4a(a) of the CEA states: ``[N]othing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the Commission from . . . exempting
transactions normally known to the trade as `spreads' or `straddles' or
`arbitrage.' ''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 4a(a)(7) provides the Commission with broad authority to
exempt any persons or transactions from speculative position limits
that it sets under Section 4a. The Working Group respectfully submits
that the Commission exercise its exemptive authority to grant
exemptions in appropriate circumstances rather than establish a pass-
through exemption, the need for which has been significantly diminished
given the transparency created in exempt commodity markets by the Act.
2. If Adopted, the Pass-Through Provision Raises Significant Compliance
Concerns
To the extent the Commission declines the Working Group's
recommendation to eliminate the pass-through provision in favor of risk
management exemptions, the Working Group submits that the
implementation of such provision in energy markets would create several
practical concerns. Importantly, for the reasons described below, the
resulting burdens and cost impacts of a pass-through provision will be
disproportionately borne by those commercial firms, including energy
firms, that presently manage risk through hedging practices.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ The Working Group submits that the Proposed Rule will impose
costs for monitoring compliance associated with the Commission's
proposed pass-through provision. See infra Part III.J, discussing the
Commission's costs and benefit analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
i. The Proposed Rule Contemplates One-for-One Hedging
For example, the Working Group is concerned that market
participants will be required to engage in a transaction-by-transaction
analysis for purposes of determining whether a particular trade is in
fact a bona fide hedge. As discussed in Part III.D, above, such an
approach is inconsistent with the routine hedging practices employed by
many participants in commodity markets, particularly energy markets.
Specifically, these market participants determine their aggregate
underlying exposures in physical markets and match hedges to those
physical positions rather than hedging on a one-to-one basis.
With this in mind, the pass-through of bona fide hedge exemptions
as contemplated in the Proposed Rule is unworkable as it would require
hedgers claiming the use of a bona fide hedge exemption to match a swap
that hedges or mitigates commercial risk with a specified underlying
physical commodity transaction. To the extent the Commission uses its
discretion to retain the pass-through of bona fide hedge exemptions,
the Working Group suggests that the Commission maintain the approach
currently used by DCMs and ECMs with significant price discovery
contracts--which is to focus on market participants' overall physical
exposures and match hedges to the physical position.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ See, e.g., ICE OTC Rule 1.16.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. Written Trade-by-Trade Representations and Acknowledgements Are Not
Practical in Dynamic, Fluctuating Markets
Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(g) requires that a party relying on the
bona fide hedging exemption provide a written representation verifying
that the particular swap qualifies as a bona fide hedging transaction
under proposed Rule 151.5(a)(1)(iv).\37\ Given the discretionary nature
of new CEA Section 4a(c)(2)(B), the Working Group believes that such
written representation should be optional, not mandatory (understanding
that absent a representation, there would be no pass-through). It is
impracticable to require a trader to make a determination at the time
of the trade on the nature of the transaction, particularly, whether
the swap is a hedge or speculative in nature.\38\ Moreover, as stated
above, it would be impracticable, if not impossible, for the vast
majority of market participants to link hedges with specified
underlying physical positions for purposes of complying with the pass-
through requirements in proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(g).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(g)(1) states: ``The party not hedging
a cash market commodity risk, or both parties to the swap if both
parties are hedging a cash market commodity
risk . . . .'' The Working Group submits that if both counterparties
are hedging, there is no need to pass through their respective hedge
exemptions and thus fails to understand the provision as written.
\38\ The Commission also recognizes the difficulty in discerning
between speculation and hedging. See End-User Exception Rule, at 80753.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. The Requirement that Parties Verify the Ongoing Nature of a Hedge
Is Not Workable
The Working Group is also concerned with proposed CFTC Rule
151.5(j)(2), which permits a party to exceed a position limit only ``to
the extent and in such amounts that the qualifying swap directly
offsets, and continues to offset, the cash market commodity risk of a
bona fide hedger counterparty.'' This provision is problematic as it
implies that a hedger must monitor and track the status of a each
transaction it represented to its counterparty as a bona fide hedge and
continually inform and represent to the counterparty that such swap
continues to be a bona fide hedge. Such requirement would result in
significant and costly burdens on hedgers.
F. Problems With the Proposed Spot-Month Limits
1. The Determination of Deliverable Supply Should Be Fully Transparent
and Subject to Public Notice and Comment
Pursuant to proposed CFTC Rule 151.4(c), DCMs that list referenced
physical delivery contracts would be required to submit estimates of
deliverable supply for those physical commodities to the Commission on
an annual basis. The Proposed Rule notes that the Commission will rely
on a DCM's estimate of deliverable supply unless it ``determines to
rely on its own estimate.'' Given the overwhelming importance of the
determination of deliverable supply for a Referenced Contract in
establishing workable spot-month position limits under the framework
set forth in the Proposed Rule, this process should be fully
transparent,\39\ and the Commission should provide public notice and
permit comment by interested parties. In furtherance of this process,
the Working Group suggests the following approach:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ The Working Group supports proposed CFTC Rule 151.4(c)(3)
requiring estimates submitted by a DCM to be accompanied by a
description of the methodology used by the DCM and any supporting data.

November 30--DCM Estimate Submissions. DCMs submit to the
Commission deliverable supply estimates for each physical
delivery referenced contract that is subject to a spot-month
limit and listed or executed pursuant to the rules of such
DCMs. This submission is immediately noticed by the Commission
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
for public comment.

Mid-December--Comment Deadline on DCM Estimates. Interested
parties would have 15 days to submit comments to the Commission
providing their views on the DCM's deliverable supply
estimates.

Mid-January--CFTC Issues Proposed Position Limits.
Approximately 30 days following the submission of comments on
the DCM deliverable supply estimates, the Commission would
publish (or post on its website) proposed position limits for
each referenced contract.

February 1--Comment Deadline on Proposed Position Limits.
Interested parties would have 15 days to submit comments on the
Commission's proposed position limits for each referenced
contract.

March 1--CFTC Issues Final Position Limits. The CFTC would
release (or post on its website) final position limits for each
referenced contract.

April 1--New Position Limits Become Effective. Affected
market participants would receive approximately 30 days to come
into compliance with the new position limits. The new position
limits would remain in effect until March 31st of the following
year.

Finally, the Working Group strongly recommends that the Commission
grandfather any position put on in good faith prior to the effective
date of any final position limit set by Commission rule, regulation, or
order.
2. The Proposed Spot-Month Position Limits for Cash-Settled Contracts
Should be Reconsidered
i. The Working Group Respectfully Submits that the Limit for Cash-
Settled Contracts Does Not Need to Equal the Limit for
Physically-Settled Contracts
In the first transitional phase, proposed CFTC Rule 151.4 would
apply spot-month position limits separately for physically-delivered
contracts and all cash-settled contracts, including cash-settled
futures and swaps. The Commission has proposed to set the limit for
cash-settled contracts at the same level as the level for physically-
settled contracts, a level which is established as 25% of deliverable
supply. While the Working Group notes that the establishment of
identical spot-month limits for cash- and physically-settled contracts
has been the practice in recent years, it respectfully submits that the
practice is not grounded in a sound regulatory foundation. Cash-settled
contracts have substantially different potential impacts on pricing.
Although deliverable supply is an important component for establishing
position limits, if any, for physically-delivered contracts, its
importance is greatly diminished with respect to cash-settled
contracts. The Working Group respectfully submits that the Commission
reconsider this approach and establish a much higher, more appropriate
spot-month limit, if any, on cash-settled contracts.
ii. As Applied to Cash-Settled Referenced Contracts, the Proposed Rule
Significantly Reduces a Trader's Permitted Position
The Working Group submits that such approach inappropriately cuts
in half position limits on cash-settled referenced contracts. For
example, a NYMEX Henry Hub Natural Gas (NG) physically-settled futures
contract has a spot-month limit of 1,000. As a result, NYMEX (NN) cash-
settled futures and an ICE HH LD1 swap each have a spot-month limit of
1,000. By separating the spot-month limits into ``physically-
delivered'' and cash-settled,'' and setting each spot-month limit at
1,000, a market participant is effectively forced to add its NN
position to its HH LD1 position, and whereas it previously could have
held 1,000 in each (2,000 in total), it can now only hold 1000 cash-
settled contracts in total. Such a result will likely constrict
liquidity in the NYMEX NN and ICE HH LD1 markets. This is contrary to
two of the express policy goals of CEA Section 4a(a): (i) ensuring
sufficient market liquidity, and (ii) ensuring that the price discovery
function of the underlying market is not disrupted.
Post Dodd-Frank position limits also will include swaps that
previously were traded over-the-counter (``OTC'') and not subject to
limits. As a result, the imposition of limits on cash-settled positions
will be even more constraining, as positions previously excluded from a
market participant's position will now be required to be included,
while the levels will be reduced in some circumstances. Thus, the
Working Group respectfully requests that the Commission reconsider its
spot-month position limits and modify them accordingly.
iii. Conditional Exemption for Cash-Settled Contracts Should Permit
Market Participants To Hold Physically-Settled Futures
Contracts
In order to promote liquidity and efficient price discovery,
proposed CFTC Rule 151.4(a)(2) provides for a conditional spot-month
limit. A trader would be permitted to acquire positions that are five
times the spot-month limit if such positions are exclusively in cash-
settled contracts, and the trader holds physical commodity positions
that are less than or equal to 25 percent of the estimated deliverable
supply of a physical commodity.\40\ However, to qualify for the
conditional exemption, market participants may not hold any physically-
settled futures contracts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ Specifically, the conditional exemption for cash-settled
contracts would apply if (i) such positions are exclusively in cash-
settled contracts, and (ii) a trader holds physical commodity positions
that are less than or equal to 25 percent of the estimated deliverable
supply. With regard to the second condition, a trader may not hold or
control (a) positions in cash-settled contracts in the spot month that
exceed the level of any single month position limit, (b) any positions
in the physical delivery referenced contract based on the same
commodity that is in such contract's spot month, and (c) cash or
forward positions in the referenced contract's spot month in an amount
that is greater than one-quarter of the deliverable supply in the
referenced contract's underlying commodity. See proposed CFTC Rule
151.4(a)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Working Group believes the condition requiring market
participants to hold no physically settling futures contract is
contrary to the statutory goals of CEA Section 4a to promote
transparency, protect price discovery, and ensure the efficiency of
markets. To the extent a hedger wants to avail itself of the
conditional spot-month limit, it would be required to move out of
physically settled futures, which would reduce liquidity and price
discovery in the physically settled futures markets. The Working Group
is concerned that the diminution in liquidity could negatively impact
price convergence in the core physical delivery contract.
Accordingly, to accommodate more appropriately the hedging needs of
market participants, the Working Group suggests an approach wherein
cash-settled position limits are set as a multiple of physically-
settled position limits, and so long as a market participant is not in
violation of any position limit, their physical positions should not be
limited in any manner.
3. The Commission Should Identify All Referenced Paired Contracts
Subject to Spot-Month Position Limits
Without clear guidance from the Commission, the broad and vague
language defining referenced paired contracts could lead to subjective
and inconsistent interpretations by market participants seeking to
identify the universe of referenced paired contracts. As such, the
Working Group requests that the Commission identify the universe of
futures contracts, option contracts, swaps, or swaptions that
constitute referenced paired contracts and provide market participants
the opportunity to comment on any Commission determination. Because the
Commission cannot identify uncleared contracts until they are executed,
it should limit referenced paired contracts to only those that are
cleared.\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ The Commission should not be concerned about excluding
uncleared contracts because as soon as they become large or material
for limit purposes, the Commission can make them subject to mandatory
clearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, after the Commission's initial identification, the Working
Group suggests that, in its process for determining whether a swap must
be cleared pursuant to the Act, the Commission should also determine
whether such swap constitutes a referenced paired contract. New CEA
Section 4a(a)(7) provides the Commission with broad authority to exempt
swaps from speculative position limits it establishes pursuant to
Section 4a. If a swap is not required to be cleared pursuant to the
mandatory clearing requirements of the Act, it should not be included
for purposes of determining position limits.
G. The Proposed Position Visibility Levels Will Impose a
Disproportionate Burden on Hedgers
Notwithstanding the absence of any mandate from the Act, the
Commission proposes to establish position visibility levels for
referenced contracts other than agricultural contracts,\42\ and
establishes reporting requirements for all traders exceeding those
levels in all months or in any single month, including the spot
month.\43\ Traders with positions above visibility levels in these
referenced contracts would be required to submit statements containing
additional information about their cash market and derivatives
activity, including data relating to substantially the same commodity
(i.e., commodities that are different grades or formulations of the
same basic commodity).\44\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ The core referenced futures contracts in the energy sector
that are subject to position visibility levels are: NYMEX Light Sweet
Crude Oil (22,500 contract level); NYMEX NY Harbor Gasoline Blendstock
(7,800 contract level); NYMEX Henry Hub Natural Gas (21,000 contract
level); and NYMEX NY Harbor No. 2 Heating Oil (9,900 contract level).
\43\ See proposed CFTC Rule 151.6. The Working Group notes that the
visibility limits are below, and in some cases, significantly below,
the all months combined and any month position limits.
\44\ These statements must include: (i) the date the trader's
position initially reached or exceeded the visibility level; (ii) gross
long and gross short positions on an all-months-combined basis; (iii)
the contract month and the trader's gross long and gross short
positions in the relevant single month (if visibility levels are
reached or exceeded in any single month); and (iv) if applicable,
certification no positions subject to the additional reporting
requirements set forth in the Proposed Rule are held.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These visibility and consequent reporting requirements are
unnecessary given the transparency provisions that currently exist
under the CEA and those being implemented under Title VII of the Act.
For example, transparency is provided under: (i) the Large Trader
Reporting System for futures markets; and (ii) reporting requirements
adopted under Title VII applicable to large swap traders and registered
entities, including derivative clearing organizations (``DCO''); and
(iii) reporting requirements of uncleared OTC transactions to SDRs or
the Commission itself. Further, to the extent that the Commission seeks
specific information regarding the hedge exposures of a large market
participant (or group of large market participants), it can exercise
its special call authority set forth in Rule 18.05 of the Commission's
Regulations.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ 17 CFR  18.05.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, the Proposed Rule fails to address and analyze adequately
the compliance costs of meeting such visibility requirements and
articulate any material benefits accruing to swap or futures
markets.\46\ The Working Group submits that, in contrast to
speculators, compliance with the proposed visibility levels will result
in a substantial and disproportionate burden on bona fide hedgers, as
hedgers will be required to produce voluminous data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ See infra Part III.J, discussing the Commission's costs and
benefit analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Therefore, in light of the transparency created by Title VII of the
Act and the Commission's ability to request data from market
participants pursuant to its existing special call authority, the
Working Group submits that the imposition of position visibility levels
and periodic reporting requirements for hedge exposures is unwarranted.
Such requirements will unnecessarily impose a substantial compliance
burden for all markets participants and would not provide any benefit
that justifies the costs.
H. Transactions Between Affiliates Should Not Be Counted for Position
Limit Compliance Purposes
Inter-affiliate transactions that merely shift risk between one
corporate affiliate and another (i.e., a book transfer) should not be
counted for purposes of complying with position limits. Indeed, inter-
affiliate swaps do not in any way enhance systemic risk, nor do they
affect liquidity in swap markets. Specifically, inter-affiliate
transactions do not add to concentration in the market and therefore
cannot lead to an attempt by a market participant to corner the market
through excessive speculation. Consequently, the Working Group submits
that there is no benefit in including affiliate transactions in any
position limit.
I. Aggregation of Positions
The Working Group generally supports the proposed aggregation rules
and disaggregation exemption as applied to ``owned'' non-financial
entities. However, the Working Group respectfully requests
clarification on the scope and application of the indicia of
independent control. Specifically, the Commission should (i) clarify
the type of showing a market participant must make to demonstrate
independent control; (ii) provide reasonable flexibility for market
participants to address specified indicia through alternative, yet
functionally equivalent, measures; and (iii) confirm that the positions
of a non-financial subsidiary or affiliate that meet the applicable
independent management and trading requirements will not be aggregated
with a parent financial entity.
The Working Group submits that employees such as attorneys,
accountants, and risk management personnel may be shared between two
affiliate companies without violating the independence requirements
under proposed CFTC Rule 151.7, so long as they do not actively and
personally perform day-to-day trading activities and engage in day-to-
day trading decisions. The Working Group further submits that risk
management systems may also be shared between affiliated companies
without violating the independence requirements under proposed CFTC
Rule 151.7, so long as appropriate security mechanisms are in place to
prevent each company from gaining access to information or data about
its affiliated companies' positions, trades, or trading strategies.
Although the Working Group generally supports the proposed
aggregation rules and disaggregation exception, it fails to understand
certain aspects of proposed CFTC Rule 151.7(g). Specifically, subpart
(g)(1)(ii) requires that, in any application for a hedging exemption, a
market participant must provide an ``independent assessment report'' as
described in proposed CFTC Rules ``151.9(c)(1)(iii) and 151.9(f)(3).''
The Working Group notes that these cross-references do not exist and
believes this discrepancy is the result of a typographical error that
should be corrected. Notwithstanding these errors, the Working Group
requests that the Commission provide market participants flexibility in
meeting the requirements of proposed CFTC Rule 151.7(g). Specifically,
the Working Group respectfully requests that the Commission permit
market participants discretion in using internal or external personnel
to make assessments relating to the independence of its owned non-
financial entities.
Finally, the Working Group recommends that the Commission treat the
application for exemption from aggregation requirements for non-
financial entities required by proposed CFTC Rule 151.7(g) as a self-
certification requirement that is effective immediately upon filing. In
addition, the Commission should provide a safe harbor for market
participants that submit such applications in good faith to promptly
correct inadvertent errors or make adjustments in an orderly manner to
comply with newly implemented regulatory requirements under Title VII
of the Act.\47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Such safe harbor protection is required to permit certain
market participants to communicate internally to determine how they
must comply with the proposed aggregation requirements and ensure that
they do not violate the Commission's proposed rules or the rules and
regulations of other federal regulators with jurisdiction over their
operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
J. Meaningful Comment on the Anticipated Costs and Benefits of the
Proposed Rule Is Not Possible at This Time
The Working Group respectfully submits that it cannot meaningfully
respond to the costs unless a comprehensive and complete view of all
Dodd-Frank rulemakings are known. In particular, the Commission has not
yet issued a proposed or final rule further defining the term ``swap,''
as set forth in new CEA Section 1a(47)(A). As such, the Working Group
and other market participants are unable to ascertain the universe of
transactions that may be subject to Commission oversight as ``swaps''
and, thus, subject to the requirements of the Proposed Rule. This
guidance is critical to the efforts of affected market participants to
identify and understand the scope and impact of the Proposed Rule and
effectively comply with it.
The reporting requirements proposed by the Commission as discussed
above are commercially impractical and if implemented would create
substantial and perhaps irreparable costs to the market and market
participants. Further, it is difficult, if not impractical, to
meaningfully analyze the costs to traders applying for, and reporting
pursuant to, the bona fide hedge exemption because it is unclear how
the reporting obligations would fit at this time with the many other
reporting requirements proposed by the Commission for market
participants. Therefore, the Working Group respectfully reserves the
right to comment at a later date on the costs from the Proposed Rule,
when those costs can be better understood and quantified. However, the
Working Group offers analysis on several issues regarding the
Commission's discussion of costs in the Proposed Rule.
The Proposed Rule's analysis of requirements under the Paperwork
Reduction Act address three main areas of costs that commercial firms
can anticipate: (i) bona fide hedge related reporting requirements,
(ii) record-keeping requirements for traders applying for bona fide
hedge exemptions, and (iii) costs arising from the visibility level
reporting obligations. The Proposed Rule states that the costs related
to the reporting of bona fide hedges are anticipated to be $37.6
million in the aggregate. This equates to $188,000 per market
participant. The record-keeping requirements for traders applying for
bona fide hedge exemptions are anticipated to be an additional $10.4
million in the aggregate for annualized start up and capital costs and
annual operating costs, which equates to $65,000 per market
participant.\48\ In addition, the Proposed Rule estimates that the
costs to implement the position visibility levels is approximately
$29.7 million in the aggregate, which equates to $212,000 per market
participant. The costs associated with those market participants that
exceed the visibility levels and need to seek a bona fide hedge
exemption are estimated to be approximately $465,000 per market
participant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ The Commission does not provide a breakdown between annualized
capital and start up costs and annual total operating and maintenance
costs in the discussion of costs in the Paperwork Reduction Act
analysis. Therefore it is not possible to ascertain the operating and
maintenance costs noted in the Proposed Rule, and discussed herein,
which the impacted market participants can expect to bear on an annual
basis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The costs set forth in the Paperwork Reduction Act analysis are not
considered in the cost-benefit analysis set forth in the Proposed Rule.
The costs outlined in the Paperwork Reduction Act section, along with
the additional costs imposed by the Proposed Rule on bona fide hedgers,
should be subject to a thorough cost-benefit analysis of any final rule
issued in this proceeding. For example, should the Commission exercise
its discretion and adopt the pass-through provision, additional costs
not considered by the Proposed Rule are the costs associated with
monitoring compliance with the pass-through provision set forth in
proposed CFTC Rule 151.5(a)(1)(iv) that will be imposed on entities
relying on the bona fide hedge exemption.
The Proposed Rule does not offer any empirical evidence as to the
criteria for selecting, or process for identifying, the universe of
market participants likely to be impacted by this rulemaking. For
example, the Commission anticipates that on an annual basis, 140 market
participants would be subject to the visibility level reporting
obligations, and 200 would be subject to the reporting requirements
applicable to bona fide hedging transactions. Given that visibility
limits are to be set at a substantially lower level than the proposed
position limits, the Working Group respectfully submits that it would
be reasonable to assume that the number of entities impacted by the
visibility limits would be greater than those which would need to seek
a bona fide hedge exemption. However, the Proposed Rule espouses an
opposite view.
Further, the cost estimates for wage and salary have been estimated
from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association
(``SIFMA'') information. Internal data collected and analyzed by
members of the Working Group suggest that the average cost per hour is
approximately $120, much higher than SIFMA's $78.61, as relied upon by
the Commission.\49\ In addition, many commercial firms, including
members of the Working Group, are not staffed with the expertise to
build the systems that will be required to comply with the various
reporting provisions of the Proposed Rule. The Working Group
anticipates that its members will be utilizing the expertise of
consultants to create and implement the information technology systems
required by the Proposed Rule. Firms will be seeking these services at
a time when consultants are in high demand and even before the
implementation of Dodd-Frank requirements are at capacity. Thus, the
cost estimates offered in the Proposed Rule regarding anticipated wage
and salary impacts may be significantly below the costs of consultants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ For a complete discussion regarding the Working Group's cost
estimates of the CFTC's proposed rules, see the Comments of the Working
Group submitted in response to the CFTC's proposed rule regarding the
duties of swap dealers and MSPs, filed on January 24, 2011. Regulations
Establishing and Governing the Duties of Swap Dealers and Major Swap
Participants, 75 Fed. Reg. 71,397 (Nov. 23, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. Open Comment Period
Given the complexity and interconnectedness of all of the
rulemakings under Title VII of the Act, and given that the Act and the
rules promulgated thereunder entirely restructure OTC derivatives
markets, the Working Group respectfully requests that the Commission
hold open the comment period on all rules promulgated under Title VII
of the Act until such time as each and every rule required to be
promulgated has been proposed. Market participants will be able to
consider the entire new market structure and the interconnection
between all proposed rules when drafting comments on proposed rules.
The resulting comprehensive comments will allow the Commission to
better understand how its proposed rules will impact swap markets.
V. Conclusion
The Working Group supports appropriate regulation that brings
transparency and stability to the energy swap markets in the United
States. The Working Group appreciates this opportunity to comment and
respectfully requests that the Commission consider the comments set
forth herein as it develops a final rule in this proceeding.
The Working Group expressly reserves the right to supplement these
comments as deemed necessary and appropriate.
If you have any questions, please contact the undersigned.
Respectfully submitted,

R. Michael Sweeney, Jr.;
Mark W. Menezes;
David T. McIndoe;
Counsel for the Working Group of Commercial Energy Firms.
______

Submitted Questions
Response from Hon. Gary Gensler, Chairman, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission
Questions Submitted by Hon. Collin C. Peterson, a Representative in
Congress from Minnesota
Question 1. Your testimony suggests that regulations may be applied
to some asset classes before others. Which asset classes do you think
would see regulation first, and what qualities about these asset
classes make them ripe for regulation as opposed to others?
Answer. The Commission proposed a rule to establish a process for
the review and designation of swaps for mandatory clearing. One of the
primary goals of the Dodd-Frank Act was to lower risk by requiring
standardized swaps to be centrally cleared. The process set out in the
proposed rule is consistent with the Congressional requirement that
derivatives clearing organizations (DCOs) be eligible to clear the
swaps and that before a swap becomes subject to mandatory clearing, the
public gets to provide input on the contract or class of contracts. The
proposed rule would provide a process to implement the Dodd-Frank Act
requirement that a DCO that plans to accept a swap (or group, category,
type, or class of swaps) for clearing to submit the swap to the
Commission for review. The proposed rule also includes a process to
implement the Dodd-Frank requirement for Commission-initiated review of
swaps, including by class. The Commission sought public comment on all
aspects of the review process. In addition, DCO submissions and
Commission-initiated reviews would be subject to public comment under
the proposed rule's processes.

Question 2. There have been a number of concerns raised about the
Commission's proposed definition of swap execution facility (SEF) and
its requirement that participants must request price quotes from
multiple participants. In contrasts the SEC and European regulators
appear to be willing to allow one-to-one price quotations, similar to
what occurs in over-the-counter markets today.

(a) Explain the reasoning behind the Commission proposal. How will
the multiple bid requirement benefit market participants?

(b) Given that the legislative language for SEFs and security-based
SEFs are virtually identical, is it possible for both the
CFTC's and the SEC's very different proposals to be in
compliance with the law? If so, what is a rationale for living
with the differences?

(c) Assuming the Commission and the EU continue down their separate
paths on this issue, what is to prevent business from moving
overseas to what may be viewed as a more favorable trading
venue?

Answer. The CFTC's proposed SEF rule will provide all market
participants with the ability to execute or trade with other market
participants. It will afford market participants with the ability to
make firm bids or offers to all other market participants. It also will
allow them to make indications of interest--or what is often referred
to as ``indicative quotes''--to other participants. Furthermore, it
will allow participants to request quotes from other market
participants. These methods will provide hedgers, investors and Main
Street businesses both the flexibility to execute and trade by a number
of methods, but also the benefits of transparency and more market
competition. The proposed rule's approach is designed to implement
Congress' mandates for transparency and competition where multiple
market participants can communicate with one another and gain the
benefit of a competitive and transparent price discovery process.
The proposal also allows participants to issue requests for quotes,
whereby they would reach out to a minimum number of other market
participants for quotes. It also allows that, for block transactions,
swap transactions involving non-financial end-users, swaps that are not
``made available for trading'' and bilateral transactions, market
participants can get the benefits of the swap execution facilities'
greater transparency or, if they wish, would still be allowed to
execute by voice or other means of trading.
In the futures world, the law and historical precedent is that all
transactions are conducted on exchanges, yet in the swaps world many
contracts are transacted bilaterally. While the CFTC will continue to
coordinate with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to
harmonize approaches, the CFTC also will consider matters associated
with regulatory arbitrage between futures and swaps. The Commission has
received public comments on its SEF rule and will move forward to
consider a final rule only after staff has had the opportunity to
summarize them for consideration and after Commissioners are able to
discuss them and provide feedback to staff.
As the Commission works to implement the derivatives reforms in the
Dodd-Frank Act--with regard to execution requirements as well as all
other areas--we are actively coordinating with international regulators
to promote robust and consistent standards and avoid conflicting
requirements in swaps oversight. The Commission participates in
numerous international working groups regarding swaps, including the
International Organization of Securities Commissions Task Force on OTC
Derivatives, which the CFTC co-chairs with the SEC. The CFTC, SEC,
European Commission and European Securities Market Authority are
coordinating through a technical working group.

Question 3. Most estimates place the world's 25 largest banks as a
party to more than 90% of the world's swaps. When you testified here
last, you suggested that 200 entities would likely register as swap
dealers and that most of them would be affiliates of the large banks,
who are being required to spin off parts of their swap business under
other provisions of Dodd-Frank. Assuming the CFTC's proposed definition
of swap dealer remains, of these 200 entities, how many do you believe
will not be affiliates of these 25 large banks and who generally would
make up these non-affiliated swap dealers?
Answer. In the first week of December 2010, the CFTC and the SEC
jointly issued a proposed rulemaking to further define the term ``swap
dealer.'' To date, there are more than 200 comments responding to the
proposal. Many of the commenters addressed why the definition of swap
dealer should or should not encompass particular types of companies.
The particular characteristics and activities that would require a
company to register as a swap dealer will be addressed in the final
rule, after taking the comments into account.

Question 4. In his testimony for the next panel, Mr. McMahon with
Edison Electric Institute appears to not want regulators to impose
capital or margin requirements on swaps entered into strictly between
swap dealers and major swap participants because of potential costs.
Given that you think the risks involved with swaps between end-users
and financial players do not merit margin requirements, what are your
thoughts about Mr. McMahon's idea to do the same for dealer to dealer
swaps?
Answer. In passing the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress recognized the
different levels of risk posed by transactions between financial
entities and those that involve non-financial entities, as reflected in
the non-financial end-user exception to clearing. The CFTC also has
recognized this, for example, in its proposed rule regarding margin
requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants. For any
transaction involving a non-financial end-user engaged in hedging or
mitigating commercial risk, neither party is required to post margin.
In the joint rulemaking to further define the term ``swap dealer,''
the SEC and the CFTC proposed factors for the de minimis exemption
based on the aggregate effective notional amount of an entity's trades,
its level of trading activity with special entities, the number of
counterparties it transacts with and the number of swaps it trades.
Before the Commission proceeds to final rules, Commission staff
will read and summarize all submitted public comments, and
Commissioners will have the opportunity to review comments and provide
feedback.

Question 4a. In his testimony for the next panel, Mr. McMahon with
Edison Electric Institute worries that his members' ``accommodating''
the demand of third parties for swaps are being viewed by the CFTC as
dealing activity and such activity could get his members listed as swap
dealers.

(a) Have you heard about this ``accommodating'' swap activity that
his members have engaged in and what do you see are the
similarities and differences between it and a dealer's swap
activity?

(b) Although it would not qualify now under the proposed rules,
isn't such ``accommodating'' swap activity a likely reason why
Congress included a de minimis exception to the definition of
swap dealer?

(c) Assuming this activity does classify one of his members as a
swap dealer:

(i) Would the full scope of regulation under the proposed rules
apply to all his swap activity or just this
``accommodating'' activity?

(ii) If his counterparties to these ``accommodating'' swaps were
end-users, wouldn't such swaps still be eligible for the
clearing exception and an exception from margin, as you
envision it?

Answer. The CFTC and SEC jointly issued a proposed rule to further
define the terms ``swap dealer,'' ``securities-based swap dealer,''
``major swap participant'' and ``major securities-based swap
participant.'' The Commissions specifically sought public comment
regarding the appropriate clarifications to the detailed definition
included in the statute. While the de minimis exemption may apply in
particular relevant circumstances, the Commissions sought specific
comment with regard to additional factors to be considered where the de
minimis exemption level may be exceeded. The Commission has received
substantial public comment in response. Staff will analyze, summarize
and consider public comments before the Commission proceeds further.
Question Submitted by Hon. Randy Hultgren, a Representative in Congress
from Illinois
Question. As you know, the Committee has expressed concerns that
the Commission is not conducting adequate cost-benefit analysis, and as
a result does not know the impact the wave of proposed regulations will
have on the economy and our markets. For example, you've received
public comments that calculations of the costs of proposed rules by
stakeholders have far surpassed those calculated by the Commission--by
as much as 20 times, 63 times and even 4,000 times.

As you hit the ``natural pause'' in rulemaking and review
the ``whole mosaic of rules and how they interrelate,'' do you
intend to review the costs and benefits of the rules when
applied comprehensively?

If no--Don't you think that's the critical component to
understanding whether the rules will have a negative impact on
the economy and jobs?

If yes--Do you intend to improve the cost-benefit analysis
that you're conducting so that your estimates are not 4,000
times below those calculated by stakeholders?

Answer. The CFTC has endeavored to include well-developed
considerations of costs and benefits in each of its proposed
rulemakings. Relevant considerations are presented not only in the
cost-benefit analysis section of the CFTC's rulemaking releases, but
additionally are discussed throughout the release in compliance with
the Administrative Procedure Act, which requires the CFTC to set forth
the legal, factual and policy bases for its rulemakings.
In addition, Commissioners and staff have met extensively with
market participants and other interested members of the public to hear,
consider and address their concerns in each rulemaking. CFTC staff
hosted a number of public roundtables so that rules could be proposed
in line with industry practices and address compliance costs consistent
with the CFTC's obligations to promote market integrity, reduce risk
and increase transparency as directed in Title VII of the Dodd-Frank
Act. Information from each of these meetings--including full
transcripts of the roundtables--is available on the CFTC's website and
has been factored into each applicable rulemaking.
With each proposed rule, the Commission has sought public comment
regarding costs and benefits.
With the substantial completion of the proposal phase of rule-
writing, the public in recent weeks has had the opportunity to review
the whole mosaic of proposed rules. To facilitate this review, the CFTC
reopened or extended comment periods for most of our proposed rules for
an additional 30 days--allowing the public to submit any comments they
may have after seeing the entire mosaic at once, including comments
about potential compliance costs as well as phasing of implementation
dates to help the agency as we go forward with finalizing rules. In
addition, in May CFTC and SEC staff held a 2 day roundtable to hear
from the public on implementation dates for final rules. The Commission
also offered a 60 day public comment file to hear specifically on this
issue. This comment period allowed for presentation of information
regarding the costs and benefits of the rules on a comprehensive basis.
Final rules will be developed only after staff can analyze, summarize
and consider comments; after the Commissioners are able to discuss the
comments and provide feedback to staff; and after we consult with
fellow regulators on the rules.
Question Submitted by Hon. Christopher P. Gibson, a Representative in
Congress from New York
Question. At a time when our economy is struggling to recover, I
remain particularly concerned with our international competiveness.
Technology and expertise have allowed the futures industry to spread
throughout the globe. I understand the CFTC has been working closely
with the European Commission, the European Central Bank, new European
Securities and Markets Authority and other regulators overseas. I
appreciate those efforts, and I hope the close consultations will
continue. In a speech you delivered last month, you discussed the
importance of ``harmonizing oversight'' of the swaps market. My
question gets back to process and the speed at which the CFTC is
moving, as well as the lack of clarity and definitions. Given the pace
of the proposed rules, do you believe the CFTC is in danger of moving
ahead of the EU and others? How is it possible to ``harmonize
oversight'' if our rule making preempts theirs?
Answer. Regulators across the globe continue to work together
towards achieving common goals including the G20 agreement of September
2009 that: all standardized OTC derivative contracts should be traded
on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where appropriate, and
cleared through central counterparties by the end of2012 at the latest.
OTC derivative contracts should be reported to trade repositories. And
non-centrally cleared contracts should be subject to higher capital
requirements.
Japan is now working to implement its reforms. In September of last
year, the European Commission (E.C.) released its swaps proposal. The
European Council and the European Parliament are now considering the
proposal. Asian nations, as well as Canada, also are working on their
reform packages.
As we work to implement the derivatives reforms in the Dodd-Frank
Act, we are actively coordinating with international regulators to
promote robust and consistent standards and avoid conflicting
requirements in swaps oversight. The Commission participates in
numerous international working groups regarding swaps, including the
International Organization of Securities Commissions Task Force on OTC
Derivatives, which the CFTC co-chairs with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). The CFTC, SEC, European Commission and European
Securities Market Authority are intensifying discussions through a
technical working group.
As we do with domestic regulators, we are sharing many of our
memos, term sheets and draft work product with international
regulators. We have been consulting directly and sharing documentation
with the European Commission, the European Central Bank, the UK
Financial Services Authority, the new European Securities and Markets
Authority, the Japanese Financial Services authority and regulators in
Canada, France, Germany and Switzerland.
The Dodd-Frank Act recognizes that the swaps market is global and
interconnected. It gives the CFTC the flexibility to recognize foreign
regulatory frameworks that are comprehensive and comparable to U.S.
oversight of the swaps markets in certain areas. In addition, we have a
long history of recognition regarding foreign participants that are
comparably regulated by a home country regulator. The CFTC enters into
arrangements with our international counterparts for access to
information and cooperative oversight. We have signed Memoranda of
Understanding with regulators in Europe, North America and Asia.
Questions Submitted by Hon. William L. Owens, a Representative in
Congress from New York
Question 1. Will the Commission fully exempt end-users, including
utilities, to hedge their commercial risks without having to clear
those swaps and without the parties having to post margin?
Answer. In passing the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress recognized the
different levels of risk posed by transactions between financial
entities and those that involve non-financial entities, as reflected in
the non-financial end-user exception to clearing. The CFTC has
recognized this in its proposed rule regarding margin requirements for
swap dealers and major swap participants. For any transaction involving
a non-financial end-user engaged in hedging or mitigating commercial
risk, neither party is required to post margin.
Before the Commission proceeds to final rules, Commission staff
will read and summarize all submitted public comments, and
Commissioners will have the opportunity to review comments and provide
feedback.

Question 2. The business conduct rules established for governmental
entities could potentially affect the access to and cost of swaps for
public power utilities. What is the Commission doing in its rulemaking
to ensure that governmental entities, like public power systems,
continue to have access to swaps without the imposition of new
burdensome and costly requirements?
Answer. The Commission's proposed business conduct standards rules
track the statutory directive under the provisions of the Dodd-Frank
Act that create a higher standard of care for swap dealers dealing with
Special Entities, which include governmental entities. The proposed
rules were designed to enable swap dealers to comply with their new
duties in an efficient and effective manner. The Commission is
reviewing the comments it has received on the proposed rules to ensure
that the final rules achieve the statutory purpose without imposing
undue costs on market participants. The proposed rulemaking release
specifically asked that the public provide comment regarding associated
costs and benefits.

Question 3. As you note in your testimony, the CFTC has yet to
issue any guidance on what constitutes a ``swap'', and has yet to issue
final rules on who's a ``swap dealer'', or a ``major swap
participant.'' How has this process impacted the SEC-CFTC Working
Group's ability to participate in the rulemaking process, and, perhaps
more importantly, how has it impacted the ability of members of the
Working Group to evaluate how the CFTC's proposed regulatory regime
will impact business operations?
Answer. The joint CFTC-SEC proposed rule to further define the
terms ``swap,'' ``security-based swap,'' ``mixed swap'' and ``security-
based swap agreement'' was published in the Federal Register on May 23,
2011.

Question 4. As you know, the CFTC is mandated under Dodd-Frank to
have final rules issued by mid-July 2011. Can you provide a timeline on
an appropriate strategy or timeline by which the CFTC should make
effective its final rules in a manner that will provide entities, such
as those in the SEC-CFTC's Working Group, adequate time for compliance?
If applicable, please describe any potential implementation phase-ins,
delaying of effective dates, or order by which certain final rules
should be issued or become effective.
Answer. In enacting title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress gave
the CFTC latitude with respect to the effective dates of particular
requirements. In May, the Commission re-opened many of its comment
periods that had closed and extended some existing comment periods so
that the public could comment in the context of the entire mosaic of
proposed rules. This opportunity was available with respect to all
relevant proposed rules, giving the public and market participants the
opportunity to comment on compliance costs and to make recommendations
regarding the schedule of implementation. That extended comment period
closed on June 3, 2011. In addition, on May 2 and 3, CFTC and SEC staff
held roundtable sessions to obtain public input on implementation dates
of the various rulemakings. Prior to the roundtable, on April 29, CFTC
staff released a document that set forth concepts that the Commission
may consider with regard to the effective dates of final rules for
swaps under the Dodd-Frank Act. We also offered a 60 day public comment
file to hear specifically on this issue. The roundtable and resulting
public comment letters will help inform the Commission as to what
requirements can be met sooner and which ones will take a bit more
time.

Question 5. If subject to the regulatory requirements associated
with being a swap dealer or major swap participant, you've testified
that energy firms would face significant compliance costs. Could you
briefly describe for this Committee how regulation as a swap dealer or
major swap participant would impact additional compliance costs on
energy companies?
Answer. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that swap dealers comply with
rules establishing capital requirements, margin requirements, and
business conduct standards. For non-bank swap dealers, the CFTC is
responsible for issuing regulations establishing those requirements.
The Commission has endeavored to include well-developed considerations
of costs and benefits in each of its proposed rulemakings. Relevant
considerations are presented not only in the cost-benefit analysis
section of the CFTC's rulemaking releases, but additionally are
discussed throughout the release in compliance with the Administrative
Procedure Act, which requires the CFTC to set forth the legal, factual
and policy bases for its rulemakings.
In addition, Commissioners and staff have met extensively with
market participants and other interested members of the public to hear,
consider and address their concerns in each rulemaking. CFTC staff
hosted a number of public roundtables so that rules could be proposed
in line with industry practices and address compliance costs consistent
with CFTC obligations to promote market integrity, reduce risk and
increase transparency as directed in Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act.
Information from each of these meetings--including full transcripts of
the roundtables--is available on the CFTC's website and has been
factored into each applicable rulemaking.
With each proposed rule, the Commission has sought public comment
regarding costs and benefits.

Question 6. You mentioned in your testimony that the CFTC is
reviewing the de minimis exception for swap dealers. What do you
believe would be an appropriate de minimis exception?
Answer. In the joint rulemaking to further define the term ``swap
dealer,'' the SEC and the CFTC proposed factors for the de minimis
exemption based on the aggregate effective notional amount of an
entity's trades, its level of trading activity with special entities,
the number of counterparties it transacts with and the number of swaps
it trades. Specifically, to qualify for the de minimis exemption under
the proposed rule, the entity's total notional swap activity must not
exceed $100 million in a 12 month period, the notional amount of
transactions with special entities must not exceed $25 million, it must
not enter into swaps with more than 15 counterparties, and must not
enter into more than 20 swaps as a dealer in a 12 month period. The
Commissions specifically requested that the public provide comments
regarding the proposal with respect to the de minimis exemption.

Question 7. Congress directed the CFTC to ``consider whether to
exempt small banks, savings institutions, farm credit system
institutions, and credit unions.'' Will the Commission clarify in its
final rules that farm credit system institutions, credit unions and
small banks with under $10 billion in assets will qualify for the end-
user clearing exemption?
Answer. The Dodd-Frank Act specifically provides for an exception
from the clearing requirement for non-financial end-users hedging or
mitigating commercial risk. It also requires the CFTC to consider
whether to exempt farm credit system institutions, depository
institutions and credit unions with total assets of $10 billion or less
from the clearing mandate. The CFTC issued a proposed rulemaking with
respect to the end-user exception from the clearing requirement that
also requested comment regarding such small financial institutions. The
Commission has received substantial public comment in response. Staff
will analyze, summarize and consider public comments before the
Commission proceeds further.
Response from James M. Field, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer, Deere & Company
Question Submitted by Hon. Randy Hultgren, a Representative in Congress
from Illinois
Question. I'm concerned about the impact of Title VII on pension
plans. Can you tell me if Deere's pension plan engages in swaps? What
would be the impact for Deere retirees if the plan were no longer able
to engage in swaps or if they became prohibitively expensive?
Answer. The John Deere Pension Trust maintains trading positions in
derivative contracts to implement asset allocation, investment
strategies, and for risk management. Interest rate swaps are used for
asset/liability surplus risk management. Currency spots and forwards
are used to mitigate foreign exchange risk for investments held in
currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Commodity total return swaps are
used as a liquid alternative for implementing commodity exposures. If
the pension trust was no longer able to engage in swaps, or swaps
became prohibitively expensive due to Title VII or other regulations,
the plans would incur higher transactions costs and experience higher
volatility and surplus risk. This is clearly not in the best interest
of plan beneficiaries nor the corporate plan sponsor, and ultimately
could impact the level of benefits provided to plan participants,
including the possibility of freezing, closing or termination of the
plans.
Response from Ann E. Trakimas, Chief Operating Officer, CoBank,
Greenwood Village, CO; on behalf of Farm Credit Council
Question Submitted by Hon. Christopher P. Gibson, a Representative in
Congress from New York
Question. I remain extremely concerned about potential effects on
my family farms and coops in my district. Falling under the definition
of a swap dealer could significantly harm the ability of my farmers,
who already face financial challenges, to hedge risk. On a related
note, I am troubled over the testimony on Farm Credit Institutions. In
your written testimony you address the potential for the CFTC to take a
narrow approach to the $10 billion asset limit. What might an overly
narrow interpretation of the asset limit mean for the Farm Credit
System? Additionally, what could collateral and mandatory clearing mean
to farm credit in my district?
Answer. Attached is a copy of the comment letter we submitted June
3 to the CFTC regarding the costs associated with both mandatory
clearing and swap dealer regulation. Also attached is an earlier
comment letter (Feb 22, 2011) we submitted to the CFTC regarding the
``swap dealer'' definition and ``end-user'' exception.
As you will note it is difficult to precisely estimate the costs of
collateral and mandatory clearing, both in general as well as with
respect to your Congressional District. We do note that the as a
cooperative system, the costs of compliance become part of the
operating rate that borrowers are ultimately responsible to bear. All
farmers, ranchers and their cooperatives in your district would share
proportionately in those costs.
We hope this additional information is responsive to your inquiry.
If we can provide further assistance, please let us know.
attachment 1
June 3, 2011

By Electronic Submission

Mr. David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commission Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: Entity Definitions (RIN 3038-AD06, RIN 3235-AK65) End-User Clearing
Exception (RIN 3038-AD10)

Dear Mr. Stawick:

The Farm Credit Council, on behalf of its members, submits further
comments on rules issued by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(the ``Commission'') to implement the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (``Dodd-Frank'').\1\ As you know, on February
22, 2011, we submitted comments on the notices of proposed rulemaking
concerning both the further definition of ``swap dealer'' and the end-
user clearing exception.\2\ We appreciate the opportunity to supplement
these comments in light of the comprehensive regulatory framework that
the Commission has now proposed.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).
\2\ See End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swaps, 75 Fed.
Reg. 80747 (proposed Dec. 23, 2010) (to be codified at 17 CFR pt. 39);
Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap Dealer,''
``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap Participant''
and ``Eligible Contract Participant,'' 75 Fed. Reg. 80174 (proposed
Dec. 21, 2010) (to be codified at 17 CFR pts. 1 & 240).
\3\ See Reopening and Extension of Comment Periods for Rulemakings
Implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act, 76 Fed. Reg. 25274 (May 4, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Farm Credit Council is the national trade association for the
Farm Credit System, a government instrumentality created ``to
accomplish the objective of improving the income and well-being of
American farmers and ranchers by furnishing sound, adequate, and
constructive credit and closely related services to them, their
cooperatives, and to selected farm-related businesses necessary for
efficient farm operations.'' \4\ Today, the Farm Credit System
comprises five banks and 87 associations, which together provide 40% of
agricultural lending in the United States. To provide tailored
financing products for farmers and farm-related businesses, Farm Credit
System institutions rely on the safe use of derivatives to manage
interest rate, liquidity, and balance sheet risk, primarily in the form
of interest rate swaps. These non-speculative swaps are backed by
collateral. Specifically, as of March 31, 2011, the Farm Credit
System's total derivatives exposure, net of collateral ($204 million),
represented approximately 11 to 12 basis points of the System's total
loan volume ($177.5 billion). Respectfully, we would advocate that such
a limited FCS exposure does not rise to current concerns related to
systemic risk and/or interconnectivity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 12 U.S.C.  2001(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we have previously explained, Congress intended Farm Credit
System institutions to qualify for the end-user exception to mandatory
clearing. In this regard, we urged the Commission to clarify that it
will consider (1) the average assets of that bank's affiliated lending
organizations, and (2) risk-based factors to determine whether a
financial institution's derivatives activity should be subject to
mandatory clearing. Further, we have explained that no Farm Credit
System institution should be regulated as a swap dealer. In this
regard, we have urged the Commission to clarify that, like the
commercial banks with which they compete, Farm Credit System
institutions will be exempt from swap dealer regulation for swaps
entered into in connection with originating customer loans.
Mandatory clearing or swap dealer regulation would raise the costs
of risk management for Farm Credit System institutions and their
borrowers. These new costs would reduce liquidity, discourage effective
risk management, and frustrate the Farm Credit System's congressionally
endorsed mission of providing financing to rural America. Having had
more time to evaluate the consequences of these proposed regulations,
the Farm Credit Council can now provide a clearer estimate of the costs
that would result from mandatory clearing or swap dealer regulation.
Although proposed requirements for margin on uncleared swaps will
impose still additional costs on Farm Credit System institutions, the
Farm Credit Council will address those proposed rules in separate
comment letters.
I. Costs of Mandatory Clearing
We estimate that, conservatively, mandatory clearing would impose
new costs on Farm Credit System institutions ranging from $6 million to
$27.2 million, per year. This estimate depends on the direction and
volatility of interest rates, which in some scenarios, may require Farm
Credit System institutions to post additional margin and thereby incur
costs exceeding even the high end of our estimate. For example, our
estimate would have to be raised if exchanges were to increase initial
margin requirements in response to changes in interest rates.
Our estimate represents the incremental costs that would result
from moving the Farm Credit System's current bilateral interest rate
swaps to major clearinghouses. First, we estimate that clearing would
impose millions of dollars annually in transaction and operational
costs. Specifically, Farm Credit System institutions would have to pay
new fees to clearinghouses, futures commission merchants, and swap
execution facilities. Additionally, Farm Credit System institutions
would have to incur the cost of developing new systems to process
cleared trades.
More significantly, Farm Credit System institutions would incur
financing costs associated with posting initial and variation margin at
clearinghouses. These financing costs are more difficult to predict
because they depend on both the value of the Farm Credit System's swap
positions, which may trigger variation margin requirements, and the
level of interest rates, which will govern the cost of meeting margin
calls. In fact, the negative carry associated with financing margin
calls could easily exceed the assumptions we used to arrive at our
estimates, pushing the annual cost of mandatory clearing above $27
million.
Finally, in addition to the up to $27 million in new annual costs
discussed above, mandatory clearing will require Farm Credit System
institutions to post funds as margin that they could otherwise lend to
farmers and farm-related businesses. The largest two Farm Credit System
banks estimate that they will likely have to post $250 million and $50
million in initial margin annually. In an adverse scenario, Farm Credit
System institutions will have to post even larger amounts in variation
margin. To be sure, the Farm Credit System currently posts--and
collects--collateral from its bilateral swap counterparties, and Farm
Credit System institutions carefully manage counterparty credit risk.
To the extent that more margin is required at a clearinghouse, however,
those funds will no longer be available for loans to farmers, ranchers,
and farm-related businesses.
Accordingly, we continue to believe that, especially given the
costs it would impose, mandatory clearing is not warranted for the Farm
Credit System, which poses little risk to the United States financial
system.
II. Costs of Swap Dealer Regulation
The costs of swap dealer regulation are more difficult to quantify.
Currently, one Farm Credit System bank, CoBank, provides swaps to its
customers, most commonly in the form of interest rate swaps tied to the
financial terms of the loans it issues. If CoBank did not qualify for
the exception granted to insured depository institutions providing
swaps in conjunction with loans to a customer or the de minimis
exception to the swap dealer definition, compliance risks and new
regulation would force CoBank to cease activity causing it to be a swap
dealer. This would impose costs on both CoBank and its member
associations.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Consistent with the Farm Credit Act's ``objective . . . to
encourage farmer- and rancher-borrowers['] participation in the
management, control, and ownership of a permanent system of credit for
agriculture,'' 12 U.S.C.  2001(b), Farm Credit System banks are
cooperatives primarily owned by their affiliated associations, and Farm
Credit System associations are cooperatives owned by their borrowers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we explained in our February 22 letter, CoBank manages the risk
of customer default by requiring certain customers to enter into swaps
that hedge fluctuations in interest rates. This way, if interest rates
rise--thereby raising the cost of loan payments--the customer will be
hedged. CoBank usually has between $2 to $3 billion in these risk-
reducing customer transactions. Eliminating the ability to help
customers hedge changes in interest rates would increase credit risk to
CoBank on this portion of its loans.
If CoBank ceased its customer derivatives activity, CoBank's
affiliated associations would also face additional costs. These
associations use swaps provided by CoBank to position their equity over
a medium-term timeframe to earn a consistent return on equity. A
consistent return on equity is important because, unlike commercial
banks, cooperative Farm Credit System associations return their profits
to their borrower-members in the form of patronage distributions. The
consistent return therefore allows the associations to pay a consistent
level of patronage distributions to the farmers and ranchers that
borrow from them. We estimate that losing the ability to invest their
equity over a longer time horizon would cost CoBank's affiliated
associations an estimated $5 to $15 million in funds that are currently
returned to borrower-members in patronage distributions.
Accordingly, we continue to believe that no Farm Credit System
institution warrants regulation as a swap dealer. To the contrary, the
risk-reducing products that CoBank offers actually make the bank safer
and provide benefits to the Farm Credit System's member-borrowers.
III. Conclusion
For the reasons set forth above, the Farm Credit Council continues
to urge the Commission to clarify both that Farm Credit System
institutions will: (1) be eligible for the end-user clearing exemption,
such as looking through each Farm Credit Bank to the average size of
its affiliated associations, and (2) that Farm Credit System
institutions will not be regulated as swap dealers to the extent they
enter into swaps in connection with originating customer loans.
Mandatory clearing or swap dealer regulation would raise costs--and
increase risk--to the Farm Credit System and the farmers and ranchers
that rely on it as a source of financing. Because Farm Credit System
institutions are already safe and sound, and because they responsibly
manage their derivatives exposure, we do not believe they pose systemic
risk warranting these costly new regulations.
The Farm Credit Council appreciates the opportunity to comment. If
you have any questions or we can provide other information, please do
not hesitate to contact us. As always, we would welcome the opportunity
to work with the Commission in developing the final rule.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Robbie Boone,
Vice President, Government Affairs,
Farm Credit Council.

CC:

Honorable Gary Gensler, Chairman;
Honorable Michael Dunn, Commissioner;
Honorable Jill E. Sommers, Commissioner;
Honorable Bart Chilton, Commissioner;
Honorable Scott D. O'Malia, Commissioner.
attachment 2
February 22, 2011

By Electronic Submission

Mr. David A. Stawick,
Secretary,
Commission Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.

Re: End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swaps (RIN 3038-AD10)

Dear Mr. Stawick:

The Farm Credit Council, on behalf of its members, submits these
comments on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (``NOPR'') issued by the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (``Commission'') concerning the
end-user exception to mandatory clearing under Section 723 of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (``Dodd-
Frank'').\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ End-User Exception to Mandatory Clearing of Swaps, 75 Fed. Reg.
80747 (proposed Dec. 23, 2010) (to be codified at 17 CFR pt. 39).
Section 723 of Dodd-Frank, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376, 1675-82
(2010), amends Section 2 of the Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA''), 7
U.S.C.  2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Farm Credit Council is the national trade association for the
Farm Credit System, a government instrumentality created ``to
accomplish the objective of improving the income and well-being of
American farmers and ranchers by furnishing sound, adequate, and
constructive credit and closely related services to them, their
cooperatives, and to selected farm-related businesses necessary for
efficient farm operations.'' \2\ Fulfilling this mission, the Farm
Credit System's five banks and 87 associations currently account for
40% of agricultural lending in the United States. To provide tailored
financing products for farmers and farm-related businesses, Farm Credit
System institutions rely on the safe use of derivatives to manage
interest rate, liquidity, and balance sheet risk, primarily in the form
of interest rate swaps. Because we believe Congress intended the end-
user exception to preserve our ability to provide dependable financing
to farmers, farm-related businesses, and rural America, the Farm Credit
Councilappreciates the opportunity to comment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 12 U.S.C.  2001(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I. Summary of Comments
The Farm Credit Council supports Dodd-Frank's goal of making the
derivatives market safer, and appreciates that mandatory clearing of
swaps entered into by risky Wall Street institutions will provide
important protections for the market. But clearing would also make the
derivatives that the Farm Credit System safely and effectively uses to
manage risk more expensive. These new costs would reduce liquidity,
discourage effective risk management, frustrate the Farm Credit
System's congressionally endorsed mission, and diminish rural America's
access to credit. Congress did not intend, and the Commission should
not endorse, such a result. Accordingly, the Commission should permit
all Farm Credit System institutions to use the end-user clearing
exception.
Specifically, our comments address the following issues:

Dodd-Frank does not limit eligibility for the end-user
exception to institutions with total assets of $10 billion or
less, and any such limit would be particularly inappropriate
for the Farm Credit System.

In order to preserve competition for agricultural lending,
the Commission must ``look through'' Farm Credit System banks
to the smaller associations that own them and that benefit from
the banks' derivatives activity. Otherwise, Farm Credit System
associations would have to bear the cost of mandatory clearing,
while competing commercial banks would not.

Because the Farm Credit Administration effectively regulates
Farm Credit System institutions; because Farm Credit System
institutions only enter into safe, non-speculative swaps backed
by collateral; and because the Farm Credit System is not
interconnected with other financial entities, the Farm Credit
System's derivatives activity does not warrant mandatory
clearing.

Alternatively, the Commission should adopt a risk-based
approach to mandatory clearing, similar to the proposed
definition of major swap participant, that would exempt small
financial institutions whose current uncollateralized exposure
and potential future exposure fall below certain thresholds.
II. Dodd-Frank Does Not Impose an Asset Limit on Which Farm Credit
System Institutions May Qualify for the End-User Clearing
Exception
Dodd-Frank requires the Commission to ``consider whether to exempt
. . . farm credit system institutions, . . . including . . . farm
credit system institutions with total assets of $10,000,000,000 or
less.'' \3\ The Farm Credit Council urges the Commission to clarify
that this language does not set an asset limit on which institutions
the Commission may exempt from mandatory clearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Pub. L. No. 111-203,  723, 124 Stat. at 1680 (CEA 
2(h)(7)(C)(ii)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fact, Congress gave the Commission broad authority to permit
Farm Credit System institutions, including those with total assets of
more than $10 billion, to use the end-user exception. The following
colloquy between Representatives Holden and Peterson of the House
Agriculture Committee makes this clear:

Mr. Holden. . . . Mr. Speaker, I now would like to enter into
a colloquy with the chairman of the Agriculture Committee.
Mr. Chairman, the conference report includes compromise
language that requires the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
to consider exempting small banks, Farm Credit System
institutions and credit unions from provisions requiring that
all swaps be cleared. We understand that community banks, Farm
Credit institutions and credit unions did not cause the
financial crisis that precipitated this legislation. While the
legislation places a special emphasis on institutions with less
than $10 billion in assets, my reading of the language is that
they should not in any way be viewed by the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission as a limit on the size of the institution
that should be considered for an exemption.
Mr. Chairman, would you concur with this assessment?
Mr. Peterson. Yes, I fully agree. The language says that
institutions to be considered for the exemption shall include
those with $10 billion or less in assets. It is not a firm
standard. Some firms with larger assets could qualify, while
some with smaller assets may not. The regulators will have
maximum flexibility when looking at the risk portfolio of these
institutions for consideration of an exemption.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 156 Cong. Rec. H5246 (daily ed. June 30, 2009) (emphasis
added).

Senator Lincoln made a similar statement in the Senate. She observed
that ``small financial entities, such as banks, credit unions and farm
credit institutions below $10 billion in assets--and possibly larger
entities--will be permitted to utilize the end-user clearing exemption
with approval from the regulators.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 156 Cong. Rec. S5921 (daily ed. July 15, 2010) (emphasis
added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In giving the Commission the authority to exempt institutions with
assets exceeding $10 billion, Congress sought to avoid imposing new,
clearing-related costs on the Farm Credit System. As Senators Dodd and
Lincoln explained, ``These entities did not get us into this crisis and
should not be punished for Wall Street's excesses. They help to finance
jobs and provide lending for communities all across this nation. That
is why Congress provided regulators the authority to exempt these
institutions.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Letter from Sens. Dodd and Lincoln to Reps. Frank and
Peterson, in 156 Cong. Rec. S6192 (daily ed. July 22, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, as Representative Holden described in detail, mandatory
clearing would have no benefit as applied to Farm Credit System
institutions because they already effectively manage risk:

Farm Credit System institutions are regulated and examined by a
fully empowered independent regulatory agency, the Farm Credit
Administration, which has the authority to shut down and
liquidate a system institution that is not financially viable.
In addition, the Farm Credit System is the only GSE that has a
self-funded insurance program in place that was established to
not only protect investors in farm credit debt securities
against loss of their principal and interest, but also to
protect taxpayers.

These are just a few of the reasons why the Agriculture
Committee insisted that the institutions of the Farm Credit
System not be subject to a number of the provisions of this
legislation. They were not the cause of the problem, did not
utilize TARP funds, and did not engage in abusive subprime
lending. We have believed that this legislation should not do
anything to disrupt this record of success.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 156 Cong. Rec. H5246 (daily ed. June 30, 2009) (statement of
Rep. Holden).

Although Farm Credit System associations have, on average, total
assets that are well under $10 billion, all of the five Farm Credit
System banks have total assets exceeding $10 billion. If, despite the
Commission's broad authority to exempt all Farm Credit System
institutions, the end-user exception were confined to institutions with
total assets of $10 billion or less, no Farm Credit System bank would
qualify, and the bulk of the System's derivatives activity would be
subject to a costly new clearing requirement. As the legislative
history demonstrates, the Commission can and should avoid this result.
Accordingly, the Farm Credit Council urges the Commission to permit all
Farm Credit System institutions--regardless of their total assets--to
use the end-user clearing exception.
III. If the Commission Adopts an Asset Test, It Should Look Through
Farm Credit System Banks to the Small Associations Whose Risk
They Hedge With Derivatives
If the Commission adopts an asset-based test for which financial
institutions qualify for the end-user exception, it should clarify that
it will look through Farm Credit System banks and consider the average
assets of their affiliated associations. As explained below, any other
approach would give commercial banks an unfair competitive advantage in
the market for agricultural lending.
Consistent with Congress's ``objective . . . to encourage farmer-
and rancher-borrowers['] participation in the management, control, and
ownership of a permanent system of credit,'' \8\ the Farm Credit System
has a unique structure. Farm Credit System banks are cooperatives
primarily owned by their affiliated associations.\9\ The Farm Credit
Act authorizes the banks ``to make loans and commitments to eligible
cooperative associations.'' \10\ Farm Credit System associations are,
in turn, authorized to make loans to bona fide farmers and ranchers,
rural residents, and persons furnishing farm-related services.\11\ Put
simply, Farm Credit banks lend to Farm Credit associations, which lend
to farmers, and farmers own the Farm Credit associations, which own the
Farm Credit banks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 12 U.S.C.  2001(b).
\9\ See id.  2124(c) (providing that ``[v]oting stock may be
issued or transferred and held only by . . . cooperative associations
eligible to borrow from the banks'').
\10\ Id.  2128(a).
\11\ See id.  2075.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accordingly, Farm Credit System banks are larger than their
affiliated associations. For example, AgriBank, FCB, is the largest
district bank, and its assets exceed $10 billion. But the 17
associations that own 99% of AgriBank have average assets of $3.6
billion, well below the $10 billion threshold suggested in Dodd-Frank.
Unique among agricultural lenders, the Farm Credit System's legal
structure places the funding function for each district with the
district bank. Centralized funding, in turn, enables the associations
to benefit from lower administrative and operational costs. Swaps are
executed by the district bank to gain hedge accounting, to minimize
administrative costs, and to minimize counterparty credit risk and
margin requirements via district-wide netting of offsetting exposures.
This is more cost effective and strengthens the liquidity of the
System. As a result, Farm Credit System associations have a lower risk
profile than the small commercial banks with which they compete.
If the Commission adopted a $10 billion asset limit, this structure
would place Farm Credit System associations at a competitive
disadvantage with respect to commercial banks. Absent a ``look
through'' provision for Farm Credit System institutions, small
commercial banks would be eligible for the end-user exception on a
standalone basis, while Farm Credit System associations would have to
bear the costs of mandatory clearing. Clearing costs would, in turn, be
passed on to farmers and ranchers in the form of higher effective
interest rates on loans. Community banks eligible for the end-user
clearing exception would therefore be able to gain market share by
offering lower interest rates. Even banks that do not qualify for the
end-user exception would benefit from spreading the costs of clearing
across their entire business, including segments outside agriculture.
Although the majority of Farm Credit System associations have
assets of less than $10 billion, the few associations with greater
assets do not present risk requiring mandatory clearing. Even the
failure of a large association would have no material impact on the
Farm Credit System's ability to meet its debt obligations because the
five Farm Credit System banks are jointly and severally liable for the
System's notes and bonds. Thus, no association is so large that it
would impact System debt holders if it were placed in receivership. By
contrast, if a standalone commercial bank fails, its bondholders will
likely face losses.
As noted, Congress gave the Commission ``maximum flexibility'' to
adopt an equitable solution for which small financial institutions will
qualify for the end-user exception.\12\ The Farm Credit Council
believes that the fair way to compare the hedging activities that
benefit Farm Credit System associations with the hedging activities of
their competing commercial banks is to consider the average assets of
Farm Credit System associations in a particular district. If the
Commission does not adopt such a ``look through'' approach, small Farm
Credit System associations would be forced to raise interest rates for
farmers and ranchers, and they would be placed at a competitive
disadvantage in the market for agricultural lending.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ 156 Cong. Rec. H5246 (daily ed. June 30, 2009) (statement of
Rep. Peterson).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. Farm Credit System Institutions Should Qualify for the End-User
Clearing Exception
The Commission requested comment on, among other issues, whether an
exception for Farm Credit System institutions would be appropriate.\13\
As we describe more fully below, an exception is appropriate because
the non-speculative, collateralized derivatives activity of
comprehensively regulated Farm Credit System institutions does not pose
risk to the United States financial system warranting mandatory
clearing. Further, imposing a costly new clearing requirement on Farm
Credit System institutions would frustrate Congress's equally important
mission of providing a dependable source of financing for rural
America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ NOPR, 75 Fed. Reg. at 80753.

A. Farm Credit System Institutions Do Not Cause Systemic Risk
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Warranting Mandatory Clearing

1. Comprehensive Regulation by the Farm Credit Administration
Adequately Mitigates the Risk of Farm Credit System
Institutions

The Farm Credit Council agrees that the Commission should ``take
into account the supervisory regimes to which Small Financial
Institutions are currently subject, and whether those regulatory
regimes adequately mitigate any risks associated with an exception[.]''
\14\ Farm Credit System institutions are regulated by the Farm Credit
Administration, an independent federal agency that adequately mitigates
any risks associated with permitting Farm Credit System institutions
not to clear derivatives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, the Farm Credit Act authorizes the Farm Credit
Administration to exercise broad powers ``for the purpose of ensuring
the safety and soundness of System institutions.'' \15\ Those powers
include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ 12 U.S.C.  2252(a)(10).

Bringing cease and desist proceedings against any
institution or institution-affiliated party that has engaged,
is engaging, or is about to engage in an unsafe or unsound
practice; \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See id.  2261.

Suspending or removing directors or officers of Farm Credit
System institutions who engage in unsafe or unsound practices;
\17\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ See id.  2264-2265.

Assessing civil monetary penalties against institutions or
individuals thatviolate provisions of the Farm Credit Act or
Farm Credit Administrationregulations.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See id.  2268.

Further, if the Farm Credit Administration determines that a System
institution is in an ``unsafe or unsound condition to transact
business,'' the Farm Credit Administration may place that institution
in conservatorship or receivership.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See id.  2183.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the Farm Credit Administration effectively oversees the
capital adequacy of System institutions. By regulation, the Farm Credit
Administration ensures that institutions meet minimum capital
requirements and establish written capital adequacy plans reviewed by
that agency.\20\ Specifically, each Farm Credit System institution must
maintain permanent capital of at least 7% of its risk-adjusted asset
base.\21\ The Farm Credit Administration also rates the safety and
soundness of each System institution using the uniform Financial
Institutions Rating System, or CAMELS.\22\ At the end of 2009, 82% of
Farm Credit System banks and direct lending associations earned a score
of one or two, out of five, on the CAMELS scale, with a score of one
indicating that the institution is ``sound in every respect.'' \23\
Indeed, more than 90% of System assets are currently housed in
institutions rated one or two.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ See 12 CFR  615.5200-615.5215.
\21\ See id.  615.5205.
\22\ The name CAMELS derives from the rating's focus on six
factors: capital, assets, management, earnings, liquidity, and
sensitivity to market risk.
\23\ Farm Credit Administration, 2009 Annual Report on the Farm
Credit System 42, available at http://www.fca.gov/Download/
AnnualReports/2009AnnualReport.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third, the Farm Credit Administration adequately oversees
derivatives activity. By regulation, Farm Credit System institutions
must adopt policies that mitigate risk, including credit risk, by
limiting their exposure to single or related counterparties,
geographical areas, industries, or obligations with similar
characteristics.\24\ The Farm Credit Administration has further
directed each Farm Credit System institution ``to establish a policy
with appropriate limits to ensure that counterparty risks are
consistent with the institution's risk-bearing capacity.'' \25\ In
reviewing institutions' policies on exposure to counterparty credit
risk, the Farm Credit Administration considers:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ See 12 CFR  615.5133.
\25\ Memorandum from Roland E. Smith, Director, to Chairman, Board
of Directors, Chief Executive Officer, All Farm Credit Institutions
Regarding Counterparty Risk (Oct. 21, 2003), available at http://
www.fca.gov/apps/infomemo.nsf (click on ``Counterparty Risk'').

Criteria for appropriate due diligence including processes
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
for measuring and managing counterparty risk;

Criteria for selecting and maintaining relationships with
counterparties, which may include credit ratings;

Controls that limit the exposure of capital to single
counterparties expressed as a percent of the institution's
capital base;

Periodic reporting and monitoring of counterparty exposures
to the board;

Periodic reporting to the board on each counterparty's
financial condition, including an assessment of its ability to
perform on agreements and contracts executed with the
institution; and

Actions to mitigate an institution's exposure in the event
the financial condition of a counterparty deteriorates and
doubts arise about its ability to perform in accordance with
the relevant agreements or contracts.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Id.

Together, these comprehensive regulatory requirements effectuate
the Farm Credit Administration's mission of ensuring a safe, dependable
source of credit for agriculture and rural America. The Commission
should not add a costly, unnecessary clearing requirement when the Farm
Credit Administration's regulation and oversight already effectively
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
mitigate risk to the financial system.

2. Farm Credit System Institutions Primarily Use Fixed-for-
Floating Interest Rate Swaps and Effectively Manage
Counterparty Credit Risk

The Farm Credit Council further agrees that the Commission should
``consider treating different types of swaps differently when
considering whether any exception should be available.'' \27\ Because
the Farm Credit System uses safe, non-speculative interest rate swaps
and already effectively addresses counterparty credit risk, clearing
should not be required.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ NOPR, 75 Fed Reg. at 80753.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Farm Credit System institutions primarily use plain vanilla, fixed-
for-floating interest rate swaps, and materially all of our derivatives
qualify for hedge accounting treatment. Farm Credit System institutions
do not use swaps to speculate, and do not use the credit default swaps
that caused the financial crisis. As the Commission determined in
setting a higher substantial position threshold in the rate swaps
category for purposes of identifying major swap participants, interest
rate swaps are less risky than more complex or speculative
instruments.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ See Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based
Swap Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant,'' ``Major Security-Based Swap
Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract Participant,'' 75 Fed. Reg.
80174, 80187-94 (proposed Dec. 21, 2010) (to be codified at 17 CFR pts.
1 & 240).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, Farm Credit System institutions already effectively manage
counterparty credit risk. To minimize the risk of credit losses from
derivatives, Farm Credit System institutions deal with counterparties
that have an investment grade or better long-term credit rating from a
nationally recognized statistical rating organization, and further
monitor the credit standing of and levels of exposure to individual
counterparties. System institutions enter into master netting
agreements that govern all derivative transactions with a counterparty.
Substantially all derivative contracts are supported by credit support
agreements requiring the bilateral posting of collateral in the event
certain dollar thresholds of exposure are reached. These thresholds are
small relative to the bank's capital. Accordingly, as of September 30,
2010, the net exposure of Farm Credit System institutions to swap
dealers was only $252 million.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ See Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation, Third
Quarter 2010--Quarterly Information Statement of the Farm Credit System
26 (Nov. 10, 2010) (hereinafter ``Third Quarter 2010 Information
Statement''), available at http://www.farmcredit-ffcb.com/farmcredit/
financials/quarterly.jsp.

B. The Farm Credit System Is Not Interconnected with Other
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Financial Institutions

The Farm Credit Council recognizes that the determination of
whether Farm Credit System institutions should be exempted from
mandatory clearing depends not only on their safety and soundness, but
also on the extent to which they are interconnected with other
financial entities. As Chairman Gensler has recognized, ``[t]he risk of
a crisis spreading throughout the financial system is greater the more
interconnected financial companies are to each other.'' \30\ Farm
Credit System institutions are not so interconnected with other
financial entities to raise this concern.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Testimony of Chairman Gary Gensler before the House Committee
on Agriculture (Feb. 10, 2011), available at http://www.cftc.gov/
PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagensler-68.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, based on their unique funding structure, Farm Credit System
institutions neither borrow from nor lend to commercial banks. As a
result, Farm Credit System institutions' primary credit relationships
with other financial entities include (1) derivatives counterparty
relationships and (2) federal funds investments. As described above,
Farm Credit System institutions carefully manage derivatives
counterparty relationships with bilateral collateral agreements, so
that the System's exposure to counterparties is at low levels relative
to capital. Federal funds investments, which are primarily overnight,
can be unwound on any day with no transaction costs should credit
concerns arise.
Second, because Farm Credit System institutions do not take
deposits, Farm Credit System banks and associations cannot experience a
``run on the bank.'' To the extent the concern about interconnectedness
involves the consequences of declining depositor confidence, it does
not apply to the Farm Credit System because the System does not rely on
depositors for funding.
Finally, the Systemwide Debt Securities used to fund the Farm
Credit System are insured by the Farm Credit System Insurance
Corporation, a government-controlled, independent entity, that
administers an insurance fund. As of September 30, 2010, the assets in
the insurance fund totaled $3.193 billion, or roughly 2% of the Farm
Credit System's aggregate insured obligations.\31\ If a bank cannot pay
principal or interest on an insured debt obligation, the Insurance
Corporation must pay investors from the fund. In the event that the
entire insurance fund is exhausted, investors have further recourse to
the five Farm Credit System banks, which are jointly and severally
liable for Systemwide Debt Securities. Accordingly, even though most
investors in Systemwide Debt Securities are professional money
managers, not banks, these layers of investor protection make sure that
the Farm Credit System will not cause a run on the funding of other
entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ See Third Quarter 2010 Information Statement 32 (Nov. 10,
2010).

C. Imposing a Costly, New Clearing Requirement Would Frustrate the
Farm Credit System's Mission of Providing Financing to Rural
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
America

Although mandatory clearing would not make the Farm Credit System's
derivatives activity safer, it would substantially raise the costs of
derivatives for our members. For example, our members would incur
significant negative carry costs on investments or cash posted to meet
new initial margin requirements. Furthermore, if the clearing
alternatives do not offer end-users interest on initial and variation
margin, the Farm Credit System's costs could easily increase by tens of
millions of dollars.
Market volatility, the direction of interest rates, and the
maturity term of outstanding swaps also affect the amount of margin
required. If market volatility returned to the levels observed after
the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in September 2008, the initial margin
requirement for the Farm Credit System's derivatives could be expected
to at least triple, and the projected negative carry expense on this
component would easily exceed $2 million annually.
At September 30, 2010, the majority of the System's derivative
positions had positive market value, so on an aggregate basis, the
System was not required to provide a material amount of collateral or
variation margin to our derivative counterparties. If, however,
interest rates increase, the derivative exposure would swing in favor
of our counterparties, and System institutions would then be required
to provide variation margin, in addition to required initial margin. In
this scenario, negative carry on variation margin is expected to be a
significant cost. To minimize negative carry, it is especially
important that clearing rules provide a mechanism for end-users of
over-the-counter swaps to earn interest on the variation margin
provided to our counterparties. On top of these costs would be new
account fees paid to clearing members, which we estimate could easily
reach $1.5 to $2.5 million each year.
These millions of dollars in new costs would make derivatives less
attractive for risk management. To the extent new costs discourage Farm
Credit System institutions from safely entering into derivatives to
hedge or mitigate risk, mandatory clearing would actually make the Farm
Credit System less safe. These new costs also represent millions of
dollars that the Farm Credit System could otherwise lend to farmers and
farm-related businesses, and new costs the Farm Credit System will have
to offset with higher interest rates to farm-related businesses. In
this way, mandatory clearing would frustrate the Farm Credit System's
mission of providing safe, dependable financing to rural America.
In deciding which institutions should be eligible for the end-user
exception, the Commission should consider that the Farm Credit System's
mission is also federal policy. Congress created the System ``to
accomplish the objective of improving the income and well-being of
American farmers and ranchers by furnishing sound, adequate, and
constructive credit and closely related services to them.'' \32\ Dodd-
Frank does not alter this congressional goal. To the contrary, Congress
``insisted that the institutions of the Farm Credit System not be
subject to a number of the provisions of [Dodd-Frank].'' \33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ 12 U.S.C.  2001(a).
\33\ 156 Cong. Rec. H5246 (daily ed. June 30, 2009) (statement of
Rep. Holden).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
V. Alternatively, the Commission Should Adopt a Risk-Based Approach for
Determining Which Small Financial Institutions Will Be Exempt
From Mandatory Clearing
The Commission requested comment on whether ``measures other than
total assets of $10 billion, such as financial risk or capital, . . .
could be used for determining whether an entity qualifies for an
exception.'' \34\ The Farm Credit Council believes that systemic risk
created by derivatives is not a function of an institution's asset
size; it is a function of the type and amount of derivative activity
after netting offsetting positions and collateral. Put simply, small
financial institutions entering into many risky trades pose greater
risk to the financial system than larger institutions that carefully
manage their derivatives portfolio. Accordingly, the Commission should
focus on risk instead of asset size.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ NOPR, 75 Fed. Reg. at 80754.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commission has already proposed such a risk-based framework for
determining when an entity has a ``substantial position'' in a major
swaps category warranting regulation as a major swap participant.\35\
The Farm Credit Council proposes that a similar test measuring
uncollateralized current exposure or current exposure plus potential
future exposure would be appropriate in determining which small
financial institutions pose enough risk to warrant mandatory clearing.
Specifically, we believe that current uncollateralized exposure of $2
billion in the rate swaps category and $1 billion in other categories--
or current uncollateralized exposure and potential future exposure of
$3 billion for rate swaps or $1 billion for other swaps--would be
appropriate. These proposed thresholds, which are lower than the
thresholds the Commission has proposed for identifying major swap
participants, would both address risk among financial entities and more
accurately capture financial institutions whose swap exposure poses
risk to the financial system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ See Further Definition, supra note 28, at 80188-94.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alternatively, the Commission could adopt a test based on an
institution's exposure to swaps as a percentage of capital. The Farm
Credit Council suggests that appropriate risk limits would be current
uncollateralized exposure to swaps of 10% of capital, or current
uncollateralized plus potential future exposure to swaps of 20% of
capital. We believe these limits would appropriately identify which
small financial institutions pose systemic risk warranting mandatory
clearing. We believe that mandatory clearing would not be justified for
institutions with less exposure to swaps as a percentage of capital. A
test of current uncollateralized swap exposure as low as 5% of capital
would, however, allow most of the Farm Credit System's risk management
activities to survive without a costly new clearing requirement.
VI. Conclusion
For the reasons described above, the Farm Credit Council urges the
Commission to exercise its ample authority to permit all Farm Credit
System institutions--including those with total assets exceeding $10
billion--to use the end-user clearing exception. Because Farm Credit
System banks use derivatives on a district-wide basis to manage risk
for much smaller associations, the Commission should look through the
banks to the average asset size of their affiliated associations.
Otherwise, mandatory clearing would put small Farm Credit System
associations at a competitive disadvantage with respect to competing
commercial banks. This approach is appropriate because safe, sound Farm
Credit System institutions do not need an additional, redundant layer
of regulation. And new clearing regulation would impose costs that
would both discourage Farm Credit System institutions from mitigating
risk and diminish the availability of credit for farmers and rural
America.
The Farm Credit Council appreciates the opportunity to comment. If
you have any questions or we can provide other information, please do
not hesitate to contact us. As always, we would welcome the opportunity
to work with the Commission in developing the final rule.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Robbie Boone,
Vice President, Government Affairs,
Farm Credit Council.

CC:

Honorable Gary Gensler, Chairman;
Honorable Michael Dunn, Commissioner;
Honorable Jill E. Sommers, Commissioner;
Honorable Bart Chilton, Commissioner;
Honorable Scott D. O'Malia, Commissioner.


