- SECOND AMENDMENT RIGHTS EMPOWER WOMEN'S RIGHTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECOND AMENDMENT RIGHTS EMPOWER
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME AND FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-58

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-400 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chair

DARRELL ISSA, California             JERROLD NADLER, New York, Ranking
KEN BUCK, Colorado                       Member
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                  SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin               HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky                  Georgia
CHIP ROY, Texas                      ADAM SCHIFF, California
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina           ERIC SWALWELL, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             TED LIEU, California
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon                  J. LUIS CORREA, California
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            LUCY McBATH, Georgia
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
KEVIN KILEY, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming             CORI BUSH, Missouri
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               GLENN IVEY, Maryland
LAUREL LEE, Florida                  BECCA BALINT, Vermont
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina
Vacant
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME AND FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE

ANDY BIGGS, Arizona, Chair

MATT GAETZ, Florida                  SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas, Ranking
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin                   Member
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    LUCY McBATH, Georgia
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
KEVIN KILEY, California              CORI BUSH, Missouri
LAUREL LEE, Florida                  STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina          HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
Georgia

CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Majority Staff Director
AMY RUTKIN, Minority Staff Director & Chief of Staff

C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, December 13, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Andy Biggs, Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime and
Federal Government Surveillance from the State of Arizona......     1
The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, a Member of the
Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government Surveillance from
the State of Georgia...........................................     2
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member of the Committee on
the Judiciary from the State of New York.......................     4

WITNESSES

Beth Alcazar, Instructor, U.S. Conceal Carry Association (USCCA),
Certified Training Counselor, Chief Range Safety Officer
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Testimony.............................................     9
Ruth Glenn, President, Survivor.Justice.Action
Oral Testimony.................................................    12
Prepared Testimony.............................................    14
Shirley Watral, State Director for Florida Women for Gun Rights
Organization, Professional Firearms Instructor; Domestic
Violence Survivor; Author of ``Heels to Holster''
Oral Testimony.................................................    21
Prepared Testimony.............................................    23
Geneva Solomon, Co-Owner, Redstone Firearms; Former Executive,
National African American Gun Association
Oral Testimony.................................................    33
Prepared Testimony.............................................    35

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

All materials submitted for the record by the Subcommittee on
Crime and Federal Government Surveillance are listed below.....    54

Materials submitted by the Honorable Andy Biggs, Chair of the
Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government Surveillance from
the State of Arizona, for the record
An article entitled, ``N. Houston Gas Station Assault Suspect
Charged After Armed Husband and Wife Fight Back,'' Jun. 28,
2023, ABC 13
An article entitled, ``The Blue City Murder Problem,'' Nov. 4,
2022, The Heritage Foundation
A fact sheet entitled, ``FACT SHEET: Vice President Harris
Launches the Biden-Harris Administration Safer State
Initiative, Highlights New Executive Actions to Reduce Gun
Violence,'' Dec. 13, 2023, The White House, submitted by the
Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government Surveillance from
the State of Texas, for the record
An article entitled, ``Red States Have Higher Gun Death Rates
Than Blue States. Here's Why,'' Apr. 28, 2023, Forbes,
submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., a
Member of the Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government
Surveillance from the State of Georgia, for the record

SECOND AMENDMENT RIGHTS EMPOWER WOMEN'S RIGHTS

----------

Wednesday, December 13, 2023

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government Surveillance

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Hon. Andy Biggs
[Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Biggs, Jordan, Nehls,
Moore, Lee, Hunt, Jackson Lee, Nadler, McBath, Dean, Bush, and
Johnson.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you all for being here today. We are going
to start with the Pledge of Allegiance. We will ask the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Nehls, to lead us.
[Pledge of Allegiance.]
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Representative Nehls.
I'm grateful to be Chairing this hearing today focused on
how the Second Amendment empowers women. The Second Amendment
empowers women and assists individuals when it comes to self-
defense.
Violent crime continues to rise, and soft-on-crime policies
are putting dangerous criminals back on the streets. This is
happening across the country, including in our own Nation's
Capital.
In 2023, so far, there have been 906 carjackings in
Washington, DC--more than double the number from last year. We
had an opportunity to discuss these statistics more in-depth in
our D.C. crime hearing in October.
At a time when violent crime continues to plague the
Nation, women have exercised their Second Amendment rights to
protect themselves in dangerous situations while waiting for
law enforcement to respond. Female firearms ownership continues
to grow in the United States. Women are turning to themselves
to be their own first responders.
It is important to point out that Black female firearms
ownership is especially on the rise. In 2021, the National
Shooting Sports Foundation reported an 87 percent increase in
gun ownership among Black women. I commend these strong women,
and all strong women, for stepping up to protect themselves and
their families.
Unfortunately, some of our colleagues across the aisle do
not share these same views. President Biden has made it clear
lawful firearms ownership will not be tolerated.
We all saw just recently how a lawful firearms owner in Los
Angeles had his concealed carry permit suspended after
defending himself, his wife, and his five-month-old from an
armed attacker at their home. It is disgraceful that someone
protecting their family would be punished in that way.
The Biden Administration's policies only target lawful
firearms owners and do not prevent actual criminals from
committing violent crimes. They fail to realize how more gun
control only harms and impacts the vulnerable populations they
claim to want to protect.
I am so grateful for our witnesses. All four of the
witnesses here have compelling life stories. I have read all
your essays. I look forward to hearing your testimony. You have
come to us as mothers, survivors, business owners, teachers,
authors, and more. I'm looking forward to your testimony.
Make no mistake; I believe the Second Amendment is for
everyone. The title of today's hearing rings true: Second
Amendment Rights Empower Women's Rights.
With that, I will yield back, and I will yield to my friend
from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for an opening statement.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the Chair, and I welcome
the witnesses today to testify before us.
I will be reading the statement of Hon. Congresswoman from
Texas, Sheila Jackson Lee, who is the Ranking Member on this
Subcommittee, but she is occupied on the House floor with a
very important matter that she is addressing. She has asked
that I appear in her stead. I'm a Member of this Subcommittee.
``The right to bear arms is ingrained in the fabric of our
country's history.'' At the same time, we cannot ignore the
pressing need for measures that promote public safety and
prevent the devastating toll of gun violence.
At this very moment, we find ourselves at a critical
juncture where we must strike a balance between upholding the
Second Amendment and enacting gun legislation that protects us
all.
This is not a question of choosing one over the other;
rather, this is symmetry. This symmetry requires an approach
that respects individual rights while also addressing the
urgent need for responsible regulation--a concept that was very
clear prior to the politicalization of the Supreme Court of the
United States.
In the past, Congress has understood that gun legislation
and regulation must be guided by the principles of public
safety and that we must implement measures to prevent gun
violence, particularly in the context of domestic abuse.
For obvious reasons, I have long been a strong proponent of
women's empowerment. If there are women who feel empowered by
responsible, safe firearm ownership, that is certainly their
prerogative, and I respect their decision.
On the other hand, it is dangerous for this body to promote
guns as a viable solution to domestic abuse, because both
statistics and commonsense show that the answer to the
victimization of women is not more guns and more violence. Not
only are guns not the great equalizer, but they do not increase
women's safety, as proven by readily available statistics.
Today, guns are the no. 1 weapon used in domestic violence
killings in the U.S. According to the Jewish Women's
International, approximately 970 women are killed annually in
the United States by men with firearms. In stark contrast, the
Gun Violence Archive, the most complete record of gun use
incidents in the country, reports an average of only 19 annual
incidents of defensive gun use by women.
Just having access to a firearm makes an abuser five times
more likely to take their partner's life. Over the last decade,
gun homicides by intimate partners jumped by 58 percent, and
the pandemic was an especially lethal period for abuse victims.
Gun homicides involving intimate partners rose a stunning 25
percent in 2020 compared with the previous year--to the highest
level in almost three decades.
In that year, women accounted for more than two-thirds of
the victims shot and killed by intimate partners, and in 2021,
researchers reported that, ``more than two-thirds of recent
mass shootings in the U.S. involved perpetrators who killed
partners or relatives or had a history of domestic violence
abuse''--``or had a history of domestic abuse.''
Because the connection between domestic violence, gun
violence, and homicide is undeniable, we must insist on common-
sense measures that effectively reduce gun violence and keep
guns out of the hands of domestic abusers and other dangerous
people who should not have them.
That is why we passed H.R. 1620, the Violence Against Women
Reauthorization Act of 2021, in the House during the previous
Congress--with just 29 Republicans breaking ranks and voting
with us. Under my leadership, we made sure that our bill made
important improvements to existing laws to address the growing
and unmet needs of victims and survivors of domestic violence,
dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking.
While firearms are often used in intimate relationships to
kill, they are also used to threaten and intimidate, as one of
today's witnesses has described in her written testimony. In
many cases, homicides, assaults with firearms, and shootings
could be prevented if abusers were prohibited from having
firearms.
For many years, Federal law allowed certain abusive dating
partners to continue possessing firearms under Federal law when
a similarly situated spouse, co-parent, or guardian could not--
commonly referred to as the boyfriend loophole. H.R. 1620 would
have closed the boyfriend loophole by expanding the domestic
violence provisions of Section 922 of Title 18 to include
dating partners.
Because we know people with a history of violence against a
partner, including stalking or strangulation, are also far more
likely to go on to commit more heinous acts, H.R. 1620 would
have also added persons convicted of the misdemeanor crime of
stalking to the list of those who may not possess a firearm
under Federal law.
If Republicans wanted to empower women, they could have
supported these provisions to keep guns away from would-be
abusers. Instead, these provisions were dropped from the
version of the VAWA reauthorization that became law due to
Republican opposition.
Nevertheless, after nearly three decades of inaction and
passage of the reauthorization, Congress listened to the
American people, chose to act, and passed sensible gun safety
legislation. That bill, the bipartisan Safer Communities Act,
which only 10 Republicans voted for, partially closed the
boyfriend loophole.
While I had hoped to do more to address gun violence last
Congress, especially as it relates to domestic abuse and
violence against women, I remain hopeful. That is why this
Congress I joined Representative Debbie Dingell, Judiciary
Committee Member Mary Gay Scanlon, Republic Representative
Brian Fitzpatrick, and others to introduce H.R. 905, the
Strengthening Protections for Domestic Violence and Stalking
Survivors Act, to close the boyfriend loophole completely.
If our colleagues truly want to protect women and empower
them, they could join their Republican colleague and support
passage of our bill or any of the many bills Democrats have
proposed that would remove at least one dangerous element from
the domestic abuse equation--guns.
The answer to the problem of gun violence in domestic
violence is not more guns--although, it seems that more guns is
the common Republican refrain for nearly every problem or issue
our country currently faces. I sincerely hope our conversation
today is truly about protecting and empowering women.
With that, the Congresswoman would yield back, although it
would be hard for her to do so.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Biggs. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman yielded
back.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hunt, will
be able to participate in today's hearing for the purpose of
questioning the witnesses, if a Member yields him time for that
purpose.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, the
Ranking Member of the whole Committee, Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. I thank the Chair.
Mr. Chair, this hearing is intended to promote gun
ownership under the supposed theory that it empowers women. The
very premise of this hearing is dangerous because we know from
the data that the presence of a gun in the home actually
increases the likelihood that a woman is murdered or dies by
suicide.
The statistic is as grim as they are unmistakable. A study
of women who purchased handguns found that they faced a 50
percent increased risk of homicide by any means and twice the
risk of homicide by a firearm than women who did not purchase a
handgun.
The statistics are even worse when looking specifically at
those experiencing domestic violence. One study found that
access to a gun makes it five times more likely that an abuser
partner will kill his victim.
Another found that people living with handgun owners were
seven times more likely to be shot by their spouse or intimate
partner, and that 84 percent of the victims were women.
Further, those with access to guns are three times more
likely to die by suicide. The presence of a gun in a home also
increases the risk of an accidental injury or death to everyone
in the home, including children.
So long as they are not legally prohibited, individuals
have a right to own a firearm, but they should do so with full
knowledge of these risks.
Unfortunately, today, our Republican colleagues will try to
obfuscate the plain evidence before us. Either they will simply
ignore the obvious risks of gun ownership or, instead, they
will suggest that, with the right gun or the right training,
these statistics do not apply.
This is the tactic the gun industry has taken in
advertising targeted to women dating back to the 1980's--by
promoting guns as ``the great equalizer.'' While this may sell
more guns, it is plainly not true.
We know that training is not enough to protect someone from
the volatility of domestic violence because even law
enforcement officers face significant risk in responding to
domestic violence calls for services. A study of law
enforcement fatalities that was conducted in partnership with
the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund found that
calls related to domestic disputes and domestic-related
incidents represent the highest number of fatal types of calls
for service. They were also the underlying cause of law
enforcement fatalities for several other calls for service.
What domestic violence victims need is not more guns and
more training; it is more support from the many people and
systems that should protect them and help them to safety well
before they consider resorting to firing a gun. Law
enforcement, social workers, behavioral health experts, and
every Member of Congress have a responsibility to protect women
and all people from gun violence.
Republicans have repeatedly failed to exercise that
responsibility to keep us all safer. Last Congress, the
overwhelming majority of Republicans opposed numerous bills
that would save lives while respecting the rights of
responsible gun owners, including the bipartisan Background
Checks Act and the Protecting Our Kids Act. They also opposed
the bipartisan Safer Communities Act, which became law over
their objection.
Republicans have also had every opportunity to empower
women through other legislation. Every time Democrats offered
them the chance to do so, the answer from Republicans was a
resounding no.
For example, the overwhelming majority of Republicans
opposed the Women's Health Protection Act to empower women in
their reproductive care. They are overwhelmingly opposed a
resolution to extend the deadline for ratification of the Equal
Rights Amendment. Notably for this hearing, they overwhelmingly
opposed the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act 2021,
which would have closed the boyfriend loophole by prohibiting
those convicted of stalking or abusing a dating partner from
obtaining a firearm.
In voting against this legislation, Republicans valued the
right to access a gun above the very safety of those facing
violence from convicted abusers. Time and again, Republicans,
their allies, and their radical judicial appointees have also
used the courts to prioritize access to firearms over women's
safety.
To give you an idea of how extreme their agenda is, the
Supreme Court is currently considering United States v. Rahimi,
a case challenging the law that prohibits possession of
firearms by those who are subject to domestic violence
restraining orders. This challenge grows out of the Supreme
Court's decision to upend decades of Second Amendment
jurisprudence in New York State Rifle and Pistol Association v.
Bruen, which established a backward-looking test for gun-safety
laws.
Under this new test, a gun law can be upheld only if there
was some similar law in effect more than two centuries ago, in
1791, when the Second Amendment was ratified, or in 1868, when
the 14th Amendment was ratified. These were times when women
did not have the right to vote; when domestic abuse was not
illegal or even frowned on, and when women were legally treated
as property. In applying this framework in Rahimi, Republicans
and their allies are asking the Supreme Court to turn back
centuries of progress and to give dangerous abusers the right
to access the firearm.
Nearly one million women in the United States alive today,
report being shot or shot at by an intimate partner, and 70
women are shot and killed by a partner every month. Many more
are threatened with a firearm or injured, but survive, like our
witness, Ms. Glenn.
Women don't need more guns. They need better laws that
respect their autonomy; that promote the safety of all our
communities, and that help them escape abuse, if they encounter
it.
No one should have to face the situations that Ms. Solomon,
Ms. Watral, and Ms. Glenn have experienced. I thank all of you
for coming here today to tell your stories.
We should focus our efforts on keeping guns out of the
hands of abusers and on preventing domestic abuse from
occurring in the first place. Only then can we truly empower
women.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Biggs. I thank the gentleman.
Without objection, all other opening statements will be
included in the record.
Mr. Biggs. I will now introduce today's witnesses.
We will begin with Ms. Alcazar. Ms. Alcazar is one of the
leading firearms instructors for the United States Concealed
Carry Association. She is a Certified Training Counselor, Chief
Range Safety Officer, and instructor. She is also the author of
several books and publications about firearms, including
firearms safety.
Ms. Geneva Solomon is a Federal Firearms Licensee and the
proprietor of Redstone Firearms in Burbank, California. She is
a member and former Director of Internal Communications for the
National African American Gun Association.
Ms. Shirley Watral is the Florida State Director for Women
for Gun Rights, a pro-Second Amendment organization. She is a
survivor of domestic violence and the author of ``Heels to
Holster,'' a memoir about her experience in an abusive
relationship.
Ms. Ruth Glenn. Ms. Glenn is the President of Survivor
Justice Action, an organization that works to end domestic
violence in the United States. She is a survivor of domestic
violence and the author of ``Everything I Never Dreamed,'' a
memoir about her experience with domestic violence.
We welcome all of you today and we are grateful that you
are here.
We will begin by swearing you in. Would each of you please
rise and raise your right hand?
Do you swear or affirm, under penalty of perjury, that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God?
Let the record reflect the witnesses have answered in the
affirmative.
Thank you. Please be seated.
I want you to know that your written testimony will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, we ask
that you summarize your testimony in five minutes.
With that, Ms. Alcazar, I will recognize you, and you begin
for your statement of five minutes.

STATEMENT OF BETH ALCAZAR

Ms. Alcazar. Good afternoon, Chair Biggs, Ranking Member
Jackson Lee, and distinguished Members of this Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak before you on behalf
of more than 800,000 members of the U.S. Concealed Carry
Association and millions of law-abiding gun owners nationwide.
My name is Beth Alcazar, and I'm honored to represent
female firearms owners, mothers, and educators who prioritize
the safety of our families, our loved ones, and ourselves. I'm
a writer. I'm an instructor. I'm a doctoral candidate working
toward my terminal degree and curriculum and instruction, but,
first and foremost, I'm a mother.
I have made a personal choice to live as a mom with a gun.
After all, I have three children who look to me as guide,
coach, counselor, and protector. My journey in and my
dedication to firearms self-defense and training has all been
motivated by them. Ultimately, my three most important reasons
for choosing to carry a gun are my three children.
I'm also a proud member of the USCCA, one of the largest
and fastest-growing organizations dedicated to educating and
training responsible gun owners. Since the USCCA was founded,
it has been providing essential self-defense training and
resources to law-abiding citizens, so they have tools to
protect themselves and their loved ones.
Nowadays, our focus has expanded to advocating on behalf of
the rising numbers of responsible gun owners from all walks of
life, and I could not be more excited about this mission.
My qualifications and certifications for teaching firearms
self-defense and personal protection come from ALICE Institute,
the American Red Cross, D.R.A.W. School, Force Science
Institute, HSI, ICE Training, NRA, Sig Sauer Academy, and the
USCCA, with whom I also have the privilege of being editor-at-
large for Concealed Carry Magazine.
I'm also the author of ``Women's Handgun and Self-Defense
Fundamentals,'' which was written, edited, and designed by
women for women on their training journeys. More recently, I
developed and authored, ``Children's Firearms and Safety
Fundamentals,'' a curriculum designed to help equip parents,
educators, and children with the knowledge needed to be safe
around guns.
As with all things in life, education is paramount. This
isn't just about teaching firearms safety. It's about
impressing on all of us how important it is to use good
situational awareness and to avoid questionable or
uncomfortable situations. It's about how to be prepared; how to
consider and choose the best options, and how to live fiercely
and safely each and every day.
As a woman and a mother, I'm honored to be one of the
leading instructors in the firearms industry. With this, I have
witnessed firsthand a rich diversity, as scores of American
women are purchasing, training with, and carrying firearms in
the name of female empowerment. For many women, this self-
defense awakening has resulted in a new source of certainty,
security, responsibility, and equality that we might not have
otherwise had.
For the women who walk across a dark parking lot every
night after work; for the realtors who show houses to strangers
every week; for any women who have shadows in their past, and
for moms like me with children in tow, I think they would all
agree: They refuse to stand by idle and helpless. They refuse
to become someone's victim. They refuse to allow harm to come
to those that they love.
That's why I view the attempt to limit, or even
criminalize, law-abiding citizens as antiproductive or
dangerous, potentially carrying grave consequences for the
safety of our families and our communities. The reality is
violent criminals, many with evil intent, do exist and they are
terrorizing us. It shouldn't be this way, but it serves as a
clear reminder that law-abiding should be able to defend
themselves from danger at all times. Any solution to better
protect ourselves, our children, and our communities should
start with our God-given right to self-defense.
I can honestly say I'm a profoundly different woman and
mother from the one I was before I decided to carry a firearm.
I'm physically changed because of how I train; how I move
through life, and how I carry, but I'm also emotionally changed
because of the decisions I've made; situations I've
contemplated, and obstacles I've overcome.
The more I've trained, the more I've realized that I don't
have to wait for someone else to care for me or protect me. I
am my own protector, and I am my family's first and immediate
responder. Being able to keep myself and those that I love
safe, there is nothing more important than that.
Today, I hope to be part of an open, respectful, and
productive dialog about how we can empower and protect law-
abiding gun owners, especially the rising demographics of
women.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this important
topic.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alcazar follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.003

Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Ms. Alcazar.
Ms. Glenn, you are recognized for your five minutes. You
may begin.

STATEMENT OF RUTH M. GLENN

Ms. Glenn. Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Chair Biggs, Ranking Member Jackson Lee,
and Members of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime and
Federal Government Surveillance. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify before you today.
My name is Ruth M. Glenn, and I am the President of
Survivor Justice Action, a national advocacy organization
working to support, engage, and empower domestic violence
survivors and their families, to prevent and end domestic
violence in all its forms.
I've been advocating for and with survivors of domestic
violence for over 30 years. I am also a survivor of domestic
violence and firearms violence.
During my 13 years of marriage, a firearm was always
present. It was used as a tool to frighten and control me and a
reminder that, in a moment's notice, my life could end.
Over 30 years ago when I left, my then-husband kidnapped me
and held me at gunpoint for hours. Sadly, my experience is far
from unusual. In our country, almost one in five women
experience firearm threats from an abusive intimate partner.
I have the opportunity of testifying before all of you
today, but the reality is that I could have very well been
another statistic. I could have been among the people murdered
every seven hours by an intimate partner.
Firearms are used in 50 percent of domestic violence-
related homicides. The simple presence of a gun in a domestic
violence situation, regardless of who it belongs to, makes it
five times more likely that a woman will be killed.
After the kidnapping, my then-husband found and shot me
three times. The first bullet went under my scalp; the others
skipped off my forehead. I thought this couldn't be happening,
and then, he shot me again in the arm. He left me for dead.
The incident occurred while he was under a domestic
violence protection order. At the time, that protection order
did not keep him from possessing a gun. I did not have the
benefit of protections that Congress passed in 1994 that have
reduced domestic violence homicide rates.
Recently, I joined survivors of domestic violence and gun
violence outside the Supreme Court during oral arguments in the
United States v. Rahimi case. Hundreds of us rallied and spoke
to support the existence of domestic violence protection
orders, which restrict those that are subject to those orders
from possessing a firearm. These decades-old, bipartisan laws
on the books help women stay alive.
As domestic violence continues to plague our communities
and disproportionately impact women, especially women of color,
it is imperative that we recognize the added danger a gun
presents. A woman is far more likely to be the victim of
handgun homicide than to use a handgun in self-defense. A study
found that, for every one time a woman used a handgun in self-
defense, 83 women were murdered by an intimate partner with a
handgun.
Congress has long recognized the deadly intersection
between access to firearms and intimate partner homicide. If
the laws, as written, were implemented, and fully enforced,
intimate partner homicide could be reduced even further. States
that have more comprehensive firearms laws have lower rates of
intimate partner homicide.
Congress can further invest in our country's efforts to end
domestic violence in our lifetime by fully closing the dating
and stalking loopholes; investing in funding ATF to enforce
existing removal laws; funding research on intimate partner
homicide and violence, and then, implementing universal
background checks.
Every survivor's story and path to safety is different. To
the other witnesses on this panel, thank you so much for
sharing your stories.
For me, the presence of a gun tormented me and my son for
many years--until it nearly claimed my life. Today, the
traumatic experience continues to impact me, my son, and my
community. The data overwhelmingly shows that the presence of a
firearm significantly increases the chances that a victim of
domestic violence will lose their life.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Glenn follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.010

Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Ms. Glenn.
Now, Ms. Watral, you may begin your five minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHIRLEY WATRAL

Ms. Watral. Thank you, Congressman Biggs, Ranking Member/
Congresswoman Jackson Lee, and Committee Members, for the
opportunity to appear before you today and share my personal
story.
The following quote by an unknown author sums up my journey
and what has brought me here today:

One day you will tell your story of how you overcame what you
went through, and it will be someone else's survival guide.

For 35 years, I was your average female who worked hard to
become a successful businesswoman. Growing up, we did not have
guns, and I was neither for nor against them. I built a career
and a life I was proud of. Safety was never an issue for me
because I thought ``it'' would never happen to me.
Then, a man who said he loved me turned violent. He
kidnapped me and held me for--and tortured me for 15 hours. I
thought I was going to die that day.
When he brought out a gun and set it on the bed, I saw it
as my way to freedom. I could get it; I could defend myself, or
the shot could be heard by the neighbors, and they'd call the
police.
I lunged for it. I pressed that trigger, but all I heard
was my screams. The gun did not go off. I had been defeated. He
had won.
Now, I survived the beating, the biting, the whiplash, and
being thrown around by my hair, and afterward, the restraining
order I got did not stop him from stalking me or contacting me.
The gated community I moved into, that did not stop him from
gaining access and knowing exactly where I lived.
He became desperate and wanted to kill me. Thank God, his
plans to end my life were not successful. I started to mend
physically, and it became apparent I was still not safe. The
mental anguish I felt remained.
Physical wounds of domestic violence eventually heal, but
the invisible scars and never-ending threats which can only be
felt by victims control their lives. For me, I escaped being a
prisoner of his house, but I was still a hostage of fear. I was
terrified to leave my house and afraid to live my life.
This is what started my journey to firearms ownership. I
walked into my first class scared, intimidated, and confused,
and I left with newfound feelings of courage, strength, and
confidence. I realized I could protect myself; I could be my
own first responder.
Millions of women are trying to reclaim their lives after
living through terrorizing times like mine. We need to help
domestic violence victims, encourage them to prepare to defend
themselves. Stop telling them they are not capable of handling
a firearm. Stop scaring them with a few statistics that only
demoralizes them. Fund programs to offer training and arm these
women. Above all, our right to ourself--our right to defend
ourselves with our firearm.
We recently witnessed citizens in Israel getting murdered
in their homes. The Israeli government reacted by scrambling to
arm their citizens. Why should it take an invasion or chancing
another woman being abused or killed before our government does
the same?
The American people see the violence. They see the police
being undermined and defunded by the same people pushing for
gun control. They see the criminal justice system being lenient
and almost sanctioning violence. They realizee no one is coming
to save them.
They have been buying firearms at a record pace over the
past two years. Gun control policies like Red flag laws, gun-
free zones, and safe storage are not keeping people safe, and
people want to be able to protect themselves and those they
love.
The difference between a safe sense of security and real
security for me is my firearm. Help me and countless other
women like me have the opportunity to protect themselves.
The Second Amendment is vital to me. It made a difference
in my life and how I live each day. We need to help the victims
of domestic violence and preserve our Second Amendment for
future generations. We need to stop penalizing responsible
Americans and punish the killers and criminals that are making
our communities dangerous.
I am honored and thankful to be here representing millions
of female gun owners and the organization Women for Gun Rights,
where I serve as the Florida State Director.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Watral follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.023

Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Ms. Watral.
Now, Ms. Solomon, you are recognized to give your five-
minute statement.

STATEMENT OF GENEVA SOLOMON

Ms. Solomon. First, thank you, Chair Biggs and Ranking
Member Ms. Jackson Lee, and the honorable Members of the
Subcommittee.
My name is Geneva Solomon and I'm deeply honored to testify
before you today.
My journey from victim to survivor to advocate has led me
to this moment today, where I am compelled to share my story
and advocate for empowering women through responsible firearm
ownership.
Imagine a childhood marked by emotional and verbal abuse, a
place where your spirit is constantly torn down and your self-
worth is diminished. Then, you fast forward to a time when
you've taken and broken free from that toxic childhood, earned
a college degree, secured a great paying job, celebrated
parenthood, and found love in a marriage.
Yet, you find yourself trapped inside your own home, forced
to endure relentless verbal abuse, physical assaults, and
unspeakable amounts of violence--all while holding your
precious toddler in your arms.
This harrowing ordeal is not a mere nightmare; it's a sole-
crushing, demonizing reality that countless women endure, and
I'm no exception. As a Black woman, this is not a matter of
imagination; it was my lived experience.
After summoning the courage to end my first marriage, the
threats--those threats escalated, and I realized that I had to
become my own first responder. Responsible--I was responsible
for my safety and that of my child.
With no prior knowledge of firearms, I embarked on a
journey to explore firearm ownership as a means of self-
protection. Despite my experienced trauma throughout my life,
and that journey at that time, my determination led me to
research and educate myself on firearm ownership, and
ultimately, becoming a registered firearm owner. Today, I
proudly co-own Redstone Firearms in Burbank, California, which
is the first Black-owned, brick-and-mortar firearms store in
California.
Gun ownership not only arms me with a physical tool, but it
also gave me a profound sense of empowerment. It turned me into
a woman who once was cowered in fear to someone who now stands
tall, even in the face of adversity.
In my role as a firearms store owner and educator, I've met
countless women with stories like and more hectic than mine.
Through education and proper training, they, too, discover
their inner strength and realize that firearms, when handled
responsibly, can be a tool of empowerment.
When my current husband and I first started operating our
FFL, we noticed the glaring gaps within the firearms world,
especially among Black women. To address this, I created an
educational program to introduce responsible firearm ownership
to any beginner who sought to approach firearm ownership from
an educational perspective. This initiative has empowered
thousands, if not tens of thousands, across California,
emphasizing that no one is coming to save you.
The reality is there's a thirst for knowledge and
empowerment, and it's happening in California big time.
Redstone Firearms continues to educate those in Los Angeles and
beyond on responsible firearm ownership and advocates for
concealed carry rights in California.
Through this passion, I have established a nonprofit
organization that also focuses on women and other avenues of
domestic violence like education, counseling, clothing,
shelter, and safe spaces. However, despite these positive
efforts, I stand before you today to express my grievances with
continued gun control laws that are being proposed and even
enacted in California. These rules disproportionately affect
women, particularly, Black women, and will cost lives.
In this opening today, I want to address a few
perspectives. In California, regardless of the reason, a person
must wait 10 days to obtain their firearm when done legally.
Imagine having to wait 10 days while in fear of your life,
wondering if the next moment will be your last. If the normal
background check takes 10 days--and that's if it runs
perfectly--but if it doesn't, it could take up to 30 days.
There's also a statewide concealed carry issuance--there's
no statewide standard for concealed carry issuance. In
California, it allows each county to determine how that process
will flow. So, you can find in more conservative areas that it
can tend to take 45-60 miles. However, in liberal counties, it
can take up to two years. This is after completing your
education requirement and paying all those extreme fees.
The cost of guns in California are far more expensive, and
recently, our Governor enacted the sin tax. Who does that
affect? Black women, all women--when they're just trying to
protect themselves. These rules will have an unintended
consequence that will disproportionately affect vulnerable
populations, especially Black women.
As I close on my remarks, I remain committed to helping all
people who want to approach responsible firearm ownership, but
I live the shared experience with women; my voice beats with
them, but it screams for Black women.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Solomon follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4400.013

Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Ms. Solomon, and thank you for your
compelling testimony.
We are now going to proceed under the five-minute rule with
questions.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Moore.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks to all the witnesses for being here today.
I've said it before, and I'll say it again: Violent
criminals don't care if you're Republican or Democrat, male or
female. We should all be able to agree that owning a firearm
puts you on better footing when it comes to defending yourself.
I have two daughters and a wife. They all have concealed
carries in Alabama, but they're here in D.C. a lot, and I don't
want them to be caught in a situation where they cannot defend
themselves, especially given the astronomical rise in violent
crimes here in this city.
Yet, D.C. is one of the hardest places to get a gun if you
actually follow the law. It's not very hard for criminals, but
it's very difficult for law-abiding citizens.
So, Ms. Alcazar, I want to start my first question for you.
What are the consequences for an individual's safety in areas
with strict gun-control laws, like here in D.C.?
Ms. Alcazar. Well, I can say from personal experience. I am
someone that travels across the Nation. It is very
disheartening to go from one State to the next, and then, not
be able to have a tool for protection in that State because of
their different laws.
National reciprocity would be a huge win for us on that
account because there are so many of us that do travel. Whether
it's seeing family, whether it's a job requirement, or
otherwise, I think that's a huge detriment to the law-abiding
citizens, especially someone like me, as a mom who wants to
make sure that the rest of my family is safe, no matter where
we go.
Mr. Moore. Let me compliment you. I appreciate you not
playing the victim. I think that it was great that you took
ownership and kind of say, hey, I'm going to defend my life and
my children's lives as well.
Ms. Watral, is that how you say that?
In what ways might strict gun control laws inadvertently
put women at disadvantages against an attack?
Ms. Watral. Well, anytime you have a concealed carry and
there's a waiting period, like Ms. Solomon mentioned, that
waiting period, for me, when I didn't have a concealed carry
license and when that person was trying to kill me. The waiting
period to take the class was very detrimental. I didn't know if
I was going to make it because I had no way to defend myself.
I understand criminals have a way of getting a gun and
breaking the law. My abuser was going to do the ultimate; he
wanted to kill me. He actually was trying to buy plastic
explosives, which are illegal, and I had no way to defend
myself. I didn't have a concealed carry weapons license. I
lived each day wondering if that would be the last day.
So, the laws need to empower the victims. Because the ones
that are trying to control the abuser are not working. The
restraining order does not work. Red flag laws do nothing, it
caused me more of a problem, because anyone that wants to
disarm me can with no valid reason.
Mr. Moore. Ms. Solomon, I'll ask you this question. How can
a firearm be a deterrent for a potential attacker?
Ms. Solomon. If you, as a woman, as a trained woman, and
you have a firearm, it de-escalates the situation. If you are
trained responsibly, you will understand that the firearm only
comes out and is used as a last resort.
So, that's why we talk about responsible firearm ownership.
I'm just going to use this firearm to threaten. This is to
empower yourself. This is to protect yourself in the event they
want to harm and kill you.
Mr. Moore. I've often asked--if there was a gun law that we
could pass that would actually do away with gun violence, I'm
sure we would all agree to pass it. Usually, it just makes
everybody victims who are actually law-abiding citizens.
So, I thank you, again, to all the witnesses, for being
here.
With that, Mr. Chair, I'll yield back.
Mr. Biggs. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Georgia, Ms.
McBath.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much, Chair Biggs. Thank you,
Ranking Member Jackson Lee, for deferring to me.
Thank you, each and every one of our witnesses that is here
today.
I want to offer you just my heartfelt--I'm just really,
really sorry for everything that you've suffered by. I'm
listening to your stories, and you're right, I cannot imagine.
Thank you so much for sharing those stories with us.
I would like to say that empowering women includes, also,
protecting women. Protecting women means providing them the
necessary tools to make them safe, to keep them safe--tools
like extreme risk protection orders, which empower law
enforcement and loved ones to prevent violence involving a gun
when an individual appears to be in crisis or has symptoms of
experiencing crisis. Protecting women means closing the
boyfriend loopholes and preventing intimate partners from
possessing a firearm when they have a history of dangerous
behavior.
I came to Congress after my son was murdered with a gun
with one clear goal in mind: Keep the American people safe and
decrease the risk of death by firearms, especially for those in
abusive situations.
An already violent situation might turn fatal in an
instant. The chance of dying at the hands of an abuser doubles
when a gun is in the house. It doubles. Nine hundred and
seventy women are killed yearly by men with firearms, and there
are one million women alive today who have reported being shot
at or shot at by intimate partners.
So, my heart goes out to every single woman. As I said, ``I
cannot even imagine the horror that you have lived with,'' the
trauma that you continue to live with. My heart goes out to you
and the child that also has been impacted by the domestic
violence, because our children and our families are impacted as
well. I thank you for coming here today to share your stories.
I do want to say that abusers should not have access to
firearms, plain and simple. If someone has a history of abusive
and violent behavior, the very least that we can do in this
Congress is make it harder for them to obtain those firearms
and those weapons that they might use to harm their victims.
Ms. Glenn, my question is for you. Thank you so much for
speaking with us today and for sharing your story.
In your testimony, you mention that the presence of a
firearm in a domestic violence situation significantly
increases the risk of lethal outcomes. What are some
alternative approaches that you believe could better protect
women in abusive relationships that do not rely solely on the
use of a gun or gun ownership?
Ms. Glenn. Thank you, Representative McBath.
There are solutions to having a firearm present in the home
or in the situation. I would suggest that we have other means
by which we can protect women other than having a firearm and
having it accessible.
We can work on the dating and stalking boyfriend loop, the
loopholes. We can talk about prevention by supporting having
Congress support Delta and the rape intervention strategies
that we've employed.
There are many other solutions. What I'd like to point out
is that the solution is limiting access to the firearm, whether
it's in the hands of the victim of domestic violence or whether
it's as someone who is abusive, it belonging to them. So, the
solution is really limiting access.
Ms. McBath. Well, thank you very much.
We've had before our Crime Subcommittee many individuals
that have suffered from atrocious abuse by violence. So, I want
to thank the Ranking Member. I would like to thank the Chair
for this, for this hearing today.
I am committed to, like many of my colleagues, trying to
make sure that we are passing policy that protects and supports
all human life.
I yield back.
Mr. Biggs. The gentlelady yields back.
I recognize the Chair for the entire Committee, Mr. Jordan,
the gentleman from Ohio.
Chair Jordan. I thank the Chair, and thank you for this
hearing.
I also want to thank our witnesses for their testimony and
for their courage.
Mr. Chair, I would yield the balance of my time to the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hunt.
Mr. Hunt. Thank you, Chair.
This is not a liberal issue; this is not a conservative
issue. The rights of women to defend themselves is a public
safety issue. It's a constitutional issue. It's a human rights
issue.
Why is gun ownership among women on the rise today? Women
have to arm themselves because the left has made it their
personal crusade to disarm police, embolden criminals, and make
American cities less safe.
How, is the left making American cities less safe? Quite
frankly, I think it's a very simple plan and it's done
intentionally.

Step 1. Defend the police.
Step 2. Enact procriminal policies.
Step 3. Open borders.
Step 4. Take away your constitutional right to defend
yourselves and your family.

What is the end result? It is absolute chaos. We've seen it
for the past few years.
When public safety collapses, who bears the brunt of it?
It's women and children.
The left has created this dangerous environment in American
cities, and now, they want to take away women's last line of
defense, and that is gun ownership.
I've read countless stories across the country of
courageous acts of self-defense where women have saved their
lives with a firearm when attacked by a man much stronger than
they are. This is something that I take personally in the State
of Texas.
In June this year, a pregnant woman in Houston was simply
pumping gas into her car when a suspicious man approached her
and demanded her purse. She drew her legally concealed firearm
on this man, and he fled immediately.
The gun is the great equalizer against dangerous predators,
and oftentimes, the last line of defense for women when it
comes to protecting themselves and their children.
This story would have ended much differently in D.C., and
other Democrat-run cities. In liberal cities, only criminals
have guns because the left is too busy disarming law-abiding
citizens like yourselves.
Let's recap this. The past few years, the left has focused
on defunding the police; passing procriminal policies; opening
the border and taking away your Constitutional rights to bear
arms.
Ms. Solomon, thank you for being here, ma'am. You're
absolutely wonderful.
You're probably aware that there has been an 87 percent
increase in gun ownership among Black women. Black women are
the fastest-growing groups of gun owners in the entire country.
I wonder why. Because of these Black women live in Democrat-run
cities with liberal policies. There are people like you, ma'am,
who have every right to purchase and own firearm for your own
defense.
Women have also described your issues with domestic
violence. I'm so sorry to hear that. I have a four- and three-
year-old daughter at my home. We are armed at my home, and they
will learn how to responsibly carry firearms to prevent this
from happening to them at some point in the future.
It's devastating. We've got to put an end to it--but not by
disarming you.
Ms. Solomon, unfortunately, ma'am, I've got some bad news
for you. Your gun shop happens to located in the People's
Republic of China--I mean California. Your Governor and your
State legislature are probably not big fans of people like you.
If you don't mind, ma'am, could you please discuss with me
some of the radical gun control laws that California has
enacted to hurt your business?
Ms. Solomon. Absolutely. Thank you. I wanted to get to that
in my opening statement.
We, California, had a big win when the Supreme Court
allowed and opened concealed carry in California. Before, it
was very subjective and not objective. It was a matter of
knowing that county's particular--you had to be in that
person's pocket, so to speak, or have a friendship. So, it was
just cause. It wasn't if you passed the background check.
We found that those in liberal counties can never get a
concealed carry weapons permit, but those in conservative
counties, sure. Then, you have to look at who lives there. Who
lives in Orange County? Then, who lives in Los Angeles County?
Then, you have your 10-day waiting period. OK, well, yes,
there is a restraining order that can be issued in 24 hours,
but what about that woman who went and bought a firearm and had
to now wait nine more days?
Or sin tax. When a woman is just moving away, she might
have to flee with nothing. So, California already has the most
highest cost of a firearm in the Nation, and now, you want to
go and add in a 20 percent tax.
Mr. Hunt. One last question before I run out of time.
Really quick, how many people are purchasing guns that look
like you and me?
Ms. Solomon. Eighty-seven percent more.
Mr. Hunt. You've got it, ma'am.
Thank you so much for being here. God bless you, and I
really appreciate it.
Yes, I yield the rest of my time.
Mr. Biggs. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member of the entire
Committee, Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Glenn, you are here to share your personal story and on
behalf of your organization, Survivor Justice Action, which
works with thousands of survivors of domestic violence and
their families. You previously served as the President of the
National Coalition Against Domestic Violence.
Based on your many years working with survivors, what do
they need from Congress or others to get to safety, remain
safe, and heal from their experience?
Ms. Glenn. Thank you, Representative Nadler.
I would suggest that they need not to be in the presence of
a firearm. That would be first.
Second, there are so many other actions that Congress can
take to ensure that domestic violence victims and survivors
have what they need to remain safe.
One of the things that I'd like to have us remember, as
we're talking about this, is that many times domestic violence
abusers do not have a criminal record. That's really important
to remember because the premise is that, if we allow criminals
to have firearms, then we're at risk.
I go back to prevention. I apologize. I go back to
prevention. What we need to be talking about is, how do we
empower young women and young men to understand that domestic
violence is not OK; and that we need to put measures in place
that prevent domestic violence, so that we never have to have
this conversation. I and the other witnesses would never have
experienced what we've experienced. One of the things that is
lacking and needs to be addressed is prevention of domestic
violence.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Glenn, some have expressed a very bleak view of the
world for women, where they cannot rely on family, their
communities, law enforcement, or others for help. Is this true?
How can women who are experiencing abuse right now be connected
with people who can help them?
Ms. Glenn. Very easily through the National Domestic
Violence Hotline, for instance. They can more readily get
protection orders that do provide them, yet another barrier to
safety.
I think that we need to be talking about more immediate and
ready protections for those that are experiencing violence
versus what might be the waiting for a firearm, for instance.
The quicker that we remove victims from that type of danger,
the safer they are.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Glenn, a recent study found that, roughly, one in seven
women had experienced nonfatal abuse with a firearm by an
intimate partner, including being shot at or threatened with a
firearm. Do you believe these women would be safer if they had
a firearm?
Ms. Glenn. I do not. Because I still go back to, and the
data shows, that the mere presence of a firearm makes it five
times more likely that a woman will be killed; a woman will be
killed in those situations.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Glenn, researchers found that 68 percent of mass
shootings involved either the killing of a family member or
intimate partner, or that the shooter had a history of domestic
violence. How do domestic violence restraining orders promote
the safety of those experiencing abuse, as well as promote
public safety?
Ms. Glenn. I would suggest that the piece of paper itself
is not protection. Absolutely, I could attest to many survivors
who've been informed by their abusive person that it's a piece
of paper. What I would suggest is the protection order allows
for the documentation of that abuse and ensures that, for
instance, if the survivor is seeking out other types of safety,
that they have the protection order of a document that shows
that there's been that abuse.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Nehls.
Mr. Nehls. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, ladies, for being here.
For those watching at home, I want to be clear about what
this is about. Joe Biden wants to take your guns. He does. He
wants to infringe on your Second Amendment rights. He wants to
strip you of the ability to protect your family, your
community, and your country.
It's dangerous; it's unconstitutional, and it does nothing
to address crime. Criminals will still have guns long after
law-abiding citizens don't.
I'd like to turn your attention to an incident that
happened in June near my district in Houston. Play the clip.
This is what Mr. Hunt was referenced.
[Video played.]
We don't have audio, but you see this knucklehead here and
he's in the gray truck. He gets up there, and he, obviously,
has a pistol. There's a pregnant woman standing there with her
husband. This guy gets a little bit bold. Look at it. He points
the gun; he's going to try to rob them.
He goes across. He approaches them, pistol whips the man,
the husband, and the woman gets out and she shoots him; pulls
out her pistol and shoots him--not only protecting herself, but
protecting her husband and her unborn child.
Unfortunately, the suspect was taken to the hospital, where
he survived. I wish she would have been a better shot; it would
have reduced recidivism. Because guys like this get back out on
the streets. They get back out on the streets. They'll do the
same damn thing.
I think you've seen a rise in gun sales because the
American people truly understand that they always can't count
on the government to protect them.
I served in law enforcement for 30 years. I was the sheriff
of a very large county. I've been to several, several
homicides, several of them related to domestic abuse, several
of them where their husbands went out there and just brutally
murdered the entire family.
There are times I reflect, now, and I say to myself maybe I
wish that mother, that woman who could have received training
and been a responsible gun owner, would have had an opportunity
to protect her children and herself from that husband, the
boyfriend, and the numerous other women that were just brutally
murdered by just criminals.
Now, many of these guys may have had some mental health
issues. I got it. They had nothing there to protect themselves.
If they had something such as a firearm, maybe they would be
able to talk to us today.
Ms. Solomon, as a former lawman, we carry guns every day. I
can tell you there's not a law enforcement officer in the
country today that wakes up and says, ``I want to go out and
legally kill somebody.''
What do you think that woman was thinking after she was out
there; she points a gun and shoots that guy? How will that
affect her for the rest of her life? What do you think she's
thinking, thinking about her mental health? How do you think
that will affect her for the rest of her life?
Ms. Solomon. I definitely do believe that she didn't wake
up that day and say I wanted to kill anybody.
Mr. Nehls. Right.
Ms. Solomon. She will feel empowered that she was able to
save herself and her husband or whoever that was, her family
member, but she will have access to get better and over that
and eventually still carry a firearm. She will feel empowered.
I believe she was pregnant. So, it is going to empower her and
that child that comes into the world that they're not a victim.
Mr. Nehls. She should be here sharing her story as well one
day, talking about how that weapon saved her life. Maybe
looking at her training, how did she acquire that and what type
of training? Did she become proficient at it? We have a lot of
people that want to carry a gun, but they don't go through that
training. I would encourage everybody, at least get proficient
with that firearm so you know how to use it.
Ms. Watral, you mentioned in your testimony that several
major cities who have adopted some of the strictest gun control
laws in the country remain unsafe still today. Do you think
more gun control laws would have prevented that suspect in the
video from illegally obtaining a gun?
Ms. Watral. No. Criminals are going to get a firearm
whether it is against the law or not. They don't care how many
laws they break.
When I carry, I carry to save a life, my life, not to take
a life. So, when someone has faced a situation where they have
to defend themselves and take a life, I am sure it is very hard
to accept that, but they are very happy because they are here
to talk about it.
Mr. Nehls. Thank you. Ms. Glenn, would you agree? Chicago
has some of the strictest gun control laws in the country. They
are out there. Red Flag laws. You can't have a concealed weapon
without a permit, background checks, and lock and store the
guns.
They have the strictest, yet they have gun violence up
through the moon. There were over 2,800 shootings in Chicago
last year; 1,300 in LA; and 1,200 in New York. I am telling you
right now, Tommy Turd does not care about gun laws. They're
going to have them. It will just affect the law-abiding
citizen.
Mr. Biggs. The gentleman's time has expired. You may answer
the question if you wish.
Ms. Glenn. I don't have the expertise. I am not here on the
expertise about gun laws in those cities. What I am here about
is how do we ensure that those that are abusive do not have
access to a firearm in which a woman can be killed.
Mr. Biggs. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Dean.
Ms. Dean. I thank the Chair and the Ranking lady. I thank
you very, very much Ranking Member. To all our witnesses today,
I have to say I am in awe of your courage, testimony, and
willingness to bring your experiences here to us so we can
craft better policy.
I can't imagine how difficult it is to talk about the
painful experiences you endured, in some cases year after year,
day after day, especially Ms. Solomon, Ms. Glenn, and Ms.
Watral. I thank you, Ms. Alcazar, for bringing your perspective
and your courage and strength.
Still, I want to focus on the facts. We have to focus on
the data. We have to focus on the facts if we're going to save
lives.
I couldn't help but think of the many women. On average 70
women a month who can't speak before us, as you have so
courageously, because their abusers used a gun to murder them.
Our laws failed to protect these women. We, as lawmakers,
failed to protect them when we knew that access to a gun makes
an abuser, and we have heard this statistic, but we really have
to focus on it. It makes an abuser five times more likely to
kill his female partner.
We also know that when an abused woman purchases a gun for
protection, or if there is another gun in the house for
whatever reason, statistically speaking the risk that her
partner will kill her doubles, five times and two times.
That's why we have to be serious. We have to be honest. We
can't spout the lies that we've heard on the other side. On the
other side, we've actually had hearings where we don't want to
defund the police. They want to defund and disband ATF. Imagine
that. They don't want us chasing down criminals.
So, we can't turn away from these alarming facts. Ms.
Glenn, as a survivor yourself, what does the premise, and you
talked about actually going out before the Supreme Court, what
does the premise of the Rahimi case mean to you, in other words
that a man--the holding is that a man subject to a domestic
violence restraining order should nevertheless be able to hold
a gun? What does that mean to you?
Ms. Glenn. Thank you so much for that question. The premise
being that if I am a survivor or a victim of domestic violence,
and I am expected that--or I expect that a domestic violence
protection order is going to protect me, how come I am not
protected from the very thing that will cause me harm, which is
the firearm?
Ms. Dean. Well said.
Ms. Glenn. It is very, very troubling, the access that
abusive person may have to that firearm, even if I am under
protection order, is removed.
Ms. Dean. Well said. Ms. Solomon, again, thank you for your
courage to defend yourself and your child. I cannot imagine
what you have gone through, and how that really inspired you to
be different, to start a business in this same area.
I really honor the way you keep talking about responsible
gun ownership. That is what we want in this country. We don't
want to take everybody's gun away, but we want responsible gun
ownership, and we want those who shouldn't possess a gun not to
possess it.
I will talk about your business for just a moment. I was
concerned to learn that your business received Demand 2 letters
from the ATF two years in a row, I believe, both in 2022 and in
2023. For those who don't know, Demand 2 is a program, a
requirement, under the Department of Justice ATF that helps
local and State law enforcement trace crime guns.
Currently, gun dealers are added to the program if they
have had 25 or more guns traced to their dealership with a time
to crime--I know you're familiar with this--which is the period
between the initial sale of the gun and the recovery of the
crime, three years or less.
I want to be absolutely clear. You're getting those letters
and requiring you to participate in the program does not mean
you've done anything wrong, but it is unusual. Only about three
percent of FFLs are subject to that program, the Demand 2
program.
So, I would like to talk to you about solutions. You are
intimately close-up with the sale, the transaction, and the
training. You know that many of these guns that have been sold
through your FFL have been traced to crimes. You must be
thinking about the solutions.
What are some of the solutions, other than I know why
people are here today to say arm more women, what are some of
the other solutions to prevent gun violence and to prevent guns
getting into the hands of criminals?
Ms. Solomon. The one thing that we have to address is that
people within the African American or Black community for years
in hundreds of years have been starving for firearms education.
Recently, with my work that I have been doing alongside my
husband at Redstone Firearms is education. We have only been
doing this for seven years alongside the National African
American Gun Association.
Our organization needs support to continue to get the
education out there because approaching firearm ownership from
an uneducated perspective when we have been starved of that
education, you're going to end up with things like that.
So, we are teaching education, and we support it. Our
mission is to consult, educate, and train.
Ms. Dean. Let me ask you about--
Mr. Biggs. I am sorry. Your time has expired.
Ms. Dean. Oh, I apologize. I didn't realize. I apologize.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. No problem. The Chair now recognizes
the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Dean. Ms. Lee, Ms. Lee, sorry.
I apologize.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you to each of the
brave women here today representing your organizations for
sharing your stories to help inform us as a Committee and,
also, to empower other women.
I will always fight to protect the Constitutional rights of
law-abiding gun owners. Women who are trained how to properly
own and safely shoot a firearm are not just gaining a tactical
skill. A woman with a firearm who is trained and understands
how to use it has a line of defense against a home invader, a
dangerous partner or just any random act of violence.
As we have seen from our victims of violent crime hearings
here in the Judiciary Committee, cities like Chicago, New York,
and even Washington, DC, are facing rampant rising violent
crime rates. So, it is important as ever for us all to be
empowered and to be prepared.
Women across the Nation have the ability to defend
themselves, their children, and their families. When we empower
women in self-defense, we all benefit.
I am especially proud to have Ms. Shirley Watral here today
with us. As we've heard, she holds many titles as a firearms
instructor, an author, and is my fellow Floridian. So, thank
you for being here today to share with us your testimony and
your insight.
I would like to start here. Earlier during our hearing, Ms.
Glenn testified about the significance of injunctions or
protection orders and, also, hotlines as tools for survivors to
escape abusive situations. I agree those are important tools. I
would like to hear your perspective on whether those tools are
adequate or whether we need to be further empowering women to
protect themselves and their families.
Ms. Watral. Thank you, Congresswoman. Speaking from my
experience, my restraining order did not stop my abuser. The
restraining order, as has been said many times, ``is a piece of
paper.'' It is just for the record. So, that piece of paper is
not going to keep me safe.
So, I have to learn and figure out a way to defend myself.
Like I said, there were plenty of times I knew that this person
was trying to kill me. I had to depend on law enforcement. What
if they didn't know what he was doing or where he was? Who was
going to come save me but me? That's why I carry. I carry
because my life is important to me now.
I am going to also share; my first firearm's class wasn't
just about learning to protect myself. It changed me
internally, who I was, how I acted, who I engaged with, and how
I let people treat me, and that is more important. I think a
key to putting an end to domestic violence is empowering our
young women, so they don't accept unacceptable behavior. They
start understanding that their life is worth something more
than what someone else is trying to tell you.
Ms. Lee. On that subject, how is it that you believe
firearm ownership, in particular, helps contribute to the
concept of gender equality when it comes to self-defense?
Ms. Watral. Well, once again, I will share from my
experience. When I was trying to fight my way out of being held
hostage in my abuser's home, I could not overpower him. There
was nothing I did--I tried everything that I knew, and
everything failed.
My only goal when he brought that firearm, that was going
to be my salvation and my freedom. I was either going to defend
myself or alert the neighbors. To my disappointment, the gun
did not go off.
So, I think it is very important, and it is very important
to me, to be able to defend myself. My equalizer I choose is a
firearm.
Ms. Lee. Another thing that you've touched on is the
concept of abusers and repeat offenders getting back out on the
street or not being held to account for their crimes. Tell us,
if you would, how soft on crime policies that allow those
repeat offenders or abusers to remain at large and at liberty
are endangering women and how you have seen that affect women
in America.
Ms. Watral. Just based on the media, that I hear there are
so many times that an offender, a criminal, is out on the
streets with hardly any bail. They are repeat offenders. If
they are repeat offenders, that means they are going to commit
the violent crime that they have already been doing.
So, if we put them and make them accountable for their
crimes, that puts them--it makes our community safer. Women
need to feel that the government is behind them.
If I am going to put myself out there, and I am going to go
to court against my abuser, I want to know that the government
is going to be there behind me and make sure that he does his
time. That early dismissal, that he can come out and threaten
me some more, I want to know the government is there and is
going to stop him from doing that.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like
to recognize the folks who are here from Moms Demand Action.
Thank you all for being here.
You all want to see Congress do something to prevent the
kind of situation where we have to teach our children, our
young girls, that before you can be respected you have got to
have a gun.
They want a world where you don't have to--where you don't
train your boys to say that the mark of being a man is to have
a gun; and have a bigger gun than the guy next door to you.
They want a world of commonsense gun reform.
We're having this hearing today; Republicans have been in
control of Congress since January 3rd of this year. It took
them 15 rounds of decisionmaking and voting to elect a speaker
and then nine months later, after having done absolutely
nothing during the 9-months, they got rid of the speaker and
elected a new speaker.
Now, we have a new speaker. Instead of doing something to
improve the lives of the American people, we are sitting here
today at a hearing showing a doctored video. You can't trust
these videos that they put up on the screen with the super
predator shooting somebody. You know, all these kinds of
subliminal messaging that they're doing, you can't trust these
videos that they're putting out there because you didn't even
see the whole thing.
What happened, what was it really that happened? Then what
has happened since then? Was anybody held accountable for
shooting anybody? Was it justified or not? You don't know those
things, but you stand up here and grandstand on a perhaps
doctored video.
This is a hearing where there is not a single policy
proposal that we're discussing. It is just simply a title,
Second Amendment Rights Empower Women's Rights. Well, I tell
you, we need to--I don't want to see women's rights empowered
by women going into a doctor's office demanding an abortion at
gunpoint. I don't want to see a society like that. There has
got to be a better way for human beings to exist on this planet
and know how to live together.
Let me ask this question, Ms. Watral. You said earlier that
rather than control the aggressor, we should be focusing on gun
laws that empower the victim. Do you think that laws that
prohibit possession of firearms by people convicted of domestic
violence, do you think that those laws are OK to prevent such
people, convicted people, from owning firearms?
Ms. Watral. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. I am
here--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Is it yes or no?
Ms. Watral. Excuse me?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Yes or no. Do you think that those
laws are good, good laws?
Ms. Watral. I am here speaking as a victim of domestic
violence.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I will take then that my time is
running that you don't support those laws. Do you support laws
that would keep firearms out of the hands of people convicted
of domestic violence, Ms. Solomon?
Ms. Solomon. I am here to talk about empowering women.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, you're not going to answer the
question either? How about you, Ms. Alcazar?
Ms. Alcazar. I would agree--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Do you support those laws?
Ms. Alcazar. I would agree with my fellow witnesses that
we're here to talk about empowering women.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. OK. All right.
Ms. Alcazar. Instead of talking about the things that we
can take away from women--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Don't you think that it empowers
women when--
Ms. Alcazar. --to take away?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. --people who have been convicted of
domestic violence are not allowed to own firearms? Doesn't that
help?
Ms. Alcazar. I think it empowers women--the definition of
empowerment is what we all need to focus on right here, right
now because empowering--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Let me ask this question--
Ms. Alcazar. --is not taking away.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. --let me ask this question of Ms.
Glenn, because Ms. Alcazar you're not answering my question.
Ms. Alcazar. Empowering is giving and providing information
and providing education.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I control my time. Ms. Glenn, do
you support laws that would keep firearms out of the hands of
persons convicted of domestic violence and those under
restraining orders?
Ms. Glenn. Absolutely.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Why?
Ms. Glenn. Because the presence of a firearm, and the
danger that it represents for victims and survivors of domestic
violence. No matter who the firearm belongs to, the data shows
that it is five times more likely to have a woman killed when
there is a firearm present.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. Mr. Chair,--
Mr. Biggs. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. --I'd last like to offer this
article, ``Red States Have Higher Gun Death Rates Than Blue
States and Here's Why.'' I would like to offer this for the
record.
Mr. Biggs. Without objection.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Biggs. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Texas,
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Crime, Ms. Jackson
Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I am very
happy to be able to welcome the witnesses here and listen to my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
I really find no reason for us to be here today because
none of us should be in disagreement of empowering women and
choosing the basis of the empowerment that they would utilize
to be safe.
I think it is important for women to be empowered. We need
to respect the individual rights while also addressing the
urgent need for responsive regulation, a concept that is very
clear prior to the politicalization of the Supreme Court of the
United States. We can do both.
For obvious reasons, I have been a strong proponent of
women's empowerment. If there are women who feel empowered by
responsible safe firearm ownership, that is certainly their
prerogative, and I respect their decision.
On the other hand, women who have a different perspective
should also be safe with the kinds of gun laws that will
provide them safety, common sense gun laws. Certainly, in a
domestic violence situation, their abusers should not have a
gun to be able to use against them.
I can never talk about this issue without mentioning
Sergeant Preston in Houston, Texas, who enforces in his life--
he is now deceased--that domestic violence calls are some of
the most dangerous calls that are ever made. He lost his life
protecting a mother and son. They lived, but he died, answering
a domestic violence call. I always want to pay tribute to
Sergeant Preston.
I also want to put into the record, Mr. Chair, an amicus
brief led by the House Gun Violence Prevention Task Force,
signed by 151 representatives, and 18 Senators filed in U.S. v.
Rahimi and just take one quote that I think is important. ``The
only difference between a battered woman and a dead woman is
the presence of a gun.'' So, we know that--
Mr. Biggs. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you. We know that we have to be
safe when we talk about gun use. Let me put into the record as
well some statistics that are important as I begin to ask my
questions.
Just having access to a firearm makes an abuser five times
more likely to take their partner's life. Over the last decade
gun homicides by intimate partners jumped 58 percent, and the
pandemic was an especially lethal period for abuse victims.
Gun homicides involving intimate partners rose a stunning
25 percent in 2020, compared with the previous year to the
highest level in almost three decades. In that year, women
accounted for more than two-thirds of the victims shot and
killed by intimate partners.
In 2021, researchers reported that more than two-thirds of
recent mass shootings were involved with perpetrators who have
killed partners or relatives who had a history of domestic
abuse.
So, we have to find a balance here. So, what I would--the
first question I want to ask all of you, is gun storage a good
common ground that we all can support, storing one's guns? Ms.
Solomon?
Ms. Solomon. I believe we all can agree that guns should be
stored when not in use.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Watral?
Ms. Watral. I also agree with Ms. Solomon, but I also
believe they have to be accessible. If I am going to have a
firearm in my home--
Ms. Jackson Lee. You believe that storage is good. Thank
you. Ms. Glenn?
Ms. Glenn. Absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Alcazar? We know they have to be
accessible. You have children, so do you believe in good
storage structure?
Ms. Alcazar. Storage is only part of the education and
training that we would do for only part.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It is included in it. I appreciate your
response. Let me also indicate that I have a letter from the
Jewish Women International that I would like to have submitted
into the record.
Mr. Biggs. Without objection.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would also like to, acknowledge the Moms
Demand Action for your leadership.
I think what I would like to conclude on is I believe in
empowering women. I believe any hearing that would suggest that
any difference between protecting domestic violence victims is
untoward and incorrect.
I do want to leave a topic that is somewhat related about
empowering women, and I have paid tribute to her and
acknowledged here. That is the horrific reproductive rights
legislation that we have in Texas that has allowed an innocent
mother of 31 years old to actually flee our State to be able to
save her life and to be able to have additional children. That
is Kate Cox. So, when we talk about empowering women, we need
to talk about all issues.
Ms. Glenn, I am very pleased to see your leadership on
these issues, but I want to make sure that your leadership is
not diminished. You want to train women, but you want to make
sure that people know that a gun can be very detrimental.
I guess as I close, so can detrimental reproductive denial
that would allow a young woman or force her to flee and to
prosecute, prosecute innocent medical providers who are simply
trying to save lives. We should not prosecute anyone for trying
to save lives. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Biggs. The gentlelady yields back. I recognize myself
for five minutes. I will begin first with just two points here.
Part of the reason that you have this problem is the
prosecutor is not prosecuting. They are letting people out on
DVs, or domestic violence, particularly misdemeanor charges,
and they let criminals back on the streets. That is a problem.
I used to be a prosecutor who prosecuted domestic violence
cases.
I want to go now to the testimony that you--the written
testimony, Ms. Alcazar. In your opening statement, you said the
reality is that violent criminals, many with evil intent, do
exist and are terrorizing us today. I want to be a part of a
respectful, productive dialog about how we can empower and
protect law-abiding gun owners, especially the rising
demographic of women.
Briefly, can you tell us what you think empowers women who
potentially could be victims of domestic violence?
Ms. Alcazar. Yes. Thank you very much for the question.
Just to summarize what I had intended to say earlier, it seems
like we have a very big problem with the definition of
empowerment here because we keep hearing these ideas that, and
I quote, ``we failed to protect them.'' We protect her. We
protect them. It is not about--that is not empowerment if
someone is failing to protect us.
It is not their job to give us something or take away
something or influence us in that way. To empower us means to
allow us, enable us, and affect us in positive ways. To empower
women in this specific environment with the Second Amendment is
not take away their options or say we failed in protecting
them. It is saying, you know what? You protect you, and we
support that.
One way to do that is the firearm. The gun is never the
solution. It is an option. It is a protected option that anyone
should be able to have if she so chooses so. Along with that
empowerment comes the training and the resources and the
commitment to make that decision for themselves.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. I think Ms. Solomon, I am on you. You
said in your statement, you talked about this, I realized that
I had to become my own first responder, responsible for my
safety and that of my child. Please talk to us about that in
relationship to empowerment.
Ms. Solomon. I always tell people; do you know how long 90
seconds is? Ninty seconds is being generous when we talk about
law enforcement responding. We hear that domestic violence is
the most dangerous call. So, in those 90 seconds if you don't
have a firearm and you do not want to fight one or two
attackers as a woman, that is a very long time.
So, empowering yourself to be able to live and empowering
your child is a God given right.
Mr. Biggs. I appreciate that. You're right, 90 seconds can
feel like a long time. Quite frankly where I live, the response
time is closer to 12-15 minutes.
Ms. Watral, you said, ``the criminal mind doesn't care
about how many laws they break.'' Their focus is on finding a
place with the least amount of resistance where they can cause
the most death and destruction.
Please tell us how the Second Amendment empowers you to
counter people with malevolent criminal intentions.
Ms. Watral. Well, the way to summarize it is, the only way
to stop a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun, someone
that has the experience and has the knowledge of how to handle
a firearm.
When these mass killings come up, and criminals are looking
for least resistance and doing the most damage, there is not
any law that I think they would ever say, oh, I shouldn't do
that because I am not allowed to have a firearm.
They've already made that decision. They're already broken
the ultimate law in wanting to kill somebody, just like my
abuser wanted to kill me.
Mr. Biggs. I would just say all of you had such compelling
stories, all four of you, and very informative. I want to ask
one more question to you, Ms. Watral, because your statement
said, ``we are being targeted and discriminated against,
politically, financially, and socially.'' When you said we, who
are you referring to?
Ms. Watral. Women, women of all races, financial status,
all women in the country. That is my belief.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. I am going to now--the question was
asked by one of my colleagues across the aisle whether the
individual who was trying to attack the pregnant lady and her
husband or boyfriend, whoever that family member was, was he
arrested? Yes, he was arrested. He was charged. I am going to
enter that in the record without objection.
Then additionally, we need to talk about what the real
problem is in Red States. It is Blue cities. That is where the
real problem is for violence. So, I am going to introduce now a
report called, ``The Blue City Murder Problem.'' I will do that
without objection.
With that, I thank the witnesses again. I thank each of you
for being here.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would like to submit something in the
record.
Mr. Biggs. Yes, please go.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. To add to the work that the
Biden-Harris Administration are doing to work with all of you,
I want to submit into the record their announcement of a number
of reducing gun violence initiatives, first, establishing the
State Office of Gun Violence Prevention, which should really
help all of you.
I encourage you to participate with them on the issues that
you are concerned about because it talks about reinforcing
responsible gun ownership, and it does include storage. That's
just one of the things, working with the industry.
I don't think it sees them actually--and I am just going to
ask you to submit it. It doesn't say anything about Blue States
or Red States or Blue cities or Red cities. It just talks about
Americans working together to make us all safe. I yield back,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Biggs. Without objection. Again, thank you for being
here, and I thank the audience for being here as well. With
that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:38 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

The record for this hearing by the Members of the
Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government Surveillance is
available at: https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?Event ID=116676.

[all]
