- RADIO, MUSIC, AND COPYRIGHTS: 100 YEARS OF INEQUITY FOR RECORDING ARTISTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RADIO, MUSIC, AND COPYRIGHTS: 100 YEARS OF INEQUITY FOR RECORDING
ARTISTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 26, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-88

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-209                     WASHINGTON

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chair

DARRELL ISSA, California             JERROLD NADLER, New York, Ranking
MATT GAETZ, Florida                      Member
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                  ZOE LOFGREN, California
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin               STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
CHIP ROY, Texas                          Georgia
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina           ADAM SCHIFF, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             J. LUIS CORREA, California
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          ERIC SWALWELL, California
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon                  TED LIEU, California
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            LUCY McBATH, Georgia
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
KEVIN KILEY, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming             CORI BUSH, Missouri
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               GLENN IVEY, Maryland
LAUREL LEE, Florida                  BECCA BALINT, Vermont
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina
Vacancy

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND
THE INTERNET

DARRELL ISSA, California, Chair

THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin              Georgia, Ranking Member
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon                  TED LIEU, California
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
KEVIN KILEY, California              ADAM SCHIFF, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               ZOE LOFGREN, California
LAUREL LEE, Florida                  MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina          GLENN IVEY, Maryland

CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Majority Staff Director
AARON HILLER, Minority Staff Director & Chief of Staff
C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, June 26, 2024

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
The Honorable Darrell Issa, Chair of the Subcommittee on Courts,
Intellectual Property, and the Internet from the State of
California.....................................................     1
The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet
from the State of Georgia......................................     2
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member of the Committee on
the Judiciary from the State of New York.......................     4

WITNESSES

Randy Travis, Country Music Singer, 2016 Country Music Hall of
Fame Inductee
Mary Travis, Wife of Randy Travis
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Testimony.............................................     9
Curtis LeGeyt, President and CEO, National Association of
Broadcasters
Oral Testimony.................................................    13
Prepared Testimony.............................................    15
Michael J. Huppe, President and CEO, SoundExchange
Oral Testimony.................................................    22
Prepared Testimony.............................................    24
William ``Eddie'' Harrell, Jr., Regional Vice President, Ohio
Markets; General Manager, the Cleveland Market; Radio One,
Inc., Division of Urban One, Inc.
Oral Testimony.................................................    32
Prepared Testimony.............................................    34

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

All materials submitted by the Subcommittee on Courts,
Intellectual Property, and the Internet, for the record........    68

RADIO, MUSIC, AND COPYRIGHTS: 100 YEARS OF INEQUITY FOR RECORDING
ARTISTS

----------

Wednesday, June 26, 2024

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and

the Internet

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:15 p.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Hon. Darrell Issa
[Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Issa, Jordan, Massie,
Fitzgerald, Cline, Kiley, Moran, Lee, Fry, Johnson, Nadler,
Lieu, Ross, Schiff, Lofgren, Dean, and Ivey.
Mr. Issa. The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time.
We welcome everyone here today. Today's hearing is on
radio, music, and copyrights. Now, I will recognize myself for
an opening statement.
It is not Groundhog Day, ladies and gentlemen, but we've
been here before. Today, among other things, we will examine
the longstanding and significant issue of our copyright laws
that have existed for nearly 100 years.
In those 100 years, the radio music industry, which this
year celebrated the 100th anniversary not only of a number of
other issues but the Radio Manufacturers Association, of which
I was once the Chair, turned 100 this year. In those years, we
recognized that AM/FM radio has believed and been able to
convince Congress that performers should not be compensated for
their performances when done on terrestrial radio because, in
fact, the performance is a promotion for which no royalties
should be paid.
This flies in the face of virtually every other country in
the world.
We all recognize the invaluable role that radio plays in
American history. Without a doubt, AM and FM radio brought us
news, weather, and sports. Oddly enough, when it brings you
news, they pay for those words to be spoken. When it brings you
weather, they pay for those words to be spoken. When it brings
you sports, you better believe sportscasters get paid for that.
As a matter of fact, the late Rush Limbaugh never made less
during the height of his career than $30 million a year for
that amazing voice and those ideas. Were those ideas more
creative than that of our witness here today Mr. Randy Travis?
The fact is, we are here once again to ask why it is that
U.S. joins the likes of North Korea, Iran, and Cuba in not
recognizing public performance rights in radio music
broadcasts. Even China recently modernized its copyright law to
provide for performance rights for sound recordings. China will
join the many others, including France, for example, in denying
an estimated $70-$100 million in royalties that are taken
overseas but not paid to our artists.
I point out France, where I was just a few days ago, France
collects the royalties. Their radio stations make a profit
while collecting the royalties--or paying the royalties, I
should say. Those royalties go to the Government, which then
promotes the arts and tourism with them, again denying American
performers who performed in those countries.
This injustice has persisted for too long. That is why I
introduced the American Music Fairness Act (AMFA), with the
Full Committee Ranking Member, Mr. Nadler of New York. I know
that we have been here before. I know that it looks like ``why
would you do this?'' The answer is, every year we must do the
right thing until ultimately the right thing is done by these
creative performers for what they have been doing.
It is not new. When I learned that Frank Sinatra came and
stood on the steps of the Capitol a very long time ago not
because he needed it. He didn't need the money. It is because
he earned it, and because others who needed it far more than
him were not getting it. He stood up for the little guy, and we
should all do that today.
We continue with that tradition with our witnesses, all
whom are famous in their own towns and their own homes, but
none, like Randy Travis--and I want to thank you particularly,
and his wife Mary, for the extra effort it took to be here
today and for your indulgence when I perhaps stray into some of
your latest works in an effort to make the American people more
aware of it.
With that, I recognize the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee, Mr. Johnson of Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon,
everyone. Thank you all for being here.
Music is incredibly important to the economy of the Nation
and to Georgia. Many recording artists call my district home.
Atlanta, Georgia is the capital of Hip Hop and R&B, with a
vibrant network of creators, writers, music labels, recording
studios, and music venues. That is just the beginning.
Creators in Georgia are making music in everything from
Rap, Bluegrass, Gospel, and classical music. Georgia Tech found
that in 2016, the music industry in Georgia generated $3.5
billion and employed over 16,000 people. Today Georgia's music
industry supports an estimated over 45,000 jobs, with over
13,000 royalty recipients, and over 91,000 song writers.
While the music industry contributes significantly to our
economy on the individual level, it is difficult to be an up-
and-coming musical artist today. It is difficult to keep up a
steady stream of gigs, and it is even more difficult to break
through as an emerging artist. Rather than the glorious and
glamorous lifestyle that some might imagine, music creators
often are working class, bartending at night, and recording
during the day. New advancements in technology and changes in
the way music is consumed have only made the rich richer and
the poor poorer.
When Congress created performance royalties for digital
distribution of musical works in 1995, it exempted terrestrial
radio. It did so in part because after hearing a song,
listeners who liked it could head to their nearest music store
to buy the whole album. There was a clear benefit to both
parties, the station and the performer.
If you look at American towns today you won't see music
stores at the mall, no CD sections at your local big box store.
That is because music consumption has moved from buying albums
to streaming individual songs. Clearly, the world has changed,
and the question is how those changes impact the broader
ecosystem.
We know that as technology develops and industries evolve,
statutory arrangements that at first worked for everyone begin
to be less balanced. Looking back over the last 20 years of the
music industry evolution, it is clear now more than ever that
we must work together to address the issue of radio broadcast
performance rights.
It goes without saying that artists should be compensated
for their work. Artists, particularly working-class artists,
need steady royalty streams because they can't always rely on
the other ways of making money from their craft.
In addition, addressing the issue of radio broadcast
performance rights we must also be sure that we are addressing
the concern of the broadcasters and all those involved in local
radio. Local radio stations and their hosts raise important
health and social issues, support local journalism, and provide
much-needed information on emergency services during national
disasters.
At home my constituents have V103-FM, its sister station
WAOK-AM, and Streetz 94.5, to name a few. Atlantans who want to
listen to Hip Hop can turn to 97.1 FM, The River. Those
interested in classic rock can turn the dial a few clicks to
Magic 107.5.
Obviously, all the different parties involved in this issue
are differently situated with respect to being able to
accommodate change. We cannot seesaw between unfairness for one
party and unfairness for another party and call it progress. I
believe it is through hearings like this that we are able to
work together to resolve this longstanding issue and explore
how to fairly compensate creators going forward.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses if and how
they believe Congress should act to ensure that every part of
the music industry from the Gospel singers to the classic rock
radio stations are properly supported as technology changes the
way we consume our favorite songs.
I thank the witnesses again for their time today,
especially to the Travises for making it here to Washington,
DC. We look forward to hearing the test--your testimony as well
as the other testimony.
Thank you and thank you for your contribution to the
culture, also.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize my partner in the legislation, the Ranking
Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Nadler of New York.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, when American workers clock out and sit down
behind the wheel of their cars to drive home every evening, or
get on the subway, they can be instantly transported to rock
concerts, jam sessions, and solo performances just by turning
on their radio. Scrolling through the stations they can hear
country twang, operatic arias, and classical violin pieces
performed through their car speakers.
In New York, FM radio New York listeners can go from the
Supremes to Miles Davis with only a few clicks of the dial.
The music is different, but all these examples have one
thing in common: The artist is not being paid for the
performance. Under American copyright law, the owner of a sound
recording of a musical work does not receive royalty payments
when his song is played on terrestrial AM/FM radio.
That same recording generates income for the artist when
distributed over any other medium, from satellite radio and
streaming services to public venues and restaurants. There is
no reason terrestrial radio should be treated differently from
all other music platforms, and certainly not at the expense of
artists forced to allow the distribution of their intellectual
property for free.
Creators whose performances are broadcast over terrestrial
radio are not just famous performers currently on the Billboard
Top 100. Working class musicians struggling to make ends meet
have for decades formed the backbone of the creative economy.
Increasing inequities have made it harder and harder for those
creators to make a living wage.
Hourly workers living paycheck to paycheck may hear their
own songs on the radio and not receive a cent for it.
The same goes for artists who no longer perform at all,
whether because musical changes and musical tastes change, or
more poignantly, because the performer ages or faces personal
tragedy that makes them no longer able to perform, terrestrial
radio stations can play the products of their life's work
without the artists seeing a penny.
We are honored to welcome Randy Travis here today to share
his experience with illness that rendered him unable to sing. I
look forward to his testimony about how the lack of performance
royalties has impacted his ability to earn a living.
Finally, the failure of U.S. law to establish a performance
right on terrestrial radio means that our seniors and other
musicians miss out on royalties when the music is broadcast
overseas. Nearly, every other developed Nation in the world
compensates performers for playing their music on terrestrial
radio. Since we do not have a similar performance right at
home, American artists do not receive royalties when their
music is played abroad. This alone deprives U.S. artists of up
to $200 million annually.
Those who argue with this statutory omission somehow inures
to the benefit of artists, who get free publicity and an
expanded audience, are missing a crucial understanding that the
world around them has changed. If the system ever were fair, it
certainly is not now.
As the music industry has evolved with technology over
time, so too have the inequities brought about by broadcasters'
exemptions from copyright royalties. For many years the public
purchased physical copies of recordings, whether in vinyl,
cassette, or CD. When you used heard a song on the radio you
might go out and buy the whole album.
Today, teenagers no longer flock to stores to buy the
latest album. In 2023, over 72 percent of U.S. music revenue
came from streaming services.
There is no reason whatsoever that artists should receive
different treatment when their songs are played on the radio or
streamed online. That is why I was proud to join Chair Issa in
introducing the American Music Fairness Act.
The AMFA would require broadcast radio stations to pay
copyright royalties to performing artists, record labels, and
other sound recording copyright owners for the right to
transmit their music over the air. The bill was carefully
constructed to ensure that smaller radio stations pay less than
large ones based on the annual revenue generated by the
stations and their parent organizations.
It is long past time for performers to be fairly
compensated. I hope that we can advance this legislation soon.
While the absence of a performer's right costs our economy
millions of dollars each year, this is not a monetary question
alone. Artists, labels, and the overall health of arts in
America all suffer for the absence of fairness in the system.
I am grateful to Chair Issa for his work to ensure artists
receive the royalties they are owed. I thank both the Chair and
Ranking Member Johnson for holding this important hearing
today.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Without objection, all other opening statements will be
included in the record.
It is now my pleasure to introduce our witnesses.
I want to take a point of personal privilege and thanks to
the fact that this is very balanced and thorough. We have
creative individuals. We have, obviously, the SoundExchange is
here, and we appreciate them. We also have representatives both
of the industry and Mr. Harrell, who represents a huge number
of stations. This, in fact, shows a fairness to at least engage
in the dialog. I, for that I am grateful.
You may not always feel like it today, but I am very
appreciative.
With that I would like to introduce--this is a great honor
and the rest of you will have to live in his shadow--Mr. Randy
Travis, who is beyond an exceptionally accomplished musician,
having released seven platinum--and if I get them wrong,
correct me, Mary--seven platinum or multiplatinum albums, and
received seven Grammy Awards, 11 Academy of Country Music, 10
American Music Awards, eight Dove Awards from Gospel Music
Association, and too many others to name. He was the 2016
inductee into the Country Hall of Fame, founder of Randy Travis
Foundation, and this charity is dedicated to raising awareness
for stroke and aphasia, and provides art and music enrichment
for children. The list goes on for both of the Travises.
I want to thank you for being here. This was not easy for
you to get here.
Nothing personal, but Mr. Curtis LeGeyt, is the President
and CEO of the National Association of Broadcasters which
advocates on behalf of all the terrestrial radio and television
stations nationwide, and has worked with the association for
more than 10 years in his role as the Chief Operating Officer
and Executive Vice President for Government Relations.
Prior to joining the NAB he served as Senior Counsel for
then-Chairman Patrick Leahy, Senate Judiciary. So, he knows the
routine here. He knows that it is all about the fairness of the
questions and the fairness of the answers. We appreciate,
again, your being here.
Mr. Michael Huppe is the President and Chief Executive
Officer of SoundExchange. I apologize that the order here is
different. An organization dedicated to administering, under
the Section 114, sound recording licenses. To date,
SoundExchange has distributed--get this--$11 billion for
digital performance royalties. Over 700,000 music creators have
received I guess what is no longer checks but, in fact,
transfers.
He is also an Adjunct Professor at Georgetown Law School
where he teaches music law.
Mr. Eddie Harrell is a Regional Vice President and General
Manager of Radio One, with markets in Ohio. Radio One and Urban
One Company is one of the largest media companies in the United
States. It also serves African Americans through radio,
television, and digital property.
Mr. Harrell also serves as the Chair of the Otterbein
University Board of Trustees, Vice Chair of the Ohio
Association of Broadcasters, and is on the National Board of
Directors for NAB and represents my hometown which the Ranking
Member got them all, but WERE that I grew up listening to for
years. By the way, live, a lot of broadcasts down there that
have been great.
I want to welcome all our witnesses. As those who have been
here before knowing, we will take your entire statement plus
any additional material you want to give to is into the record.
We do ask you to try to limit your opening remarks to five
minutes.
Because of the limitations that the stroke has placed on
Mr. Travis, Mary Travis will serve as both a principal witness
on her own behalf and at times may speak for, for Randy.
I am going to ask one indulgence. Can I call you Mary and
Randy?
Ms. Travis. Absolutely.
Mr. Issa. Oh, that has made my day.
The other guys will call you Mister.
Pursuant to the rule, if I could ask you all to be sworn
in. Mr. Travis, you do not need to rise. If you will raise your
right hand and take the oath, please.
Do you all swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that
the testimony you are about to give will be true and correct to
the best of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help
you God?
[Chorus of yeses.]
Mr. Issa. Thank you. You may all be seated.
Please let the record reflect that all witnesses answered
in the affirmative.
Again, not as an accommodation, but because I am in awe of
the creative work, Mary, between the two of you, however you
want to handle your opening statement you are recognized for
it.

STATEMENT OF RANDY AND MARY TRAVIS

Ms. Travis. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
Randy has right-side paralysis, so he couldn't raise his
hand. I apologize.
Mr. Issa. He gave me a good left-handed sign. So, he has
still got a lot of strength there.
Ms. Travis. He does. He does.
Chair Issa, thank you for having us. Ranking Member Johnson
and the Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity and this honor to testify today on behalf of all
artists and musicians in support of the American Music Fairness
Act.
What would sheet music sound like without a voice? What
would radio sound like without a song?
This piece of legislation is essential to correct a 100-
year-old issue regarding artists and nonpayment for their work
performed on the most prominent music platform in America, one
which they helped to build and sustain.
My name is Mary Travis. I am the wife and voice of Randy
Travis. I am kind of like a bad version of AI, but with
consent. He is the good one.
Even though a massive stroke in 2013 left him with aphasia
making it difficult to speak, his commitment to music is clear
and very resolute. Eleven years ago, at age 54, Randy was
stricken with viral cardiomyopathy, leading to pneumonia,
flatlining life support, massive stroke, coma, brain surgeries,
intubation, tracheotomies, feeding tubes, collapsed lungs,
staph, sepsis, Serratia, pseudo-monas, aphasia, right-side
paralysis, and six months in a hospital stay, a lost of a third
of his body weight, followed by years of daily rehab.
We would be in and out of the hospital and bedridden for
the rest of our life, is what we were told after getting 1-2
percent chance of survival. He didn't listen to that and,
instead, he rolled right back into the industry he loves so
much.
Duane Allen of the Oak Ridge Boys told us when he came to
see us in the hospital, he says, ``Well, I guess the devil
don't want you and God ain't ready for you yet.''
Anyway, music is, was, and always will be his lifeline.
That lifeline has changed, and we need to acknowledge that. The
days of Randy packing a car and tracking across thousands of
miles throughout the country to visit radio stations and
deliver copies of his newest cut cassette in hope of having his
music heard are things of the past.
The advent of streaming has all but replaced physical
records and CD sales. There are no guarantees that listeners
are running out to buy concerts or t-shirts. Folks can hear all
the music they want on demand for pennies a day.
Of all the things that we do differently than we did a
century ago, one thing remains the same, and that is that the
voice is still the mandatory bridge between the writer and the
listener. It is time to do right by the ones that created that
sound, that melody, that emotion that keeps the listeners
coming back and the advertisers buying into the radio.
Passing AMFA bill would make any old wrongs finally right:

Artists, musicians, and producers would receive a gratuity for
their work;
Artists would be much more inclined to collaborate with
stations on projects and events;
All platforms, all other platforms would be more understanding
of the level pay field; and
Artists can spend more time, can spend more time with their
family and less time on the road.

The size and the nature of the radio stations will
determine the scaled-fee, starting at just $10 a year,
structured to protect and assure continued success for stations
of all sizes.
You have the power to change this. Better sooner than
later, as we are staring AI technology squarely in the face.
Artificial intelligence, and I call it Artistic Intelligence,
because it enabled Randy to release a new song utilizing AI in
its most authentic and artistic way. It is the first song ever
recorded and released with full artist consent and involvement
in a studio setting. His Warner Music Nashville label,
producer, musicians, vocalists, and Randy were all present.
This is good AI. There is bad; but there is bad, no, there
is terrible AI out there, and it is increasing exponentially
daily. It is estimated that there are 179,000 songs,
unauthorized AI songs, posted on the internet already.
We ask your help in righting the wrong for legacy artists
and creating a more prosperous future for the next generation
of artists. Passing the American Federation Fairness Act, then
moving forward with a thoughtful approach to putting AI
protections in place would be positive steps to ensure that
artists are paid for their work, their identity is theirs
alone, and the soundtracks of our lives continue to play on
forever and ever. Amen.
We appreciate your time and your consideration as you
reflect back on the songs that you celebrate a certain time, a
certain place, and a person in your life. The artists will tell
you, in fact, that it was their honor to create them for you.
Thank you for your service to this great United States of
America and thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. and Ms. Travis follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mary.
Mr. LeGeyt.

STATEMENT OF CURTIS LEGEYT

Mr. LeGeyt. Good afternoon, Chair Issa, Ranking Members
Nadler and Johnson, and the Members of the IP Subcommittee. My
name is Curtis LeGeyt, and I am proud to testify today on
behalf of the National Association of Broadcasters' (NAB) more
than 5,100 free local radio stations that serve your
communities every day.
It is an honor to appear today alongside such an esteemed
panel, but particularly Eddie Harrell of Radio One. Founded by
Cathy Hughes more than four decades ago, Radio One is the
country's largest urban radio broadcaster, and embodies the
very best of our industry.
I am also pleased to testify alongside the legendary Randy
and Mary Travis. I grew up in awe of Randy's talent. I am
grateful for what his team has recently accomplished using
artificial intelligence so that a whole new generation can
experience Randy's music.
For over 100 years, broadcasters across the country have
been privileged to play great music like Randy's on our
stations where we expose artists to new listeners and engage
them with one-of-a-kind interviews in partnership with local
performance venues.
We are more than that. We inform, educate, and alert
listeners to important events, issues, and emergencies; we
entertain listeners with sports and talk radio; and we are
local, involved in our communities and proud to serve the
public interest.
Radio stations' critical role as fact-based first informers
and emergency lifelines has never been more important than it
is today. With online misinformation and disinformation
threatening to upend our upcoming elections, and the seemingly
constant deluge of natural disasters and cell phone outages,
local radio remains trusted, always on, and freely available
without an expensive subscription or data service.
Of course, you cannot talk about the power of broadcast
radio without recalling the countless artists whose careers
were made when their first song played on our airwaves, or our
listeners whose memories are indelibly intertwined with a song
playing on their favorite station. Performers across diverse
genres have shared the incredible and unforgettable feeling of
hearing their songs on the radio.
Even amidst drastic changes in the media landscape,
broadcast radio continues to drive music discovery for both new
musicians and legacy artists.
Unfortunately, the so-called American Music Fairness Act
would undermine our indispensable medium and this mutually
beneficial relationship. AMFA would impose a new royalty on
local radio that is financially untenable for broadcasters of
all sizes. Such an abrupt change in law would be wholly
inconsistent with Congress' long-held approach to copyright
policy where updates have been made to account for new,
emerging technologies. It would be virtually unprecedented for
Congress to upend copyright laws that have governed decades-
long relationships and on which an entire industry has been
built and relied on for over a century.
Radio invests considerable sums in producing content,
employing on-air talent, and updating the equipment needed to
run successful stations. Radio also pays substantial FCC
regulatory fees, and already pays hundreds of millions of
dollars in annual copyright royalties to performing rights
organizations like ASCAP, BMI, CSAC, and GMR, and streaming
collectives like SoundExchange.
Without charging expensive subscription fees, like our
streaming and satellite competitors, local radio is supported
by advertising alone. With big tech having used their market
power to siphon away local advertising revenue, a new
performance royalty could spell the end for many local
stations.
For these reasons, 250 Members of Congress, including 225
House Members and 12 Members of this Committee, have
cosponsored the Local Radio Freedom Act, a resolution that
opposes any new fee or tax on local radio. We are grateful for
their support.
Mr. Chair, as you know, NAB stands ready and willing to
engage in good faith discussions on a holistic legislative
proposal that enhances our unique value to artists without
diminishing our ability to serve your constituents. In the
meantime, Congress has repeatedly considered and chosen not to
impose the recording industry's one-sided performance royalty
proposal on free local radio. This Committee should do so again
today.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. While this hearing's
title focuses on the singular legislative issue on which the
radio and recording industries disagree, I hope it also affords
the opportunity to discuss the many areas of shared interest
between our industries, including the novel threats and
opportunities posed by generative AI. By rehashing old fights
today let's not sour the opportunity for consensus that has
been critical, that has been the critical ingredient for all
major changes in IP law in the modern era.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. LeGeyt follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Huppe.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. HUPPE

Mr. Huppe. Thank you, Chair Issa, Ranking Members Nadler
and Johnson, and the Members of the Subcommittee. It is an
honor to be here today to testify in support of the American
Music Fairness Act.
This bill seeks to finally remedy the egregious fact that
the United States is the only democratic Nation in the world
without a performance fee for artists on AM/FM radio. I have
had the privilege of representing American artists around the
world. When I speak to other industrialized countries, Mr.
Chair, quite frankly, it is an embarrassment that the United
States, a country that is a leader in intellectual property and
protecting free expression, denies this most fundamental right
to the people who make its music.
IP is a huge portion of our GDP and one of our biggest
exports, yet we deny this critical economic right to cherished
creators like Randy Travis. It is shocking that the United
States stands in the company of countries like North Korea,
Iran, and Cuba in not paying artists when their songs are
played on AM/FM radio.
Even Russia and China, with their horrible IP records, have
a public performance right for sound equivalence.
The current system in the United States is so broken that a
touch of a button on the dashboard determines whether or not an
artist like Randy gets paid. That means if you are driving in
your car and you turn on satellite radio, Randy gets paid.
If you switch to the streaming service on your phone, Randy
gets paid. If you listen to the same song on an FM station,
Randy gets nothing.
That, Mr. Chair, is indefensible. Same music, same product,
same consumer experience, but radically different treatment
under U.S. law. Apple, Spotify, Pandora, Sirius XM, even TikTok
and YouTube pay the performer, but AM/FM, a service that 88
percent of Americans listen to every week, gets a pass due to a
100-year-old loophole.
To put it bluntly, Mr. Chairman, for over a century AM/FM
radio has been stealing the music. Last year alone radio made
$15 billion in revenue, and not a dime of that went to the
artists that drew the crowd. Why? Because the broadcasters hide
behind the outdated concept of promotion. Which is ironic,
given that 72 percent of music on the radio today is not even
new music.
Yet, even to the extent there may be some promotion, that
should never justify a mandatory, un-permissioned taking of the
music.
You must obtain a license to make a movie based on a book.
You must get the rights from Major League Baseball to broadcast
a Nationals name. These are both clearly promotional. Why
should music be any different?
Mr. Chair, Congress must set a standard that creators need
to be compensated whenever and wherever their music is played,
especially when their creations form the backbone of the
business model like they do for AM/FM radio. This is going to
be even more critical as the music industry takes on artificial
intelligence.
To add insult to injury, because the U.S. doesn't have a
performance right, Americans lose out on royalties overseas.
For example, when Randy Travis has a song played over the radio
in Paris, the French collect royalties on that music. Instead
of paying Randy, that money is diverted to French artists and
French cultural funds.
We estimate that artists lose almost $300 million of
taxable U.S. income each year because we lack these protections
in the U.S. This is on top of the hundreds of millions of
dollars they are already missing out on domestically.
After listening to Mary share Randy's incredible story, I
don't know how anyone can look Randy in the eye and say he
doesn't deserve to be paid for his life's work. For every big
name artist, there are hundreds of smaller artists, backup
singers, session musicians, studio producers, mixers, and
others who helped make the music timeless but who never made a
penny from it being played on radio.
In fact, the dozen States represented on this Subcommittee
have over 100,000 music creators who would be eligible for
royalties over AM/FM radio if this legislation was enacted.
Mr. Chair, the concepts embodied in AMFA have been
supported by every Administration since President Carter,
including both the Biden and Trump Administrations. That should
tell you something.
Just two days ago the U.S. Conference of Mayors passed a
resolution at their annual meeting in support of AMFA.
I leave you with this: In the two-hours or so during which
this hearing will take place over 200,000 songs will be played
on terrestrial radio. The artists who performed the songs won't
get paid for it. Those artists are your constituents, your
neighbors, your family and friends.
I hope that Congress will finally fix this problem and make
things right for all the music artists in this country. They
certainly deserve it after everything they have given to us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huppe follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Harrell.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM ``EDDIE'' HARRELL, JR.

Mr. Harrell. Greetings, Chairs Jordan and Issa, Ranking
Members Nadler and Johnson, and the Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Eddie Harrell, Jr., and I am
testifying on behalf of Radio One where I oversee our local
operations in Columbus, Cincinnati, and Cleveland, while still
managing the day-to-day operations of the latter.
As someone who runs multiple stations that uniquely serve
our listening audience and values the collaborative
partnership, we have with recording artists and connecting with
our communities, make no mistake that a new performance royalty
imposed on local stations will create harm for local stations,
listeners, and the recording industry itself.
A little bit about our company.
Media pioneer Cathy Hughes founded Radio One in 1980 and
built it into the largest urban radio network today. Ms. Hughes
originally--Ms. H as we call her--started as an Administrative
Assistant, working her way up and becoming Howard University's,
Howard University Radio's first woman Vice President and
General Manager, which was WHUR right here in Washington, DC.
Her leadership was instrumental in creating unique WHUR
programming like the Quiet Storms radio segment, which is now a
staple, and uniquely reflected the sound and style of the
Washington, DC, community.
As anyone who has tried to start a new business knows, it
is never easy. After being denied 32 times by various banks,
and overcoming significant other hardships, Ms. H. persevered
to become a single station owner and develop a winning formula
for what became Radio One. That family business now encompasses
more than 70 radio stations across 13 markets in urban America,
including but not limited to Atlanta, Baltimore, Cleveland,
Houston, Philadelphia, Raleigh-Durham, Richmond, and here in
Washington, DC.
Today, Radio One, now led by Ms. Hughes' son, Alfred
Liggins, reaches 17 million weekly listeners and connects one
million annual local attendees with music and musicians that
they love. Radio One also employs more than 1,200 people who
come to work every day to make a difference in the lives of our
listeners.
Radio stations like ours provide a uniquely free service
and connect everyday Americans. At Radio One we are the source
for the latest music in R&B, Hip Hop, and Gospel. In short, we
inform, we inspire, and we entertain.
Not only does radio provide an invaluable source of daily
news and entertainment, but radio also serves as a trusted
voice during national disasters or emergency situations. In
Cleveland we have consistently served as a conduit for
communication between the mayor, the police chief, and the
general public. Our ability to connect as a trusted voice in
terms of public--in times of public emergencies is vital in all
our markets.
Radio also provides a key platform for recording artists. I
am proud of the real-life partnership that exists between radio
and the recording industry. Broadcasters around the around the
country are known for putting a spotlight on new upcoming
artists and, therefore, serving as an integral part of artist
promotion. This continued relevance of radio and the value
proposition is affirmed in everyday life among radio stations.
Record labels are contacting us to promote new artists and
music, looking for air play to help launch the next hit.
While we embrace this promotion platform, our partnership
with the recording industry goes much deeper than air play. I
often tell the story about a little-known upcoming trio who
performed in Cleveland at Z107.9 Summer Jam in 2014. Before
they performed, I had not heard of Migos. However, after their
performance at Summer Jam, everyone in Cleveland and then the
world soon experienced the generational Hip Hop talent of
Quavo, Offset and the late great Takeoff. This is just one
example that illustrates the power of the collaboration between
radio, the recording industry, and free promotion.
Not surprisingly, none of our community investments go
without a cost. Today, local broadcasters are competing against
tech behemoths and global streaming services who, ironically,
would use new AI tools to attempt to replicate the unique
sounds and service of local radio. Imposing a new performance
royalty on our uniquely free service would diminish the music
we play for our audience and decrease our investing in staff
and community service, and ultimately to less competition
against global streams, and the destruction of an incredible
promotional platform that benefits artists.
Yes, radio will use AI to find new efficiencies in our back
office operations. AI will not replace the soul of local
broadcasting, such as the people who work at our stations and
serve our communities. Nor will AI replicate the
entrepreneurial spirit or programming genius of Ms. Hughes.
Fake Drake will never take the stage at our Summer Jam.
Radio One and local radio stations will continue to thrive
by serving our audiences in uniquely local and human ways.
In conclusion, I applaud the majority of the House that
supports the Local Radio Freedom Act and encourages this
Committee to refrain from imposing a performance royalty. To do
otherwise will jeopardize local radio stations employing local
staff, keep upcoming artists from breaking into the recording
industry, and harm Americans across the country who rely on
free local radio for news, entertainment, talk, sports, and
reliable information.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today. I look forward
to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harrell follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you. I thank all the witnesses.
We now go to the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald,
for five minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Chair.
Mr. LeGeyt, do radio stations already pay royalties for
sound recordings as a result of some of the online streaming
that the stations broadcast themselves?
I am just trying to get clarity on that.
Mr. LeGeyt. So, radio stations across the board, both for
our terrestrial air play and webcasting, pay significant
performance royalties to, that go to the song writer. So, those
are paid through ASCAP, BMI, CSAC, and GMR in the tune of
hundreds of millions of dollars.
We also pay an additional royalty on the sound recording to
SoundExchange when those performances take place online.
Mr. Fitzgerald. So, would it then be fair to say that the
radio stations would have to make two separate payments? Is
that what this would result in if we move forward?
Mr. LeGeyt. That, that is exactly right.
It has already proven extremely difficult for local
broadcast stations in the webcasting context to innovate online
due to the burdensome costs that those additional royalties
pose to innovate.
The fact is, it would be devastating to add those
additional royalties to the terrestrial air play when we are
already generating such significant promotional value to
artists.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr. Huppe, while this hearing is about the
public performance rights for terrestrial radio, some
stakeholders have argued that passing the American Music
Fairness Act would be the first step in getting rid of all
transmission and retransmission exemptions granted in the
Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995.
This is concerning. You know what, I guess, what is coming.
Because of restaurants and bars, and how do you guys do that or
what is your take on that right now, kind of as we sit here
today?
Mr. Huppe. Sure. Congressman, that is an excellent
question.
I have worked in the industry for 20 years, and the
recording industry has been fighting this fight for 80 years.
It is and will always be about terrestrial radio and making
sure that everybody gets paid fairly for their content. We want
to make sure that this is a technology-neutral solution and
that big broadcasters do not get a break from paying what every
other competitor has to pay.
You bring up restaurants and bars. Those are different.
Congressman, people go to restaurants to have food and dine
with their family. They go to bars to share a communal drink.
People listen to music radio for one reason: To listen to
music radio. Radio is different from all those others. That is
the focus today and an injustice that we are trying to resolve.
Mr. Fitzgerald. So, Mr. LeGeyt, let me go back to you.
Proponents of the bill argue that American artists are
losing that $300 million a year, which was brought up earlier,
in overseas revenue. I am sympathetic to that argument. We
should be doing what we can to ensure artists like Mr. Travis
are being paid what he deserves in that work, even though it is
being performed or played abroad.
It is not clear to me whether major record labels are
already collecting those international performance royalties
from or for the American artists.
Mr. LeGeyt. Thank you for the question.
So, first, we are sympathetic. If there is any U.S.
performing artist that is owed dollars that are sitting
overseas that they are entitled to under that foreign country's
laws, we certainly agree that those should be collected.
Trying to compare the broadcast recording industry
relationship in the United States to that in any other country
is an unfair comparison.
You allude to the right thing. When we have tried to dig
into what that number looks, it has been very hard to
substantiate. I think it is an appropriate question for the
recording industry as to how their international subsidiaries
are already collecting those dollars.
I don't have that answer, but certainly understand it to be
the reality of today's marketplace.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes, whether it is Randy Travis or any
other artist, what I am trying to determine is whether
publishers like Warner who operate globally are already
collecting performance royalties abroad on behalf of their
American artists, and instead of transferring it back to the
artist are simply using it to offset--I don't know how else to
describe it--their overseas operations? Right?
What would be your comment on that, I guess?
Mr. LeGeyt. My understanding would be clear and would be
purely secondary. I think those are questions more
appropriately directed at the record labels.
I can tell you that anecdotally we have certainly heard as
much.
Mr. Huppe. Congressman, if I, if I may elaborate on that.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Sure.
Mr. Huppe. SoundExchange actually has 50-60 reciprocal
agreements around the world. We have agreements covering 85
percent of the planet who, with organizations who do what we do
in other countries.
In many cases there are some collections in country by
country from the labels. In many cases, there is no collection.
Sometimes that includes artists' performances, but most often
it is the artists like Randy who really lose out on this across
the board.
As I said, our estimates based on the data we have is up to
$300 million a year is left overseas and not repatriated to
this country.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you all very much.
I will yield.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We will now go to the Ranking Member of the Full Committee,
Mr. Nadler, for five minutes.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Huppe, when Congress extended copyright procedures for
sound recordings in 1971, it did so in part because of the
increasing piracy of records and tapes, then relatively new
technologies. According to a contemporary House report, piracy
caused over $100 million in economic losses at the time.
Similarly, when Congress extended Digital Performance
Rights in 1995, this Committee presciently found that,

The digital transmission of sound recordings is likely to
become a very important outlet for the performance of recorded
music in the near future.

It went on to say that without appropriate copyright
protection in the digital environment the creation of new sound
recordings and musical works could be discouraged, ultimately
denying the public some of the potential benefits of new
digital transmission technologies.
We changed the law in 1971 because the evolution of
technology had created a system that was unfair to artists and
the listening public. We changed the law again in 1995, because
once more new technologies were making it harder for artists to
make a living.
Do we have a similar argument today that the music
ecosystem has changed?
Mr. Huppe. Thank you, Congressman.
We absolutely have a similar argument today. Streaming is a
huge part of the U.S. recorded music revenue today. It is 85
percent of revenue into the entire industry comes through
streaming. We live in a world where 40-50 years ago it was a
sales-based model, and everything was done to purchase--to
drive purchases of CDs and albums. Now, 85 percent of U.S.
revenue comes from streaming.
That is exactly what we are here about today because the
broadcasters are the one platform that doesn't pay for that
delivery method that now serves a huge majority of the U.S.
music industry.
Mr. Nadler. Mr. Travis and Mrs. Travis, as a country music
star considered the voice of classic country your performances
are regularly played on AM/FM radio. Why is it important for
your long-term care that you receive royalties not just from
streaming services but also from terrestrial radio?
Ms. Travis. The royalties since his stroke, the royalties
are what we have counted on for income for survival for his
long-term care.
It's also important to note that we are here not just for
us. We are 65, we are kind of on the other side of it. The
younger artists that are coming along with families that are
looking forward to a career in music, we want to do it for
them. We want them to know that they have a career ahead of
them, one that they can look forward to, one that they know
they are not giving away their, their music, or their identity,
or their copyrighted material for the radio.
Randy loves radio. I want to get that straight. He loves
radio and would never have been Randy Travis without the radio
at that point in time. That was 40 years ago.
Mr. Nadler. Again, Mr. and Ms. Travis, while artificial
intelligence is not the focus of this hearing, use of
generative AI in the music industry is of strong interest to
this Committee, both as potential as a tool for creators and
the dangers it may pose that an artist's work or likeness is
used without permission or compensation.
How has artificial intelligence helped you continue to
create?
Ms. Travis. That is a wonderful question. It is one that we
have just, it is a bridge we have just crossed.
Randy, has put out his first song since his stroke 11 years
ago called ``Where That Came From.'' It was used with, it
usually stems from 42-45 of his songs that were sent to a
company that put his music on top of a vocal bed so all the
vocal that you hear is Randy's.
It was, it was pretty emotional, to be honest with you.
When it came back, he spent months in the--it took us 11 months
to do it, and he spent months in the studio with his producer,
real long producer, with Warner Music, with musicians that had
played on some of his earlier albums.
So, the whole setting was very authentic, artistic, and
humanistic. It had all the heart in it. So, it was wonderful to
get to hear some more music by Randy Travis.
Mr. Nadler. Do you believe AI users should be allowed to
create unauthorized copies of a singer's voice?
Ms. Travis. Absolutely not.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Finally, Mr Huppe, some argue that
small broadcasters cannot afford to compensate musicians for
the performance of their sound recordings. In your opinion,
does the American Music Fairness Act adequately account for
that concern?
Mr. Huppe. The American Music Fairness Act absolutely
accounts and looks out for small broadcasters. The sponsors of
the bill have gotten the balance exactly right. We recognize
the importance of allowing small business to thrive and grow so
we have more competition and more variety in radio.
As you know, Congressman Nadler, 1.5 stations that make
$1.5 million or less will have to pay a mere $500 for all the
music they want to use in a year. That is $1.37 a day. I hasten
to note it is the lowest fee to join the NAB which they offer
to noncommercial outfits. We are offering a $1.5 million cap to
commercial outfits. It is less expensive than what it costs a
student to go to the NAB radio show. It is $139.
Mr. Nadler. Easily afforded by not joining the NAB?
Mr. Huppe. Exactly.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. With that, I am going to take just one minute of
a privilege for this, for a good reason.
[Song played.]
Mr. Issa. Though I would love to play the whole thing, but
the Chair is waiting.
I now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan.
Chair Jordan. I wanted to keep listening. I grew up, I grew
up under the old joke: In my mom and dad's household there were
two kinds of music: Country and Western. Right?
It is good to be here. I apologize, Mr. Chair, for not
being here earlier to do the opening statement. I was actually
doing two talk radio shows and so was unable to get here.
I will enter the statement now.
This issue has been before Congress for the past 100 years.
It has also been at an impasse for the past 100 years. I want
to thank Chair Issa for trying to tackle it. We must get this
right.
As everyone knows, music is interwoven into American
history and culture. It is one of our most important cultural
exports.
Radio is, obviously, an extremely important institution in
America. It is how millions of people get news and
entertainment.
Back in Ohio we have some great broadcasters. This
Committee is entrusted with the jurisdiction over copyright
matters, which means that it is up to us to balance interests
in the rights of creators and distributors. Historically, we
have only been able to tackle complicated issues like this when
everyone is willing to come to the table and find a path
forward. In this case, it means balances the interests of
performers to be compensated, and accounting for the reliance
interests of broadcasts, of the broadcast community for the
value that they provide.
Despite music consumption increasingly moving away from
broadcast radio to digital streaming, the issue before us today
is still one worthy of our attention.
Last Congress Chair Nadler organized bipartisan
negotiations to try to sort this thing out. Unfortunately,
those negotiations stalled, and we never quite got to a
resolution. Despite that, we still believe there is a deal to
be struck that is fair to all sides and, most importantly, fair
to taxpayers and consumers.
We have heard from musicians across the spectrum about the
importance of being fairly compensated. We couldn't be more
grateful to have legendary country star Randy Travis with us
today and his wife to share their perspective.
We also have with us Eddie Harrell, Jr., from the great
State of Ohio to share how broadcasters on the ground are
thinking about these issues.
Historically, this Committee moves copyright legislation on
a consensus basis. These issues are not and should not be
partisan.
I want to thank again all our witnesses for being here
today.
I want to thank our Chair for putting this together, and
all the work he has done on this issue to try to get to a
solution. I look forward to the remaining discussion and debate
and questions that come.
With that, I would yield back to the Chair. Again, thank
you for the time.
Mr. Issa. Well, I thank the Chair.
Since the Chair yielded back to me I will just, I will just
say that if we want to make a deal here today, you are hearing
numbers that you pay that much for your coffee service in a
year. So, think about that as we go through this because it
really is something where you heard a little piece of that
wonderful music that reminded us of the great music that was
produced for 40 years by Randy.
With that, I think I am going to the gentlelady from San
Jose, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair and
Ranking Member.
Thanks to all the witnesses for being here. It is
instructive and also inspiring, Mr. and Ms. Travis, that you
are here.
One of the things that we need to guard against when we
consider legislation is unintended outcomes. I realize people
have different perspectives, so I want to focus on one of those
issues.
Mr. Huppe and Mr. LeGeyt, one of the issues is what impact
would this legislation have on the critical role of radio
stations in providing emergency broadcasts?
Now, Mr. LeGeyt, you argue that paying artists for air play
would come at the expense of investments in emergency broadcast
systems, potentially comprising those systems, which would be
important to every Member of this Committee.
Mr. Huppe, you contend that other countries successfully
manage to fund both the performance royalties and robust
emergency systems.
How can you, the two of you, respond to the divergence of
opinion that you are presenting here to the Committee? If you
could each address that briefly, I would appreciate it.
Mr. LeGeyt. Well, I think what is--thank you for the
question--I think what is most difficult about these
comparisons to other countries' regimes is that there is no
comparison to the U.S. locally focused, freely available
broadcast model in any other country. This model is time
tested.
Across our laws, copyright communications laws, there,
there are special exemptions and special provisions that have
been put in place to enable this locally focused service,
ensure that we are always on in times of emergency, and ensure
that we have a reach that enables us to touch listeners who
maybe can't afford an expensive subscription service, don't
have adequate broadband service.
That is what local broadcast is serving--
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I understand. My question really has to
do with the emergency services.
Mr. LeGeyt. So, local broadcasters across this country are
operating on extremely tight margins right now. I don't need to
tell anyone on this Committee about how disrupted the media
landscape is, the degree to which the large tech platforms have
siphoned dollars out of local advertising.
We are, the numbers for small broadcasters and that
treatment that Mr. Huppe referenced earlier is a bit of a red
herring, because the fact of the matter is under this proposal
more than 4,000 local broadcast stations would be subject to
CRB set rates, which would total, if we apply their precedent
here, hundreds of millions of dollars. You are not going to see
local service with those kinds of costs.
Ms. Lofgren. Mr. Huppe, could you address the same
question?
Mr. Huppe. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I would say that you don't even need to look to other
countries to find that this is quite manageable for the
broadcasters. They have news stations that are required to
broadcast emergency services, and yet they manage to make them
profitable and pay their talent.
They have talk stations that are required to do emergency
service broadcasting, and yet they manage to make a profit and
pay for their talent.
They have sports radio that have to do the same thing, and
yet they manage to make a profit.
So, we don't even need to go overseas to look at how this
will actually play out in this country. I think they absolutely
have the ability to do this if they wanted to.
In terms of radio suffering and having financial problems,
in the words of the great Mark Twain I would say that the
reports of radio's demise are greatly exaggerated.
This is a $15 billion business in the U.S. Eighty-eight
percent of all Americans listen to radio. The biggest broadcast
groups are becoming bigger and more powerful.
If you look at iHeart's IBIDA for the past eight years,
IBIDA which is a proxy for profit, they operate in the 24-25
percent range.
Ms. Lofgren. I think we have a clear diversion fuse here.
Let me just close. Mr. and Ms. Travis, it was fascinating
to hear of your capacity to create new music using AI. AI is
going to provide tremendous tools for new things that are--
obviously there are risks that we need to be aware of and
prevent--but it is also a tremendous tool for good.
The Library of Congress is currently under the Registrar of
the Copyright Office examining AI. Obviously, if there is no
human component, a machine can't get protection. So, the
question is where is the AI being used as a tool as opposed to
creating itself.
I am hoping that you and your husband will weigh in with
the Registrar because I think your experience would be
instructive for them. We want to be able to empower people to
utilize this tool, as you have done, in a very emotionally
moving way.
I just wanted to mention that. It is obscure but it is
important. I hope you will have a chance to let the Registrar
know about your experience because it is important.
Mr. Chair of the Full Committee, I am also a fan of country
music.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the gentleman, Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to all the witnesses that are here today. Very
important discussion, tough discussion.
I have talked with both sides of this issue and great
arguments on both sides. I know that what we really want to do
is we want to be able to find that right balance of interest
that protects both local radio stations and the talents and
efforts of musical artists like the great Randy Travis before
us today. I do want to thank you all for your time and your
efforts in this regard.
I grew up listening to local radio. As many of you guys
know, I'm from East Texas. Everything out there is rural, and
everything is local. Especially in rural America, local radio
stations are important because they're often the only source of
local news and information, especially after a severe weather
event--literally, serving as a lifeline to many of the people
in our area.
So, I want to talk about some of the perspectives from the
radio stations. I want to start with you, Mr. LeGeyt, for a
moment.
Would you talk about the kinds of things that your member
companies and radio stations, do to promote music and the
recording artists who perform them?
Mr. LeGeyt. Thank you for the question, Congressman, and
thank you, also, for your support of the Local Radio Freedom
Act.
What makes broadcast unique in, in this media landscape is
the fact that we are in the communities that we serve. So, when
music is played on our airwaves, we have a particular
relationship with our audience and an engagement from our
audience that's unequaled on any other medium.
In addition to that, because we are freely available, we're
allowing a reach, especially in rural areas, that other
services just can't touch. So, there have been study after
study that have touched on this, but the promotional value
received through local radio, because of the fact that it is
freely available and tethered to a local focus, is unmatched in
audio.
Mr. Moran. Yes, I want to ask you about that. Is there any
way to quantify really that, the value, the estimate of the
value of the promotional work that local radio stations do in
terms of the personnel time, the airplay, the other expense
that go into that?
Mr. LeGeyt. Yes. So, a number of studies have tried to do
this. We've estimated that dollar figure as high as $2.4
billion nationally in promotional value, but I think it's safer
to say billions of dollars in promotional value. It is simply
unmatched and no doubt that the way the listeners consume music
has changed dramatically over the course of radio's history, as
has the entire economy and media landscape. We are still
driving, whether it's what you would have called 20 years ago
``album sales,'' now it's on-demand downloads. We are still
driving music discovery in a way no other medium is.
Mr. Moran. You don't charge the artist for that promotion;
I think we all know that. Could you verify that?
Mr. LeGeyt. We do not charge artists for that promotion.
There are payola laws that restrict that.
Mr. Moran. Yes. That's one of the things that I wrestle
with in this. Because I understand what the artists are saying.
They want to be compensated for their time, their talents, and
their efforts on the radio, but there is a value to this
promotion that's given back to the artist, and I think that
they would say the same thing.
Is that what you're hearing from, for instance, the label
promoters, the record label promoters, that talk to your
program directors?
Mr. LeGeyt. Yes, I think Mr. Harrell can speak to this more
directly, because he's on the receiving end of those phone
calls. You can bring any radio station representative in the
country in here, and I don't think they would be telling you
that promoters are asking them not to play songs on their
airwaves.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Harrell, would you answer that? I have one
more question for you as well, Mr. Harrell.
Mr. Harrell. He's right, artists are coming to us all the
time every day, still, asking us to play their music--new
artists, existing artists, and stars. The labels are still CS--
it's a symbiotic relationship between their music and our
ability to publicize their music on an everyday basis.
Mr. Moran. Yes, I've heard it for years, actually, from the
artists that talk about, especially, when they start, how
important that local community is. A lot of times, they start
with a local radio station that plays their music.
The American Music Fairness Act, Mr. Harrell, charges, as
we've talked about, as a little as $10 for some of those
smaller stations. Could you explain why some of those small
broadcasters are still united in opposition to this bill?
Mr. Harrell. I could tell you in the media landscape, as
the dollars or the top-line revenue is not growing. So, any new
expense will cause decisions that have to be made from a small
group to a large group.
What does that mean? What's lost in this is some of the
services and the community service we provide outside of
playing our music. If you look in communities across the State
of Ohio, particularly in Cincinnati, for example, we do
something called ``Stuff the Bus,'' in which we collected over
almost 2,000 pounds of donated items last Christmas, which we
translated into over 1,500 meals to families in need. Those are
the things that are lost in what we do, as opposed to just
playing music. So, our ability to lead community efforts like
that would be impacted by any new expense that we'd have to
endure.
Mr. Moran. Yes, I want the artists in the room to know that
I do not discount the arguments that are made on the other
side. They know that I'm an advocate for them in a lot of ways.
The No AI FRAUD Act is something I've promoted, and I think it
protects artists as they develop their works against intrusive
AI if they don't want to consent to that. I want to make sure
that both sides of the argument are discussed and we find a
good consensus ground to move forward.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman--
Mr. Huppe. Mr. Chair?
Mr. Issa. Yes?
Mr. Huppe. Mr. Chair, any chance I could followup just
briefly on the promotional issue?
Mr. Issa. If you can be very brief. Mr. Schiff is waiting.
Mr. Huppe. OK. We--thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to say, we recognize there may or may not be
promotional value in music that is played on AM/FM, but this
system takes that into account. It actually directs the rate
setter to consider promotion. If the broadcasters believe the
rhetoric that promotion is so valuable, then they should be
confident that this would work its way out in the proceedings,
as a rate is set for this.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I am now going to my colleague from California, Mr. Schiff.
Mr. Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all for being here.
Mr. and Ms. Travis, I want to start by thanking you for
sharing your story with us.
I'm a proud cosponsor of the American Music Fairness Act
and a strong supporter of what this bill at its core and what
it stands for, and what it means to the creators.
My district in the State of California is home to so many
creators that rely, just like you do, on performance royalty
payments every time their songs are played in restaurants or
streaming services, and elsewhere--everywhere but on AM/FM
radio.
I echo the sentiments of many of my colleagues that support
this legislation, and I'm grateful that you took the time today
to share the importance of this critical effort.
I would also like to take the opportunity to ask you a
little bit more about your most recent song, ``Where That Came
From,'' which you shared you created using generative AI to
create your voice, Mr. Travis.
Can you share a little more about what that process has
meant to you both, and specifically, how you would feel if
someone else used AI to recreate your voice without your
permission? What does ownership of your ability, over your
ability--and what should be your ability alone to train a
generative AI model on your voice? What does that mean to you?
Ms. Travis. I can tell you it was a very emotional thing
for Randy to hear his voice again. We never thought we would.
He went through every human emotion there was, just like he
went through every human ability to create that song--being in
studio with his musicians, with his producer. His piece of AI
work was humanistic and artistic. That's the difference between
good and the bad AI.
It meant the world to me to hear his song again. Just a
moment ago when Chair Issa played that, I thought I was going
to break out in tears again. Because just to hear that voice
again after so many years, something you never thought you'd
get to do, is very important to us.
The whole process, like I said, it took 11 months. We were
in brand-new waters. We were treading in new waters. We didn't
know exactly how this was going to happen.
In fact, when the final song was sent after he and Kyle got
through tweaking it, changing--making sure it sounded like
Randy Travis--they sent it back to the gentleman that created
this AI platform and we said, ``We never thought it could work
this well.''
So, it was enlightening for a lot of us. I apologize, I
don't remember the other part of your question now.
Mr. Schiff. Well, I guess the other part of my question is
the flip side, and that is, what goes through your head when
you contemplate others using AI to recreate your husband's
voice without your permission, authorization, or compensation,
to produce songs you didn't write using melodies you would not
condone, and what that means in terms of the dilution of your
brand?
Ms. Travis. It feels kind of like identity theft. It is
intellectual property--the voice and the likeness. So, it does
feel like somebody has robbed you, because he has spent his
whole life since he was seven years old making music, he knew
that's all he wanted to do.
So, when you hear somebody on the internet or on your
computer and they're saying they're pretending to be Randy
Travis, and it doesn't sound like Randy Travis, it hurts. I
think that's what all artists feel--like I said, just like
you've been robbed. Just like it's identity theft and there
needs to be laws that are in place to keep that from happening,
which means consent, compensation, attribution, and provenance,
so that it doesn't happen.
It's coming up so fast now that, if we don't get on the
front end of it, which I'm not sure we can at this point, but
if we don't get in as soon as we can to protect the artists,
I'm not sure where we'll go from there.
Mr. Schiff. Well, thank you for sharing that. Mr. Travis, I
know I speak for many millions of people who are thrilled and
grateful that you can continue to make new music. Thank you for
that gift and thank you for your testimony today.
Ms. Travis. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I might remind all colleagues that Mr. Schiff has been a
leader on transparency in AI and want to understand it well
enough not to overregulate it, but to make sure that we do get
what's fair for the creators and their work that's being
ingested.
Thank you.
We now go to the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Huppe, I'd like to return to your testimony and a
subject that we touched on earlier and hear more about the
distinctions between United States artists and foreign artists,
and how they are compensated for performance rights and
royalties. If you would go back to that and tell us a little
bit more about the distinction? How does the United States
compare with other countries with respect to foreign
performance rights and how artists are treated?
Mr. Huppe. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman. That is a very
excellent question.
As I mentioned, the U.S. stands alone in the industrialized
world as the only democratic Nation that does not pay
performance rights for terrestrial radio. It puts us in the
company of Iran, South Korea, Cuba, and others.
Because of that we don't compensate for that fundamental
right that every other democratic industrialized world (sic)
does pay around the world, because we don't do that here, as a
penalty to our creators, like Mr. Travis, as penalty, many
countries overseas do not pay us that similar right in those
countries. We estimate that artists are missing out on up to
$300 million a year because of that lack of reciprocity. That's
a tremendous injustice that has existed for 100 years, and it's
what we hope Congress will fix.
Ms. Lee. Do you have a sense--you just mentioned an
estimate of $300 million a year--do you have a sense of whether
that loss exceeds what would be paid to foreign artists if the
policy were changed?
Mr. Huppe. That's hard to say and it's hard to estimate. If
AMFA were passed, they would go through a procedure to set the
rates that, by the way, mimic the free market in many ways. The
way the system works, there's many parts of the industry that
are in this system where rates are set, and they look at things
like promotion; substitution; what's the capital investment;
and what do each of the parties bring to the table.
So, the attempt is to set a rate that closely mimics the
free market as much as possible. So, it's impossible to sit
here and say whether there would be a positive balance of trade
one way or another, but I can tell you, at the end of the day,
this is fundamentally about just making sure that everyone
deserves to be paid for their work.
We have a lot of discussion up here about exemptions and
foreign regulations, and how the FCC does different things. I
would argue that all those sorts of hide the ball. This is
about as basic a concept, an American ideal, that you can think
of. When you have creators like the great Randy Travis who pour
their heart and soul into a beautiful piece of music, and you
have another entity making, or set of entities making $15
billion off that music--we're just looking for a fair payment
for that input.
Ms. Lee. Do you have a perspective on what procedural
impediments, if any, would prevent or inhibit the expansion of
royalties for the performance of sound recordings to cover
terrestrial radio?
Mr. Huppe. I think there would be very few procedural
enhancements. Indeed, it's a fairly simple law, as laws go.
AMFA is at a high level merely removing the exemption that the
broadcasters have and putting them in the same class as every
other music delivery platform. As I mentioned, Spotify,
SiriusXM, all of them pay the performer, and the FM broad--even
the broadcast industry themselves, when they simulcast the
exact same programming online, they also pay the performer.
This would simply remove the exemption for the much larger
part of their business that you've heard testimony about today
and drop them into the same treatment as all the other
platforms. So, it's a fairly simple process to do that from a
legislative perspective. To be honest, it would be fairly
simple to implement. Since we're already operationalizing and
paying out on the webcasting of all these stations, it would be
administratively fairly easy to add this on top of it.
Ms. Lee. Now, Mr. Harrell, a counter viewpoint, I'd like to
hear from you. You mentioned something a moment ago. You
referred to a ``Stuff the Bus,'' which I think is reflective of
really the greater community, impacted community, and a
commitment that you see from some of these local broadcast
radio stations.
Tell me a little bit more of that. If the top-line revenue
is not growing, describe to us in a little more detail what you
think is the impact or the overview loss, if we were to make
this change.
Mr. Harrell. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
First, I will be remiss if I did not thank Mr. Travis for
his tremendous contributions to American history and to
American music. I want to make sure I do that.
We keep hearing, ``Treat us the same,'' when, in fact,
we're not the same. We are not the same as Spotify and Pandora,
and other streaming services. Pandora and Spotify cannot do the
things that we do on a daily basis outside of just playing
music, as you mentioned.
Spotify and Pandora don't get a thousand backpacks and give
them to students when they go back to school. Pandora and
Spotify don't do somethings we did very unique in Cleveland
when we were at the height of some tension in race relations.
All 21 radio stations in Cleveland, all 21, four competitors,
agreed to stop the music, and do a forum on race on all 21
stations at the same time. That's something that Pandora and
Spotify cannot do; they won't do. It's not part of their model.
So, when you talk about us being the same, I think it would
be disingenuous to not recognize the differences that we have,
and what's important to us. So, our ability to do those things
that are important to the communities are important, as we do
our daily business.
When it comes to natural disasters, right now, if something
was going on in my markets, because of our ability to be local,
I can call and in 30 seconds have our stations flipped to talk
about what's going on in our communities. You can't do that on
the streaming service. So, that really emphasizes why we are
different.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I'll inform everyone there are votes on the floor. The
intent of the Chair--and hopefully, you can all stay--is to
vote as quick as we can--11 times--and come right back. So,
we're going to string this out as far as we can, and then, the
last couple of us are going to run to the vote. We'll vote 11
times, hopefully, two minutes per, and come back, if you can
all remain.
With that, the gentlelady from Pennsylvania is next.
Ms. Dean. I thank you, Chair Issa and Ranking Member
Johnson, for holding this hearing.
I thank all of you for your work and your testimony before
us today. I have to admit to you, I'm glad to hear so much
about the bill that I'm very connected to, one of the coauthors
of, which is No AI FRAUD.
While I know artists and the music industry, and so many
others who are performers, are in support of that, I hope you
know I'm doing it, also, as a mother and a grandmother. Because
what no AI FRAUD does is it provides a property right to our
voice and our likeness. So, whether it's my granddaughter or
it's me, ordinary folks, we have that property right as well.
It certainly works in terms of this industry that is so
important to our country.
Mr. Travis and Ms. Travis, thank you so much for your
testimony. Thank you for your talent. Thank you for your
storytelling. That is the basis of beautiful music, great
writing, performing, and, of course, storytelling.
When I was reading about this in preparing for this
hearing, as I say, I come at AI with a fear: How do we protect
ourselves? Look at what you are doing. As a result of your
experience, and a result of the tragic, heartbreaking stroke,
et cetera, that you suffered, you're turning that heartbreaking
experience into something that is so hope-filled--the
resurrection of your unique talent. So, I think it's a time of
extraordinary challenge, but also opportunity.
What are some of the primary challenges that artists face
in this changing climate with AI? I wonder, do you have other
artists who talk to you, as a result of your generating this
beautiful new work, about how it affects them? Maybe they
haven't had the devastating health consequences that you've
had. So, what is your experience? What are other artists
saying?
Ms. Travis. We have spoken to several other artists. As a
matter of fact, we had eight or ten artists come to listen to
Randy's song when it first came out, a day or two before it was
finally on the radio.
It's mixed because they are like you and I--we're mothers.
We have children. It scares you to death what AI can do.
Ms. Dean. Yes.
Ms. Travis. You hear it all the time, about the older
generation that's taken advantage of through AI voice and,
``The grandson's in jail and needs money.'' Just fraud as far
as bank accounts. So, it does scares you to death.
I guess that's with so much technology, so many changes
that we've had in the world, there's the good and there's the
bad. It just depends on whose hands it's in as to where it
goes.
Think the artists, from their standpoint, if they haven't
been through anything tragic, as in Randy's case where it took
his voice, it took his livelihood, I don't know that many of
them have embraced it. A lot don't know. It's the fear of the
unknown, that we're all going through this.
I think that, if we can set a precedence, if we can be a
model to how it should be used for good in music, if it is
consent of the artist, if it has the artist, like I said
before, the heart in it, if the human touch is in it, then I
think it can be really exciting for a lot of people.
The bad news is it's something that we all need to be on
top of, which goes back to why we need to have something. We
need laws, so that we can go and stop somebody from doing what
they're doing, if it's fraudulent.
Ms. Dean. Absolutely.
Ms. Travis. Right now, we really don't have that.
Ms. Dean. I'm wondering if you are going through the
process of generating that work has instructed you as to some
of the guardrails that ought to be there. I love some of the
language that you eloquently used, it feels like you were a
point of light for artists and fans in this new chapter, that
point of light.
As you're working through it, I know that we would benefit
from hearing, where were the vulnerable points? How is it you
control your own voice, your image, your likeness, and your
sound? So, through where that came from, maybe you could give
this Committee--because you could see we have a bipartisan
support around this issue, and we're very happy for the point
of light that is you; that reminds me that all AI isn't bad. I
don't have to come out of this as a crazed grandmother.
I guess my time is up. Again, thank you all for being here
today. Thank you for your talent, Mr. Travis.
Ms. Travis. Thank you so much.
Mr. Issa. Never to be called ``a crazed grandmother.''
[Laughter.]
We now go to the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Massie.
Mr. Massie. Well, Chair Jordan said there were two kinds of
music in his house growing up. He grew up in Ohio. He said
country and western. In the county I grew up in Kentucky, the
two kinds of music you could choose between were bluegrass and
gospel. So, that may just be Kentucky, or the part that I was
in.
I think anybody here could answer this question, but I'm
going to go to Mr. Harrell--what is the Copyright Royalty Board
and what do they do?
Mr. Harrell. Congressman, I'm going to pass on that
question.
Mr. Massie. Oh, OK.
Mr. Harrell. OK.
Mr. Massie. Let me ask you--I just want to ask somebody who
knows or feels comfortable answering.
Mr. LeGeyt. Well, and I think this underscores some of the
point, which is that, when you are an operator of local
stations, the complexity of everything happening in terms of
where these copyright fees come from is just lost. What it
means to a local station is the simplicity of what is the
degree of the check that I'm writing, and how is it taking away
from my ability to serve communities?
What the Copyright Royalty Board does is for certain types
of, in this case, public performances that have been designated
by Congress, it sets a rate. So, for noninteractive streaming
services--Pandora is an example--if a broadcaster is
simulcasting its over-the-air programming on the internet, the
user can't just pick a song on demand the way that they can
with Spotify. That falls into a category here where the
Copyright Royalty Board, a three-judge panel within the
Copyright Office, hears a case every five years to set rates.
Mr. Massie. So, we've got an example here of ``White
Christmas.'' Bing Crosby did it; Garth Brooks did it, and Bette
Midler did it. I'm leaving some people out, I'm sure.
Everybody's done it at home maybe, but they're not trying to
copyright.
Would they all get paid the same price under the Copyright
Royalty Board for all those versions? Or are there different
prices for each of those? Mr. Huppe?
Mr. Huppe. Sure. Thank you, Congressman.
It depends on the system. The Copyright Royalty Board is a
system that Congress set up. They've been using something like
this--maybe it had a different name--but they've been using
this type of rate-setting tribunal for over 100 years.
It's a system that operates in many areas of copyright law,
both in the music area and others. It's a system that has a lot
of benefits to both parties. I think it's working fairly well.
In fact, Congress reaffirmed their belief in this system in
2018 with the Music Modernization Act, where they created a
whole other system and a whole other right that is being
administered by this panel of judges.
So, the idea behind it is to deal in a very efficient way
with the entire industry that plays--
Mr. Massie. So, my question, I'm thankful for that
information, but would Garth Brooks and Bette Midler get the
same fee, price?
Mr. Huppe. In general, on the sound recording side, when
the CRB operates with what SoundExchange does, streaming radio
in the digital world, artists are treated very fairly across
the board.
Mr. Massie. That's not what I'm asking.
Mr. Huppe. The answer is, yes, they get the same--
Mr. Massie. OK. They're paid the same price.
Mr. Huppe. Right.
Mr. Massie. You're saying, ``fair,'' but everybody has a
different version of ``fair.''
Mr. Huppe. Fair enough.
Mr. Massie. So, you said something before about mimicking
the free market. If we're going to revisit things that have
been assumed for 100 years, why should we assume a tribunal
should be deciding what's fair? That doesn't sound American to
me.
In fact, I think if you went and asked the artists--we keep
asking this question, who benefits under this regime and who
benefits under the new regime? I bet if you asked 100 artists,
100 artists/performers would tell you and would break it down
differently as to the benefit of the promotional aspect of it,
or the royalties that they want to enjoy after they've quit
making music.
So, when you get to a situation where everybody has a
different answer, instead of mimicking the free market with the
three-person tribunal, I'm just going to ask a crazy question,
why not have a free market, where an artist could decide, OK,
is it a benefit to me to play on radio for free? I'm sure Randy
Travis would probably fetch a better price than my neighbor who
thinks he can sing.
Could we have something where there are different prices?
It just
doesn't--we're comparing things to these dictatorships, or
what-
ever. I'm wondering, where is the free market here? Mr. LeGeyt?
Mr. LeGeyt. Well, certainly, as you point out--and thank
you for the question, Congressman, as well as your support for
the Local Radio Freedom Act--the CRB, where you've got a one-
size-fits-all government-imposed fee is not a free market,
right? The backstop to any free market negotiation outside of
that is that CRB-set rate. So, that is not a free market.
At the same time, when you're thinking about an industry
like broadcast, where you have 15,000 stations across the
country and literally thousands of different ownership groups,
there are certainly some efficiencies gained by a bit of a one-
stop-shop here, right?
Mr. Massie. Right.
Mr. LeGeyt. The idea that there would be individual
marketplace negotiations between all of them would be difficult
to achieve.
Mr. Massie. Twenty years ago, the idea that you would be on
the internet bidding against somebody on the other side of the
world for something on eBay that should be at a flea market was
inconceivable. Or that you wouldn't have taxis; you would be
using a device in your hand.
Mr. LeGeyt. Yes.
Mr. Massie. So, anyways, I'm just saying maybe there's a
solution here we haven't thought of that involves the free
market.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
This is why we always have at least one libertarian on the
Committee, so that can be heard and understood.
We do have that, obviously, in the motion picture industry
where it is a willing buyer/willing seller. It's probably the
reason that, among other things, you didn't hear any of Elvis'
movies or Elvis' music in the movie Priscilla. Just saying the
movie would have been better with a little bit of Elvis.
With that, the Chair and Ranking Member regret to tell you
that we do have to vote still. Only the Speaker doesn't have to
vote. So, for that, we are going to take a recess of the
shortest possible.
If any of you have to leave, we will regret you not being
here, but we are taking you past the appropriate time.
So, we are going to recess.
You are welcome, the witnesses, to come in the back.
We will come back. The votes are 11, but since we have
exhausted the time for the first one, and we are going to run,
and then, each one is, roughly, they call it two, but call it
three or four minutes. The fact is we will be back in well less
than an hour. We will come back the moment I can gavel in.
So, thank you for your indulgence.
We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Issa. To be fair to our witnesses, we are going to go
straight to questions from Mr. Johnson now, and then we will
deal with other Members when they arrive. The gentleman is
recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for holding this very
important hearing.
Mr. Huppe--Huppe?
Mr. Huppe. Huppe, sir.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Huppe, I am sorry.
Mr. Huppe. No worries.
Mr. Johnson. Unlike album--
Mr. Huppe. That is not the worst it has been bastardized,
so it is all good.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. Yes. I could come up with a few other humorous
pronunciations.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. Unlike album sales, which have dropped
drastically over the past 20 years, broadcast radio use has
remained relatively popular over that same period. According to
Pew Research data, the percentage of Americans aged 12 or older
who listen to traditional or terrestrial radio, in a given
week, fell just 10 percentage points between 2009-2022.
How would you respond to concerns that adding a performance
royalty for terrestrial radio broadcasts would make it harder
for local radio stations who are so far weathering the changes
in technology pretty well, how would you meet that argument
that this will hurt the ability of broadcast radio stations to
stay afloat?
Mr. Huppe. Thank you, Ranking Member. That is an excellent
question, and I think it is fair to say broadcast radio does
all these things in other formats and manages to turn a profit
and do all the things that they do. Music radio is the largest
part of their revenue. People go to music radio to listen to
music radio.
Truly local, small, and independent broadcasters are
accommodated in the bill as we have discussed before. Any
broadcaster making $1.5 million or less that is not part of a
huge conglomerate pays merely $500 a year, which is less than
the cost of a candy bar every day for all the music that they
need. I think that is what the public clamors. That is what
people want when they listen to music on the radio.
There has been a lot of discussion about promotion
throughout this hearing, but the fact of the matter is
promotion will be taken into account with ll this process. So,
I think that we would not see a dropoff in radio by having to
pay a performance royalty.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. LeGeyt, how much money would it cost the average
station that produces revenues in excess of $1.5 million
annually, what would be the average performance royalty that it
would pay yearly, given the number of songs that you can, I am
sure talk about they play?
In other words, we know that a certain number of songs get
played within a certain period of time every day, and then
calculating those numbers you should be able to determine how
much in performance royalties an average radio station that
produces income in excess of $1.5 million would have to pay.
Mr. LeGeyt. Thank you for the question. It is a little bit
difficult to answer, but I am going to do my best in this
regard. The current--if you are taking the current CRB
framework that applies to our streaming, which is a per play,
per listener measurement, you just extrapolated that onto
terrestrial radio, you are talking about millions of dollars in
royalties per station.
Scale that up, and especially if you are talking about the
most popular stations in the country, and that has a real
impact on those local stations' ability to serve their
communities.
Mr. Johnson. So, of the 15 billion annually that the
broadcast industry takes in that would be millions of dollars
that would be paid out--is that what you are saying--in
performance royalties?
Mr. LeGeyt. Across the entire industry, millions understate
that. Again, if you are applying the calculation that today
applies to webcasting over to broadcast, the legislation, in
fairness to the legislation, doesn't set a particular rate. It
obviously sets some criteria for the rate, but it would be a
devastating number under any scenario that matches what the CRB
is currently doing.
We have already seen that in webcasting those rates are
unsus-tainable for local broadcasters. It is a major inhibition
in broadcasters' ability to innovate and streaming.
Mr. Johnson. I would be remiss if I wish that I could hear
from you in response. Can we?
Mr. Issa. Please, go ahead.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Huppe. Respectfully, I would have a different view on
that. When the rates are set by the CRB, the point they try to
do is look at all the factors, one of which is the licensee's
ability to pay. So, the CRB will take into account, what is the
level of promotion? How much does a licensee contribute? What
is the cost and benefit? What does everybody bring to the
table? The CRB will take that into account when they set the
rate and set a rate that is affordable for the broadcasters.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Last but not least, I simply want
to say that I hope that we can continue to listen to the music
of Randy Travis, both his new music and his legacy music, which
I would be remiss not to recite at this time.
Oh man, gosh. You know what? I got--
Mr. Issa. To be played later. He will be here.
The gentleman from--
Mr. Johnson. Can I have an amen?
Mr. LeGeyt. Amen.
[Laughter.]
Mr. LeGeyt. Let me add how much local radio across the
country, particularly country radio, but, frankly, your
popularity transcends country, looks forward to promoting all
your new work.
Mr. Issa. We now go to the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Cline.
Mr. Cline. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is quite an occasion
to have Mr. Travis and Ms. Travis here with us, a very popular
icon, really, across Western, Southwestern, and West Virginia,
but we are honored to have you here today.
My district runs from Roanoke in the South to Winchester in
the North, and it boasts many songwriters and recording artists
who began their lives and musical careers in our part of
Virginia. That is why I am Chair of the Songwriters Caucus.
We have folks like Matthew Ramsey and Whit Sellers from the
band Old Dominion, who both grew up in Botetourt County, and
the Statler Brothers from Staunton, and of course Patsy Cline,
who is no relation, from Winchester. In fact, Patsy Cline's
first professional performance began when she was just 15 years
old at the local radio station, WINC, which is still in
operation today.
So, we are also lucky to have many good local radio
stations in the district, three different markets--Roanoke,
Harrisonburg, and even ones that make their way up toward
D.C.--so we want to protect the rights of IP--of our recording
artists while also appropriately factoring in the good work our
local radio broadcasters do for our communities.
Let me ask Mr. and Ms. Travis first, you talked about how
the shift from physical sales of albums to online streaming has
impacted your livelihood and that of other recording artists.
Has the shift in a listener's way of finding new music affected
the balance between the benefits of radio play and the loss of
royalties?
Ms. Travis. The benefit of streaming and the other
platforms, is that what you are asking?
Mr. Issa. Can you put your mic a little closer, Mary?
Ms. Travis. I am so sorry.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Travis. I am sorry. The benefit of streaming versus
radio, is that your question?
Mr. Cline. How has a listener's way of finding new music
affected the balance between the benefits of radio play and the
loss of royalties?
Ms. Travis. The streaming platforms have been extremely--
they pay well. Randy is streaming. If people like the music,
they are going to find the music. So, the royalties that are--
and I think we just heard that there are millions of dollars a
year, hundreds of millions I think he said, that the artists
are missing out on. That is not something that makes us feel
really good about when we--
Mr. Cline. Does the failure to pay royalties to recording
artists for radio play while paying songwriters for that same
radio play have any effect on decisions to record your own
music versus having other artists record music you have
written?
Ms. Travis. It is always something in the forefront of an
artist's mind. Some artists just don't write, but they sing.
Preferably, yes, you would write, and you would perform, and
that way you would ascertain being paid.
What I would like for people to remember is we were
speaking about the smaller radio stations and the smaller
areas. I had a grandfather that had one in Wytheville,
Virginia, years ago. So, I understand that, but they also have
to understand that artists are small businesses, too, and they
have crews, they have bands, and they have travel. They have
got a lot of overhead and insurance. There are so many things
that go into them trying to make a livelihood along with the
families of their crew and their band.
So, we understand the small business struggles. When you
perform and you are not paid, it makes it hard to make ends
meet.
Mr. Cline. Well, to that end, I will go to Mr. Harrell. On
page 3 of your testimony, you point out several celebrities in
talk radio who have programming on Radio One--Rickey Smiley,
D.L. Hughley, Incognito, Willie Moore, Jr. Does Radio One pay
these personalities for their work or do they simply benefit
from the publicity that their appearances provide?
Mr. Harrell. Congressman, thank you for that question. So,
they do get paid for their work. I would also add that they
are, in addition to the on-air work that they do, Ambassadors
in their cities. They have--
Mr. Cline. Why does radio pay talkers for content but not
artists?
Mr. Harrell. Because they are representatives of the
community, and they are part of our staff. They are going to
job fairs and health fairs. They are going to visit kids in
local hospitals. They are going to small businesses and doing
remotes for car dealerships. So, they are not just talent on
the radio. They are part of--they are Ambassadors in the market
we do business. They are part of our staff.
Mr. Cline. You concede that artists do participate as well,
providing community benefit and engaging in different volunteer
activities?
Mr. Harrell. Artists, yes, but I also would say that we
provide a benefit to the artists as well, not only with the
airplay, but in partnerships we have with artists, that we pay
them as well. I have a couple of examples of events that we do
across the country, which we actually pay artists.
Mr. Cline. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Just for clarification, you also play syndicated
things. I had mentioned Rush Limbaugh earlier, but you have
syndicated talk radio, correct? So, they don't get involved in
the community. They aren't even in your cities, are they?
Mr. Harrell. Well, they are very involved. Some of our
talent will travel to different markets depending on--Ranking
Member, I am sorry, or Chair. They do--
Mr. Issa. Depending on the Congress, it changes.
Mr. Harrell. They do participate in our events around the
country.
Mr. Issa. OK. Thank you.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Ivey.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Harrell, I want to say hello, welcome you. Radio One
is--I represent Prince George's County, Maryland, right at the
Eastern border of Washington, DC, and you guys are major forces
in our community. Radio One, back when Ms. Hughes got started,
and before it was Radio One, she has been a huge player even
since then. I was explaining to one of our interns yesterday
how she got started and the impact that she had and continues
to have.
I want to followup on Ranking Member Johnson's questions
about figuring this out from a dollars and cents standpoint,
because I think we have heard not everybody on the Committee
but many Members who are saying it would be great if we could
work something out here, something that--some kind of
accommodation to the artist, but certainly, I don't want to see
Radio One go out of business, or I want to see it continue to
thrive.
As a matter of fact, I would love to have you all move your
offices back to Prince George's County, but that is another
conversation.
I did want to press it a little bit, though, with Mr.
LeGeyt and Mr. Huppe about figuring it out. So, because we have
got contractual arrangements with respect to Spotify, and the
like, where that was resolved--in fact, well, tell me, what is
that arrangement that is in place with Spotify?
Mr. Huppe. Well, Spotify typically operates under direct
licenses with the owners of the sound recordings. So, because
they are a much more complex and interactive service than just
a radio service, like our FM colleagues to the right, they
typically have to go directly to the record labels and get the
rights.
I just want to say one thing following up, Congressman, on
your comment. We don't want radio to disappear either. We
recognize the value of radio in our ecosystem. I think in many
ways we could have a symbiotic relationship, if this bill were
to pass, and we also salute all that you have heard in terms of
what they do about community work and charitable efforts.
Our only point is, we don't know why the artists should
have to support all of that. Why should Randy Travis have to be
the one to bear the load of this community effort and all the
charitable work? We would love a solution where FM radio can
thrive because they are an important part of the ecosystem. We
are simply asking that they pay fairly for the artists that
form the basis of their business.
Mr. Ivey. Mr. LeGeyt?
Mr. LeGeyt. Thank you for the question and the dialog. NAB,
over the course of the last several Congresses--Chair Issa
knows this, Ranking Member Johnson knows this and has been at
the table willing to have conversations, about how to grow the
pie while resolving the issue that is the subject of this
hearing.
From our perspective, that means more airplay on broadcast
and broadcast-related assets. That growth is going to happen in
streaming. The current rules and royalty rates in streaming are
inhibiting music airplay on broadcast and our ability to really
expand in that space. So, when I look at a potential solution--
Mr. Ivey. Tell me--explain that to me.
Mr. LeGeyt. Absolutely. When we talk about what makes local
broadcasts unique, what we can't do that every one of these
other streaming services does, is charge a subscription. We
also can't nationalize our programming or we lose our
competitive advantage.
Our advantage is all the principles that you just
articulated. We are embedded in these communities. We are
trusted. We are there in times of emergency. We are there in
the lead-up to an event. We are there during the event,
reporting on it, on the ground, cell phone systems go down, and
we are there in the aftermath to help communities rebuild.
All of that is broadcast. You need value proposition. It
means human beings in every market in the country, not some
algorithm that can be consumed and just distribute music
because a particular user logs in.
So, for us, we certainly see benefits to expanding our
reach through streaming. The royalties that have been set by
the CRB are inhibiting broadcasters' embrace of it. So, when we
have talked about a holistic solution, I would love one that
makes that expansion more affordable. I think that will mean
more airplay, more listeners, and more royalties for everyone.
Mr. Ivey. All right. Does the current legal or regulatory
regime prevent that from happening? Do you need help from
Congress to try and create a scenario where there could be a
resolution that is worked out that does grow the pot?
Mr. LeGeyt. Well--
Mr. Ivey. I will start with Mr. Huppe.
Mr. Huppe. Congressman, thank you for entertaining that. We
have at times tried to sit down with our good colleagues on the
broadcast side. I think let's call it what it is. We recognize
that we are the political underdogs in this fight. Radio is
incredibly powerful, and every time we have tried to do that,
their play is to run out the clock and get to the next
Congress. Every year--
Mr. Ivey. We have got a conference room right back here. We
could go sit down and start working it out now, if you want.
Mr. LeGeyt. I take significant issue with this. We have
made everything clear to the leadership of this Committee that
we would like to be engaged in conversations. We had two rounds
of them last Congress, and then, once again, the recording
industry didn't provide the support to those conversations to
keep them going.
So, NAB stands ready and willing, to be in a conference
room. I will concede here, my version of a middle ground here
is very different than what Mr. Huppe's version of a middle
ground is. I do think if we are viewing this through the lens
of what is good for listeners, what is good for local
communities, and what is good for artists, and we can find a
solution here. We can find a win-win. I will be in that
conference room with you ready for my colleagues in the
recording industry to put a proposal on the table.
Mr. Ivey. Excellent. Well, Mr. Chair, I yield back. I think
that is an opportunity that we might want to try and take them
up on. I know that the Full Committee Chair expressed similar
kind of interests in seeing--
Mr. Issa. We could even use the big conference room.
Mr. Ivey. You guys get to use it, Democrats don't right
now, but--
Mr. Issa. We will share.
With that, we go to the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Fry.
Mr. Fry. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Ivey offered a conference room. If you need boxing
gloves, we have those, too, right?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Fry. Thank you guys for being here. I know it is a
long, long day. I have got a couple of questions. What do you
think the impact--this is for the whole panel. Now, you have
talked about this, but I want to hear it again. What do you
think the whole--what the impact would be of a performance
royalty imposed on local radio stations, like the ones I
represent in South Carolina? We will start right here with you,
Ms. Travis.
Ms. Travis. Please repeat the question.
Mr. Fry. What would the impact be to local radio stations
in South Carolina, Tennessee, or Texas, wherever, what do you
think the impact would be if we were to do this legislation?
Ms. Travis. I think that there is a way to be a lot more
collaborative, a lot more cooperative, and work together. I
guess the bottom line is--right or wrong, it is principle, it
is not getting work, it is not getting paid for work that is
done.
If they were--if it was just a little royalty for each time
they use your song, they would be more willing to work
together. There is a way to make a collaborative approach to
this, so that everybody can win. I don't think that they would
fall apart if they had to share some of their royalties. I am
not so sure that it wouldn't increase their revenues, their
listenership, but the artists play lots of charities also.
Mr. Fry. Thank you for that.
Ms. Travis. I know that they are speaking of all the things
that radio does in their communities. Artists do the same
thing, and the same tornadoes or storms that they are talking
about that they are reporting on, the artists are the ones that
come along, and they will have a benefit fundraiser for their
community. So, they are working together just on different
ends, if they can just figure something out.
Mr. Fry. Thank you. Thank you for that.
Appreciate that. We will--
Mr. Huppe. Congressman, if I could respond.
Mr. Fry. For the three of you, if we can just move quickly,
because I know we have got limited time, and I want to punt the
Chair a couple of minutes.
Mr. Huppe. Congressman, at the end of the day, as we have
said, we have made accommodations for truly small and
independent local radio. This is just about making sure that
everybody gets paid who provide input into the output.
The broadcasters, when it is their property at issue, they
are very, very ardent about trying to get paid for it, whether
it is retransmission consent or getting special treatment for
their news content when used by Google and others. They are
worried about their content and their property when it comes to
dealing with AI.
So, when it is their property at issue, they are very, very
focused on it. I just for the life of me don't know why they
don't recognize that is how Randy Travis and others feel about
their own property.
Mr. Fry. Right.
Mr. Huppe. Just like they want to be paid for third party
use of their property, Randy wants to be paid for third party
use of his, and it is very hard to have a one-sided negotiation
when there is no property right at all.
Mr. LeGeyt. So, the ``why'' in answering that question is
because every one of those policies that we are advocating,
including for the Local Radio Freedom Act here, are about
enabling our local stations to serve their communities. We
right now, in this media landscape, I don't need to tell this
panel, are the most trusted media. We are freely available, and
we have a reach that no other media has.
So, that fight--our policy agenda is about ensuring that we
have the means to be able to support those local communities
and to be able to provide them a trusted source of information,
news, investigative journalism, and that they are not getting
anywhere else.
Mr. Fry. Mr. LeGeyt, while I have got you here, can you
discuss, describe the impact from a national weather--say a
national weather event in South Carolina, what the impact would
be, how this bill might impact your ability to serve the public
in that regard?
Mr. LeGeyt. Thank you for the question. What we do in local
communities, both in the lead up to a major natural disaster,
reporting, making sure communities are prepared for it, during
the disaster when other forms of communication fail, staying on
the air, people in our stations, people out there dealing with
very extreme conditions, and then aftermath, in the aftermath
helping communities to rebuild, and that is something that is
unique to broadcast radio and television.
No one else in this music ecosystem, certainly not these
international streaming services, are doing that. That takes
people, and it takes equipment, and there are real costs
associated with it.
Mr. Huppe misrepresents the way the broadcast industry
currently works. It is not as if there is an independent
business for a music format station, an independent business
for news, and an independent business for sports. These most
often are clusters, all which a cost to one means less service
for all.
So, if the service that you are getting from a local radio
station in a time of disaster is something that you believe
stands out in communities all across the country, I believe it
does--
Mr. Fry. Let me ask you this, and I have got like--
Mr. LeGeyt. --this will undermine that.
Mr. Fry. Briefly, a little bit of time left, Mr. Chair, if
I can, how do you respond, then, and just curious--again, I am
still kind of formulating this issue, but how do you respond to
other countries not doing it the way that we do it? We are, out
of the democratic countries in the world, the only one that do
it this way. Why should we not adopt a different model? Just
curious about your thoughts on that.
Mr. LeGeyt. Those other democratic countries don't have a
commercial, locally focused broadcast system that rivals what
the U.S. has in local communities. They have nationalized
syndicated broadcast radio, or they have government-funded
broadcast radio. That is the comparison we are making here.
So, the resources that it takes to enable a freely
available, locally focused model are significant. Public policy
in the United States has recognized that, both in the
Communications Act and the copyright laws. This is not a
loophole. It is a well-considered, thought-out exemption to say
terrestrial radio is different than these streaming services.
It is also important to State, because sometimes it gets
taken for granted, when we are saying no pay broadcasters, we
are paying the songwriters when we are airing these songs. We
are paying significant royalties, hundreds of millions of
dollars, to ASCAP, BMI, and the like.
We are also paying when we do the public performance. That
is more like our streaming competitors. We pay the same way
that they do. We paid $70 million as an industry to
SoundExchange last year when we are streaming, but terrestrial
radio is different.
Mr. Fry. Thank you for that.
Mr. Chair, I yield. Before I do that, I would also
encourage the boxing gloves in the conference room. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. With that, the Chair recognizes himself. This has
been a good hearing. Yes, it has been a repeat of some things
we have seen in the past but let me close and try to create a
little different environment closing.
Randy and Mary, thank you for everything you have done. It
has made this special. I do want to continue seeing a lot more
of yours and others' AI creations, and you are going to see on
the copyright side a real effort, much more bipartisan even
than today, to support and make that happen. That is where the
broadcasters are actually in synch with your efforts and
desires. Let me just go through a little bit of the behind-the-
scenes as I see it, because I want to be accurate.
I am going to go to Mr. Harrell. You represent the business
here. You know that NAB has been negotiating on your behalf,
right? Is it fair to say that you would be--you and your
stations would be willing to pay something to get this problem
to go away?
Mr. Harrell. Mr. Chair, I would not say that. I would say
that--I would go back to the fact, to recognize what we already
pay.
Mr. Issa. OK. So, I am going to take you to exactly what
you just said. So, Mr. LeGeyt, you have been saying you have
been negotiating in good faith. Is it true that you have never
made an offer to the performers that gave them a net increase
in their revenue sans some hypothetical growth? In other words,
in all cases, you have wanted to negotiate what they already
have going down in return for getting off zero on trust for a
broadcast. Is that fair?
Mr. LeGeyt. No, it is not fair, because I take them at
their word, although it remains unsubstantiated, that they
believe that there are $300 million in international royalties
that--
Mr. Issa. No, no. I am not going to deal with the--what is
going to come out of somebody's pocket. I just came back from
Europe. There is a high chance that the Europeans would look at
anything we do and reciprocate, meaning if it is not in good
faith increasing, and they would find reasons to delay or not
pay.
So, plus, on top of that is not your pocket of money. That
is a separate batch of money for their creation outside the
U.S. We are dealing with the U.S. copyrights and your U.S. use.
If you had Canadian stations, you would be paying in Canada. If
you had Mexican stations, you would be paying in Mexico. I have
been to both of those countries. They are substantially more
similar than NAB would imply.
I have got to tell you, I have listened to local radio in
Canada, so I don't know why they are not given credit for
having real radio stations. Matter of fact, the station in
Windsor, which you can listen to in Detroit, which is pretty
darn good, it does pay even if it overlaps into the United
States. So, there are some royalties coming to the Travises. It
just comes from a Windsor, Canada, station that happens to
cross the border.
So, setting the record straight, as of right now, neither
the practitioners nor NAB are willing to offer a net additional
amount. So, I am going to switch to a business question. You
have to deal with us every year, and you have to deal with the
fact that streaming is increasing. It is becoming more a part
of yours. It is the only revenue that these folks have.
Clearly, when they are setting royalty rates, they understand
that terrestrial isn't paying, that you are just promoting.
So, I have got two questions. First, which goes to the
streaming, is it fair to say that your streaming is promoting
your terrestrial on occasions? Isn't that true? Isn't it true
that there is no way to get around the fact that those
community people and everything else that is paying on
streaming, they are also promoting people going back and
turning the tuner on when they are in a radio that doesn't have
streaming for some reason? Isn't that fair?
Mr. Harrell. Mr. Chair, I would argue that we are actually
causing--it is the other way around.
Mr. Issa. No, no. I didn't say that you are not promoting
your streaming, but isn't it the ultimate in--you are under
oath. OK? You are supposed to say the truth. Can you truthfully
say that there is no benefit to your broadcasters of your
streaming, that there is no benefit passing over, that no one
ever streams and then turns to AM or FM radio and listens to it
because they already like your music or your deejay, or
whoever?
Mr. LeGeyt. Mr. Chair, local broadcasters need to engage
their audiences.
Mr. Issa. I would like to have an answer to that question.
I just want a fair answer, because--
Mr. LeGeyt. Oh, I am agreeing with you. We need to engage
our audiences through every mechanism possible, whether it is
our terrestrial, our stream, or social media. Our local
engagement is everywhere, and the stream is a part of that.
Mr. Issa. So, I am going to close this, and I am going to
close it with the following. I have been here 24 years at the
end of this Congress, including two years that I was absent and
working down the street for the Administration. I am tired of
this coming. I am less tired than Frank Sinatra would be if he
were still alive, since he came here in the 1960s to ask for
this fairness.
I would strongly suggest that the record of this hearing
will remain, and I will write it, and it will remain that NAB
did not offer one net penny, that their negotiations were only
on a net savings or certainly no increase, and that the idea--
and WERE, I grew up on it. I grew up on all that. My mom still
listens to the--she won't call them anything but the Cleveland
Indians, and she does have to get it streaming.
The fact is that there ought to be an amount that you are
at least willing to come to the table and say, ``Look, we would
like to get a deal on streaming. We know we have to negotiate
that.''
If you spend 1,500, 2,000, 3,000, or probably 10,000 or
15,000 in your dues to NAB, the idea that you couldn't give an
offer of a flat rate substantially similar, which is partly
what our legislation every year envisions for many, and if we
were offered a deal for all, we would be looking at it fairly
favorably to make this go away, that would make a difference.
I will say that I was in business for more than 20 years,
and I followed a man named Mark McCormick. His books are long
forgotten perhaps, but he said something that is so profound
that it has to be repeated every chance I get. A problem is
something money won't solve. Everything else is a business
decision.
I would tell you that if the recording artists began today
aggressively encouraging people to only listen to your
streaming, to only go to places in which they were being
treated fairly, if they went on with a national program to out
you for not being willing to pay one penny, you might find that
it costs your business far more than a modest concession or a
transition that might go decades.
I will tell you that at least this Chair, and the Ranking
Member of the Full Committee, we stand ready to negotiate
fairly small amounts to change a principle to get this behind
us. If you don't take that, then, quite frankly, you have to
live with the consequences.
Mr. Kiley has shown up, and he is a good friend and fellow
Californian. So, he is going to take the gavel, and he is going
to close this as the Chair, because I never gavel out one of my
Members. So, Kevin, come on up here. You are now the Chair.
Thank you very much. Mary and Randy, it has been the
pleasure of a lifetime. Thank you.
Ms. Travis. Thank you so much.
Mr. Kiley. [Presiding] Well, I got a little more than I
bargained for here, but I do appreciate the Chair putting on
this hearing. I just wanted to ask a couple of questions for my
own sort of further insight into the issue.
I am fairly torn on this issue, because on the one hand, I
am very sympathetic to the rights holders, and it does seem
there is some level of arbitrariness in the law. On the other
hand, I think that anytime you redefine what the scope of a
right is, when there has been reliance interest built up over a
long time, that creates some disruption that could have some
far-reaching consequences.
Though balanced against that I will say there are times
when we have occasion to sort of rethink the scope of rights
and how they relate to one another, and perhaps with the way
the world is changing right now, when it comes to AI and other
technologies, maybe this is such a time.
So, I would just invite--well, first, I would like to--Mr.
Harrell, if you might give me just sort of a better
understanding, and I am sure this was covered to some extent
earlier in the hearing of what exactly the financial impact and
the impact on the viability of local radio across the country
might be if some of the proposed changes were made.
That local radio is sort of a unique public good that
serves many purposes, so that is of concern to me. Then, I
would invite anyone else on the panel to comment on any of the
other considerations that I have raised to the extent they
haven't been covered in the hearing.
Mr. Harrell. Congressman, thank you. Any new performance
royalty on top of what we already pay will cause us to cut
local staff, which will decrease our efforts around community
service and diminish the safety net that we provide in the
communities that we serve. I had the unique opportunity prior
to coming to Radio One to serve as the CEO of the Columbus
Urban League.
We have many community services that we provide as a
nonprofit organization, and I benefited, and our community
benefited firsthand because of our relationship with Radio One
and the local broadcasters, to support the things that we
wanted to do, whether it was gun buybacks or health affairs or
job fairs. That is--so I know firsthand the impact of local
radio because of my experience as a nonprofit CEO.
So, those are the things we continue to do today, and any
performance royalty or any other fee on top of the millions
that we already pay will diminish our capacity to provide these
services in communities around the country.
Mr. LeGeyt. Mr. Chair, the legal copyright regime that
governs terrestrial radio, to address one of your questions, is
not arbitrary. In the 1990s, as Congress was grappling with the
copyright laws that ought to govern public performance on what
were then new emerging streaming services, Congress took the
step of establishing a unique performance right in the sound
recording for streaming and satellite services effectively over
the course of several years.
Prior to that, public performance, the payment--and
broadcasters for the last 100 years have paid a royalty to the
songwriter. At the time that Congress considered that change in
law for the digital services, there was an explicit exemption
granted for local broadcast because we are freely available. We
can't pass along a fee through expensive subscription services.
There are no expensive data fees, and we are community based.
So, there are unique considerations that I would say when
we talk about all the changes in the media landscape and
adaptations that happened in 1971, 1995, and again as we are
looking at AI, that Congress needs to account for with new
technologies, what hasn't changed is what broadcast is, which
is locally available, free, in the communities, with
essentially the same relationship with the recording industry
that we have had for the past 100 years.
Mr. Huppe. Mr. Chair, if I may respond to that. We keep
hearing that this is how it has been for 100 years, 100 years,
100 years. I think it is fair to say that just because there
has been inequity for 100 years is not a reason to keep it
moving forward. This has been something that the recording
industry has fought for decades, and I salute radio for all
that they do in terms of community relationships, localism, and
what they do in their charitable works.
At the end of the day, it is a $15 billion industry that is
paying nothing to the artists that make their input. A lot has
changed in those 100 years. A lot has changed in the 30 years
that Mr. LeGeyt just referenced. What is different today? I
will tell you, one thing that is different is streaming didn't
make up 85 percent of the recorded music revenue. It makes up
85 percent today. That is a huge difference.
Second, you didn't have 20-40 other streaming platforms
that all have to pay competitors of the broadcasters. That was
not true 40 years ago. That is true now. You didn't have AI,
where once again the broadcasters are looking to protect their
content. We share the need to protect all creators from abusive
use by AI, but that is something that did not exist 30 years
ago.
While we support--and everyone in this room who is seeking
to address the problems with AI and all the bills that address
that, to move forward on that and not fix what is a 100-year-
old stealing of the music, it just seems that Congress needs to
take care of that as well as the other AI problems.
Mr. Kiley. All right. Thank you very much. That concludes
today's hearing.
I am sorry. Ms. Travis, did you have--
Ms. Travis. I was just going to add to that, and it is
never too late to do the right thing. I think it is something
we all believe in. Where they are talking about their--when
they negotiated, they paid writers, why did they pay writers
and not the artist? I just am having a hard time trying to
decipher why it is OK to pay for one party, but not the singer,
not the one that puts it on the radio? Because if you didn't
sing it, then that art--then the writer's work stays in a
drawer somewhere.
Mr. Kiley. Well, thank you very much. That concludes
today's hearing. On behalf of Chair Issa, I would like to thank
all our witnesses for appearing before the Committee today.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the witnesses
or additional written materials, additional materials for the
record.
Without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:29 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

All materials submitted for the record by Members of the
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet
can
be found at: https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent
.aspx?EventID=117457.
