- LIBERTY, TYRANNY, AND ACCOUNTABILITY: COVID-19 AND THE CONSTITUTION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LIBERTY, TYRANNY, AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
COVID-19 AND THE CONSTITUTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION AND
LIMITED GOVERNMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, APRIL 16, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-71

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-436                      WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chair

DARRELL ISSA, California             JERROLD NADLER, New York, Ranking
MATT GAETZ, Florida                      Member
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                  ZOE LOFGREN, California
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin               STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
CHIP ROY, Texas                          Georgia
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina           ADAM SCHIFF, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             J. LUIS CORREA, California
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          ERIC SWALWELL, California
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon                  TED LIEU, California
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            LUCY McBATH, Georgia
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
KEVIN KILEY, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming             CORI BUSH, Missouri
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               GLENN IVEY, Maryland
LAUREL LEE, Florida                  BECCA BALINT, Vermont
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina
Vacancy

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION AND LIMITED GOVERNMENT

CHIP ROY, Texas, Chair

TOM McCLINTOCK, California           MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania,
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina               Ranking Member
KEVIN KILEY, California              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming             VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
WESLEY HUNT, Texas                   CORI BUSH, Missouri
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        BECCA BALINT, Vermont

CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Majority Staff Director
AARON HILLER, Minority Staff Director & Chief of Staff

C O N T E N T S

----------

Tuesday, April 16, 2024

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
The Honorable Chip Roy, Chair of the Subcommittee on the
Constitution and Limited Governmentfrom the State of Texas.....     1
The Honorable Mary Gay Scanlon, Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on the Constitution and Limited Government from
the State of Pennsylvania......................................     4
The Honorable Jim Jordan, Chair of the Committee on the Judiciary
from the State of Ohio.........................................     6
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member of the Committee on
the Judiciary from the State of New York.......................     7

WITNESSES

Harmeet K. Dhillon, Founder, Chief Executive Officer, Center for
American Liberty
Oral Testimony.................................................    10
Prepared Testimony.............................................    12
Dr. Joseph A. Ladapo, M.D., Ph.D., Florida State Surgeon General;
Professor, University of Florida College of Medicine
Oral Testimony.................................................    20
Prepared Testimony.............................................    22
Claudine Geoghegan, Co-Founder, Freedom in Education, Independent
Women's Forum
Oral Testimony.................................................    34
Prepared Testimony.............................................    36
Michele Bratcher Goodwin, Linda D. & Timothy J. O'Neill Professor
of Constitutional Law and Global Health Policy, Georgetown Law
School
Oral Testimony.................................................    41
Prepared Testimony.............................................    43

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

All materials submitted by the Subcommittee on the Constitution
and Limited Government, for the record.........................    70

Materials submitted by the Honorable Mary Gay Scanlon, Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on the Constitution and Limited
Government from the State of Pennsylvania, for the record
A letter from Robert M. Califf, MD, Commissioner, U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), and Rochelle P. Walensky,
MD, MPH, Director, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), to the Honorable Jim Jordan, Chair of
the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of Ohio,
Feb. 27, 2024
An article entitled, ``Trump politicized mail-in voting in
2020, but it came to PA with strong Republican support,''
Dec. 10, 2020, Public-
Source
Materials submitted by the Honorable Becca Balint, a Member of
the Subcommittee on the Constitution and Limited Government
from the State of Vermont, for the record
An article entitled, ``Florida surgeon general altered key
findings in study on Covid-19 vaccine safety,'' Apr. 24,
2023, Politico
An article enitled, ``Coronavirus pandemic: We were caught
unprepared. It is too late for shutdowns to save us,''
Mar. 26, 2020, USA Today
An article entitled, ``Lockdowns Won't Stop the Spread,''
Apr. 9, 2020, Wall Street Journal

LIBERTY, TYRANNY, AND ACCOUNTABILITY: COVID-19 AND THE CONSTITUTION

----------

Tuesday, April 16, 2024

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on the Constitution and Limited Government

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:37 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Hon. Chip Roy
[Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Roy, Jordan, McClintock,
Bishop, Kiley, Hageman, Hunt, Fry, Armstrong, Scanlon, Nadler,
and Balint.
Also present: Representative Massie.
Mr. Roy. The Subcommittee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess at any
time. We welcome everyone to today's hearing on American civil
liberties during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Without objection, the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Massie,
will be able to participate in today's hearing for the purpose
of questioning witnesses if a Member of the Subcommittee yields
him time for that purpose. Now, before I recognize myself for
an opening statement, we have a video prepared on behalf of the
Committee.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Roy. I'll now recognize myself for an opening
statement. I thank our witnesses for being here today. The
government response to the COVID-19 pandemic triggered some of
the most aggressive usurpations of freedom present-day
Americans have experienced.
When we look back at the trillions of dollars spent, the
immeasurable loss of freedom, the loss of jobs and businesses,
the lost confidence of public health, and the immense societal
harm created, Americans deserve to know it will not happen
again. Every level of government, Federal, State, and local, to
some degree took part in this attack on the liberty of the
American people. Corporate America, academia, and the media
were happy to oblige.
An apology, if we were lucky to get one, does not change
the fact that the effects of COVID-19 tyranny are permanent if
we don't act to change them. I will remind both my Democrat and
Republican colleagues that the liberties reflected in our
Constitution are not optional and as a general matter should
not be suspended for political expediency nor times of crises.
In fact, the Constitution was written to constrain the power of
government and secure liberty that the founders knew would be
challenged specifically in those times of crises.
On March 16, 2020, the Trump Administration announced,
quote, ``15 days to slow the spread.'' Far too few government
leaders did anything to stop the unconstitutional tyranny that
would follow over the past four years. Four days after that
announcement, I wrote an op-ed in the National Review urging
Americans that we need a, quote,

Date certain to return to their normal lives or the government
action in response to the pandemic would be worse than the
virus itself.

A year after 15 days to slow the spread, I wrote another op-ed
calling for an end to the capacity limits on businesses, rules
about what the vaccinated could and couldn't do inside and
outside, and vaccine passports. Here we are. It was clear the
COVID-19 measures were not about science or safety but
compliance and control with a strong urging of the Federal
Government with particular propaganda from Drs. Fauci and Birx.
By late April 2020, 42 States collectively leading
approximately 316 million people were subject to stay at home
orders violating their fundamental rights to life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness. Churches across the country were
subject to strict social distancing and attendance limitations
while favored businesses were allowed to carry on, violating
freedom of religion guaranteed in the First Amendment. Perhaps
most egregiously, here in D.C., Mayor Bowser joined thousands
of Black Lives Matter protests while effectively banning church
services for groups greater than ten people.
The White House and the CDC colluded with social media
companies to suppress opposing views related to COVID-19,
ranging from Ivermectin to vaccine and mask mandates, violating
freedom of speech protected in the First Amendment in addition
to common sense. Many Democratic Governors did not consider gun
stores to be essential businesses during the lockdowns while
considering marijuana dispensaries and liquor stores essential,
undermining the Second Amendment. States forcibly closed
businesses and deemed certain essential and others
nonessential.
The CDC implemented a 120-day eviction moratorium, many of
which would arguably violate the Fifth Amendment which requires
government compensation for the taking of private property for
public use or a public purpose. COVID-19 measures delayed court
proceedings, undermining Americans' right to a speedy trial
protected by the Sixth Amendment. I could go on and on.
These constitutionally problematic government actions
inflicted intense societal damage. We are still seeing the
results and the consequences. The American economy experienced
14 trillion dollars in damages due to lockdowns and
governmental measures.
The United States spent six trillion dollars in the name of
COVID, more than what the United States spent on World War II
in today's dollars. This led to rampant inflation that has yet
to subside. One reason analysis found that the typical American
household must spend an additional 11,400 dollars annually just
to maintain the same standard of living they enjoyed in January
2021, right before inflation soared to 40-year highs.
Forced school closures and remote schooling erased decades
of progress for students in math and reading and resulted in a
quarter of our Nation's students being chronically absent. We
saw record high suicides, an increase of 5,000 from before the
pandemic and almost 50,000 annually. Drug overdoses hit 100,000
a year.
Tens of millions of Americans lost their jobs and were
forced on government assistance. In April 2020, the
unemployment rate hit 15 percent, an all-time high since the
data has been recorded. Over 100 million Americans were forced
to take a vaccine with a veiled threat, your job or the jab.
Regardless of what radical progressive Democrats want to
claim, these vaccines were not voluntary. The Federal
Government mandated vaccines for military personnel, healthcare
workers, government contractors, and all businesses with more
than 100 workers. The Biden Administration bragged that their
mandates covered more than two-thirds of American workers.
The government lied about its efficacy and effectiveness to
make these mandates more palatable. Dr. Fauci said,

It's as simple as black and white. You're vaccinated, you're
safe. You're unvaccinated, you're at risk. Simple as that.

I'm not sure the truth has borne that out.
Former CDC Director Rochelle Walensky said the following.

Our data from CDC today suggest that vaccinated people do not
carry the virus, don't get sick.

They teased the prospect of freedom if we would just suck it up
and do what they said.
How did that work out? They were dead wrong. Instead, we
got one of the biggest bait and switches of all time. We
decided to inject 700 million people with vaccines regardless
of the risk COVID-19 poses to them. Here's the aftermath.
A million adverse events from the COVID-19 countermeasures
have been reported to the government. Only 11 have been
compensated while Big Pharma enjoys complete immunity from
liability stemming from COVID-19 vaccine injury. Hundreds of
thousands of small businesses shut down permanently while big
businesses like Amazon, Walmart, and Target raked in billions.
All of this for the CDC to announce last month to treat
COVID-19 infections like the flu. What are we going to do to
ensure our liberty is protected going forward? What are we
going to do to ensure that unelected public health bureaucrats
who promoted this on the American people are held accountable?
We need to pass emergency powers reform to ensure Congress
can stop the expansion of the size and scope of government
during times of crisis. We need to stop the funding of
organizations who perpetuated this tyranny like the United
Nations World Health Organization, and not accede to their
power as maybe occurring this month. We should pass legislation
to enhance Congressional oversight of the runaway healthcare
bureaucracy.
We need to hold officials like Dr. Fauci and Birx
accountable. God forbid something like this would happen again,
we should reject mandates, vaccine mandates, mask mandates,
lockdowns, and trillion-dollar spending bills. This is a good
place to start.
We will likely hear the following today. We should view our
response to the COVID-19 pandemic as a success. We should give
the people in charge the benefit of the doubt since it was a
stressful and uncertain time.
Sure, there are things we can improve on for the next
pandemic. Freedom is just one factor in the many complicated
case-by-case calculations governments must make. Ignore all
this.
Our rights are not to be negotiated. No matter how much
they try to change the subject or rewrite history, we should
never forget what they did to us. We must not be the victim of
another government science experience ever again, and that's
exactly why we're here today. I appreciate the witnesses for
being here, and I will now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentlewoman from Pennsylvania, Ms. Scanlon, for her opening
statement.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Mr. Chair. When the Chair noticed
this hearing about liberty and tyranny, one might've wondered
if our Republican colleagues wanted to have a real discussion
about the civil rights and liberties guaranteed to all
Americans. Given that his hearing is being convened by the same
majority that changed the name of this Subcommittee from the
Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil
Liberties to the Subcommittee on the Constitution and Limited
Government.
It's no surprise that civil rights and liberties are once
again taking a back seat to culture wars because you can't have
a hearing on liberty without mentioning one of the most
important civil liberties issues facing our country today, a
woman's freedom to make existential decisions about her own
healthcare without the meddling of politicians. You can't have
a hearing about tyranny without acknowledging that a person
being denied medical care because of someone else's political
or religious beliefs is certainly an exercise of tyranny. Since
the Supreme Court overruled Roe v. Wade two years ago, State
legislatures nationwide have passed laws that threaten women's
reproductive healthcare with medically unnecessary
restrictions.
One in three women of reproductive age lives in a State
with an abortion ban. Doctors and pharmacists during their jobs
and even women who suffer miscarriages have been threatened
with criminal charges. Women who are denied access to
healthcare are vulnerable to harm and even sometimes death.
To be clear, the Supreme Court's misguided Dobbs decision
did not take away a woman's underlying right to the freedom to
make her own reproductive healthcare decisions. It did take
away an important legal protection. At a time when a majority
of the public, 62 percent, disapproves of the Supreme Court's
decision to overturn Roe, Congress must pass the Women's Health
Protection Act to enshrine this fundamental freedom into law.
Now, with all that said and despite the subjection of women
currently occurring across America, reproductive freedom is, of
course, not the topic chosen for today's hearing by our
Republican colleagues. Instead, they're proving, yet again,
that their supposed passion for limited government is, in fact,
a passion for imposing the political and religious views of a
noisy far right majority on all Americans. Today's hearing is a
destructive exercise of revisionist history.
So, let's try to correct the record a little bit. Four
years ago, our public health officials faced a daunting crisis,
the global spread of COVID-19. I find it very disturbing that
the majority in its effort to cast legitimate public health
measures as tyranny, just showed a very misleading video in
which they also tried to blame the Biden Administration for
actions which were implemented under the Trump Administration.
The actual history, public servants had to make critical
decisions confronted with limited information and a mounting
death toll to keep people safe from a fast moving and deadly
disease for which there was at least initially no cure, no
treatment, and no vaccine. They utilized broad powers based on
longstanding Supreme Court precedent and statutory authority.
They acted in good faith to keep our communities the best that
they could with existing knowledge.
It's these very efforts to keep people safe that our MAGA
colleagues want to paint as tyrannical here today. It is a
deeply cynical view of government that I wholeheartedly reject.
For two centuries, courts have recognized that the State's
possess significant general police power under the Constitution
to respond to public health threats.
Of course, the Constitution commands that individual rights
must be protected even in an emergency and rightly so. Yet,
courts have also recognized that even a fundamental
constitutional right is not absolute. It's important to
recognize that the idea of freedom espoused by our founders is
not, as some of our colleagues suggest, a right completely
devoid of personal responsibility.
From experience in my community, I know that our public
health leaders' decisions, especially early on in the pandemic,
saved countless lives because during a public health emergency,
individual decisions are not isolated. They affect other
people. While one person might be willing to risk illness or
death in exchange for going without a mask or a vaccine, not
everyone is.
People can suffer when their fellow Americans make
irresponsible choices. When our framers gathered in
Philadelphia to write the Constitution, they were explicit
about the purposes of that founding document which included
promoting the general welfare. How can we do that if our
leaders don't embrace basic steps to keep people safe and
healthy in extraordinary circumstances, which is, I'll add,
something our government has done throughout our Nation's
history.
George Washington mandated smallpox inoculations for all
continental soldiers in 1777. In 1918, Dwight Eisenhower, then
commanding the Army's tank corps in Pennsylvania, in
Gettysburg, successfully controlled the influenza epidemic
among his troops by employing familiar strategies like
quarantining, masking, disinfecting, ventilating, and making
sure that everyone was up to date on their vaccines. That
experience informed his later advocacy as President to
vaccinate all Americans to eradicate polio.
We could've used this hearing today to seriously discuss
how best to protect our national public health against future
pandemics. That includes how to best strike a balance between
safeguarding individual rights and ensuring the public good.
Instead, our Republican colleagues want to rehash old culture
wars and sow mistrust in public health and giving a platform to
vaccine skeptics to peddle more dangerous conspiracy theories
and public health misinformation.
We're already seeing the insidious effects of vaccine
skepticism as infectious and serious diseases we once thought
were contained like measles are spreading again, especially
among school children. With this hearing today, our MAGA
Republican colleagues are once again trying to force their
bleak and divisive vision of our country on everyone. It's a
vision where Congressional powers wielded to intimidate public
servants, reject the common good, and abandon our most
vulnerable fellow Americans.
It's not responsible governance. It's not government at
all. Americans deserve so much better. I yield back.
Mr. Roy. I thank the gentlelady from Pennsylvania. I now
recognize the Chair of the Full Committee, Mr. Jordan, for his
opening statement.
Chair Jordan. I thank the Chair for having this hearing.
That's what we did just last week when we're talking about
freedom of the press. The former Attorney General said, ``the
Constitution is not suspended during a crisis.''
In fact, I would argue that's when it's the most important.
It was certainly during COVID government attacked Americans'
rights saying we were in a pandemic in a crisis. I'll just say
some of the same things I said last week at the start of that
hearing.
Every single liberty we enjoy under the First Amendment was
assaulted during COVID, every single one. You had people tell
Americans they couldn't go to church on Sunday. Holy cow.
I always use the example, I spoke to the New Mexico--right
to--you think of all five rights, right to practice your faith,
right to assemble, freedom of the press, free speech, and your
right to petition the government. All five were attached. I
told the story many times.
I spoke to the New Mexico Republican party in Amarillo,
Texas, because they had to leave their own darn State where
they pay taxes to go to another State where they had the
freedom to actually get together because their Democratic
Governor wouldn't let them do it in their own State. Your right
to petition your government, you wanted to talk to a Member of
Congress. For two years, you couldn't go talk to them in your
Congress, in your Capitol that you pay for because Nancy Pelosi
wouldn't let you in. You had to meet them somewhere else.
Couldn't meet them at your Capitol.
Free press, I'll use the example. Jen Psaki stood at the
podium probably two years ago, I guess, stood at the podium in
the White House, in the press room talking to the press. She
said these two sentences:

Most Americans now get their news from social medial platforms.
We, the Biden Administration, are working to limit what those
social media platforms can post.

Think about the irony. The press person in the pressroom
talking to the press about restricting the press. Crazy. The
biggest one, of course, is speech. That's the one they go
after.
I tell people all the time, if you can't talk--it's the
most important right you have because if you can't talk, you
can't practice your faith, can't share your faith, and can't
petition your government. We don't have a free press. That's
the one they go after, the censorship effort which this
Committee and the Select Committee spend a boatload of our time
trying to get to.
That's the scariest one of all, so this hearing is
important. Here's the other thing. Here's the other thing. So
many of the things they told us when they were restricting our
First Amendment liberties during the pandemic, so many of the
things that particularly the Biden Administration told us
turned out to be wrong.
Bad enough, you got to give up your rights. When you give
them up when they're telling you for wrong reasons you could go
down the list. They told us it wasn't our tax dollars using the
lab in China. Yes, it was. Yes, it was.
They told us they weren't doing gain-of-function research.
Yes, they were. They told us it didn't start in a lab. It
didn't start in a lab. Sure looks like it did. They want us to
believe it was a bat to a pangolin to a hippopotamus to Joe
Rogan. Now, we all get the virus, right?
That's what they want us to think. I kind of think it
started in a lab. No, no, no. We're all stupid. They're so much
smarter than us. They're going to restrict our liberties while
they're telling us they're smarter than us even though they
were wrong.
They said if you got the vaccinated you couldn't get it.
They said if you got the vaccinated you couldn't transmit it.
They said makes work. They said kids couldn't go to school.
That was a good--I mean, you can just keep going down the list.
There's the other one. They said for the first time in
history, we have a virus where there's no natural immunity.
Wow. Ground-
breaking. So, this hearing is important because just for the
simple purpose of reminding the country how wrong they were
while they were taking away our freedoms, while they were
attacking the First Amendment.
So, I appreciate our Chair for putting this together. I
really appreciate our witnesses and the strong positions
they've already taken saying some of these things already. God
bless you for doing that and thank you for being here today. I
yield back.
Mr. Roy. I thank the Chair of the Committee, Mr. Jordan. I
would now recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee,
Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I appreciate
your announcement a little while ago, that 700 million people
were vaccinated out of a population of 330 million. Quite an
accomplishment.
Mr. Chair, a former colleague and current Ambassador to
Japan, Rahm Emanuel, is often quoted as saying, ``You never
want a serious crisis to go to waste.'' I believe that my
Republican colleagues think that this idea applies to the topic
of today's hearing. The COVID-19 pandemic was a serious public
health crisis.
Four years later, House Republicans are still attempting to
capitalize on that global trauma for political spin. Today's
hearing is nothing more than a platform for extreme MAGA
Republicans to spread skepticism of public health officials to
advance the conservative persecution complex that has become
the cornerstone of their political identity. Any reasonable
reading of the facts from that time makes it clear that this
portrayal is a bogus, politically motivated hit job.
Public health officials at the local, State, and Federal
levels are dedicated public servants who at the time had to act
on the limited information available in response to a
nationwide public health crisis. The facts demonstrate that
they took reasoned, good-faith actions in response to an
infectious disease that even to this day quite literally
continues to evolve. I would note, however, that the House
Judiciary Committee has no expertise on matters of public
health policy or medical science.
If the Republicans wanted a discussion about lessons
learned from the Nation's experience with COVID-19, I would
welcome it. As to whether officials had the authority to take
the steps that they took, that authority was and largely
remains broad, even after years of legal challenges stemming
from the pandemic. That is to say that while individual
constitutional rights are always enforced, even during a public
health emergency, the Constitution is not a suicide pact.
No legal right is absolute. The Constitution itself
accounts for the need for government to respond to protect a
Nation from serious threats. Given the chaotic and uncertain
circumstances in which they were operating, not every decision
by a public health official may have struck the ideal balance
between the need to protect public health and respect for
individual rights.
That is why we have a court system. Nonetheless overall,
those public officials' decisions were made in good faith and
saved countless lives during a public health emergency
involving a novel and rapidly spreading infectious disease that
was killing more than 1,000 people a day in the early part of
the pandemic and which so far has killed more than million
Americans. Individuals may have varying tolerances for personal
risk.
The individual choices about vaccination, quarantining,
masking, or other public health measures can also seriously
affect other people's health. In particular, the most
vulnerable members of our society are at risk during an event
involving infectious disease. This includes the very young, the
very old, those of preexisting conditions, and the working poor
who historically lack access to healthcare and are
disproportionately represented among ethnic and racial
minorities.
According to the apparent viewpoint of extreme MAGA
Republicans, the government should've done nothing during the
pandemic to protect the public while vulnerable Americans were
left to fend for themselves. That is not my idea of freedom.
This apparent callousness demonstrates that for some of our
colleagues, public health policy is just another angle for
which to cast the government officials as power hungry
bureaucrats to suit their narrow political interest, no matter
what the facts may be.
While the MAGA Republicans may think that a revisionist
hearing like this, relitigating the government response to the
COVID-19 pandemic to recast it as a tyrannical power grab is a
political winner. There is, in fact, no winner. Instead, the
American people will lose.
Politicizing public health policy has real consequences for
the American people. Even outside of a once in a century
pandemic, one must look no further than the impact of vaccine
skepticism has had on the spread of infectious diseases that we
once thought contained, but that are now spreading again
because of people like Dr. Ladapo who tell us myths about
vaccines. I would just write today's hearing off as, yet
another MAGA extremist rant were it not for the corrosive
impact on American's trust in public health officials. The
American public deserves better than this hearing. I thank the
witnesses, and I yield back.
Mr. Roy. I thank the Ranking Member for his remarks. I
would only note that the commentary of about 700 million
Americans or individuals receiving vaccines because there was
multiple rounds of vaccines administered. So, there were 700
million administrations of vaccines, or 700 million people
received vaccines. A lot of those were the same people getting
two, three, four, and five versions of it.
That's the facts. There were 700 million vaccines
administered. I would also note that we are uniquely suited in
the Judiciary Committee to deal with issues involving
constitutional questions and size and scope of government in
response to what the Chair said. I'm just responding to what
the Ranking Member said.
The Ranking Member takes his time to question what the
opening statement. As the Chair, I wanted to respond to it. So,
with that, I'm going to introduce the witnesses and thank them
for being here.
First, I'd like to recognize Ms. Harmeet Dhillon. Ms.
Dhillon is a nationally recognized civil rights lawyer and the
Founder and Chief Executive Office of the Center for American
Liberty. The Center for American Liberty is a nonprofit
organization dedicated to defending the civil liberties of
Americans. She is a graduate of Dartmouth College and the
University of Virginia School of Law.
Dr. Joseph Ladapo, Dr. Ladapo is the Surgeon General of the
State of Florida and a Professor at the University of Florida
College of Medicine. He previously served as an Associate
Professor at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, on
the faculty at the NYU School of Medicine, and as a staff
fellow at the Food and Drug Administration. Dr. Ladapo
completed his undergraduate studies at Wake Forest University,
earned his medical degree from Harvard Medical School, and
earned a Ph.D. in health policy from Harvard.
Next, I would introduce Ms. Claudine Geoghegan. Ms.
Geoghegan is a visiting fellow at the Independent Women's
Forum. She's also a Co-founder of Freedom in Education, a
nonprofit organization that works to enhance education and
increase educational opportunities for children. Ms. Geoghegan
is a former elementary school teacher.
Finally, Professor Michelle Bratcher Goodwin. Ms. Goodwin
is the Linda D. and Timothy J. O'Neill, Professor of
Constitutional Law and Global Health Policy at the Georgetown
University Law School. She's also the Co-faculty Director of
the O'Neill Institute for national and global health law.
Professor Goodwin previously served as a Chancellor's Professor
at UC, Irvine, and as the Abraham Pinanski Visiting Professor
of Law at Harvard Law School.
We will begin by swearing you in. Would you please rise and
raise your right hand? Do you swear or affirm under penalty of
perjury that the testimony you're about to give is true and
correct to the best of your knowledge, information, and belief
so help you God?
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative and they may be seated. Please know that your
written testimony will be entered into the record in its
entirety. Accordingly, we ask you to summarize your testimony
in five minutes. Ms. Dhillon, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF HARMEET K. DHILLON

Ms. Dhillon. Good afternoon, Chair Roy, Ranking Member
Scanlon, and the Members of this Committee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify before you on a topic that I believe to
be the most significant civil rights crisis of my lifetime, the
use of so-called COVID emergency to eviscerate American's most
cherished constitutionally protected freedoms. During the
pandemic, we witnessed the radical dismantling of the
guardrails that the framers of our Constitution specifically
designed to reign in imperious government actors.
In the guise of an emergency, government officials
instituted unlimited executive fiats to control and control and
curtail every aspect of our lives. These actions by the
government were not nearly tailored nor based on credible
science. As such, the government's escalating and often
arbitrary restrictions were not meaningfully limited.
The government closed our schools, locked down our houses
of worship, destroyed our small businesses, criminalized our
free speech, banned travel, kept us from our loved ones at
their most desperate hours, even shut down the beaches of
Orange County and the skate parks so that children could not
play. The government wrested unchecked and unprecedented
control from the American people. The vast majority of American
elected officials from both parties assumed the heretofore
unimaginable powers with no qualms about history, precedent, or
the consequences.
Thankfully, due to a wave of legal challenges against these
restrictions, the Supreme Court eventually issues rulings that
piece by piece return some measure of protection to our
threatened First Amendment rights while others remained exposed
and eroded to this day. COVID demonstrated just how vulnerable
these rights are without affirmative protection from judicially
unchecked government overreach. At any given time today, a
State or Federal Government official could declare an emergency
or fabricate some unfounded excuse and suspend our fundamental
rights once again. Most courts will not stop them as we have
unfortunately seen.
It is imperative that Congress intervene to make sure that
the COVID legal history cannot and will not repeat itself. One
of the most egregious violations of our First Amendment
freedoms was the treatment of religious Americans as second-
class citizens as vectors of disease. From the very beginning
of the pandemic, Governors across the country discriminately
labeled houses of worship and by extension the First Amendment
as, quote, ``nonessential,'' while at the same time leaving
their secular counterparts open for business.
In my State California, marijuana, liquor, and big box
retailers were deemed essential, but God was banned. There were
different rules for the elites compared to the people as well.
A Member of this Committee, Congressman Bush, held protests on
the steps of the Capitol while Nancy Pelosi barred our client,
a reverend, Patrick Mahoney, from praying at the same place.
The Center for American Liberty and law firm represented
several American faithful citizens in their fight to live
according to their religious beliefs. In three of these cases,
the U.S. Supreme Court agreed with us: Gish v. Newsom, South
Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Newsom, and Tandon v. Newsom.
We represented pastors and congregants in California who did
everything they could to keep their church's doors open safely.
They offered distancing. They offered sanitization. They
offered masking. None of it was good enough for the government.
This discrimination against religious Americans did not end
once restrictions lifted.
We currently represent three individuals who were fired
from the North Carolina Symphony where they requested religious
exemptions to the vaccine mandate. All three musicians
submitted exemption requests that included guarantees they
would take additional social distancing and masking measures to
avoid violating anybody else's rights. This was not good
enough.
The symphony denied their request and fired these musicians
who remain fired to this day, even though the symphony has
lifted its vaccine mandate. As a result of these discriminatory
actions, these artists lost their livelihoods and the American
dream. These violations of our civil rights were made possible
by the lack of due process and judicial scrutiny during the
pandemic.
When Governors invoked emergency status, many Federal
judges threw all three standards of scrutiny, rational basis,
intermediate, and strict scrutiny, to the wind in the name of
an emergency. I heard judge after judge chillingly dismiss
rulings in our cases challenging government overreach. This
complete disregard for a critical check was a result of an
outdated Supreme Court ruling, Jacobson v. Massachusetts, which
hails from even before the Jim Crow era in our country and yet
remains the law in this country to this day.
Jacobson handed unbridled power to the government to
declare when an emergency occurred and what to do about it.
There was no room for judges to make their own rules based on
facts, experts, and the law. Executive fiat was rubber stamped,
and our fundamental rights abridged.
In conclusion, I urge Congress to enact legislation that
limits the Federal Government's ability to use outdated
legislation and rulings like Jacobson and others to curtail our
constitutional freedoms and to apply instead modern tiered
scrutiny and due process analysis developed by the courts. No
emergency, especially one defined by the government, should
warrant the erosion of our freedoms and a complete disregard
for the judicial scrutiny the court used to preserve them in
every other instance. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dhillon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Roy. Thank you, Ms. Dhillon. Dr. Ladapo.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH A. LADAPO

Dr. Ladapo. Thank you, Chair Roy, Ranking Member Scanlon,
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. It's an honor to
appear before you today to discuss liberty, tyranny, and
accountability, COVID-19, and the Constitution. My name is Dr.
Joe Ladapo, and I currently serve as Florida State's Surgeon
General and also as a Professor at the University of Florida.
I was born in Nigeria and immigrated to the United States
when I was five years old with my family. After graduating from
Wake Forest University, I earned my medical degree from Harvard
Medical School and a Ph.D. in health policy from Harvard
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. When COVID-19 hit the
United States in 2020, I felt the heavy hand of California's
public health policy, this is a recurring theme, not only as a
resident, father, and a husband, but also as a professor and
hospitalist physician at UCLA taking care of patients with
COVID and other medical conditions.
I saw fear supplant thoughtful decisionmaking. In contrast,
I looked to Florida. It was clear that Governor DeSantis was
laser focused on evidence-based approaches to COVID-19.
Since the beginning, Governor DeSantis took courageous
steps to ensure that his pandemic response decisions were
rooted in data and served his population, even when these
decisions were wildly unpopular. With over six million senior
residents, the highest risk of serious illness and death,
Governor DeSantis prioritized access to COVID-19 vaccines for
them, a deviation from CDC recommendations at the time. A few
months later, the CDC followed his lead.
The invitation to serve as Florida State Surgeon General
came in August 2021. Escaping the tyranny of California sounded
like a breath of fresh air. Most importantly, my wife said OK.
While many States required proof of vaccination to leave
their front door, Florida outlawed COVID-19 vaccine passes.
Governor DeSantis refused to let the fear that gripped our
Nation shape the State of Florida. He ensured that personal
liberties would be protected.
Florida has led the Nation by codifying permanent health
protections to ensure medical freedom, protect jobs, and
prohibit COVID-19 vaccine and mask mandates. While other States
locked the doors of schools, Florida was the first State in the
Nation to mandate in-person learning for students and welcome
students back into the classroom. As the Federal Government
continued to solely rely on preventive strategies that were not
halting transmission, Florida launched the Nation's first
monoclonal antibody treatment network.
This lifesaving treatment minimized the risk of severe
illness and alleviated pressure on our hospitals. At their
peak, 25 sites were serving as many as 5,000 patients a day.
Unfortunately, the Federal Government made it increasingly
difficult for Florida to receive the supply of treatments
because they maintained control of supply and allocation.
Eventually, U.S. Health and Human Services eliminated
access to any monoclonal antibody treatment. These policy
decisions were not clinically sensible. Florida was forced to
cancel 2,000 appointments overnight among high-risk patients
with COVID-19 across the State.
Meanwhile, global research had been detecting risks
associated with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. Data continued to
surface on adverse events, including myocarditis, acute cardiac
injuries, Bell's palsy, encephalitis, and other blood clotting
events. Even the FDA themselves identified safety signals among
seniors following COVID-19 vaccine administration.
To this day, this evidence is largely ignored and often
smeared as hysteria or myths. Americans are not pharmaceutical
guinea pigs. Based on years of evidence across the world and
lack of transparency from the FDA and CDC, I called for a halt
to the use of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines earlier this year.
In 2022, Governor DeSantis petitioned the Florida Supreme
Court for a statewide grand jury to investigate crimes
committed against Floridians related to COVID-19. This year,
the first interim report of these findings revealed exactly
what we are here today to discuss. They concluded that mask
mandates and lock-
downs did more harm than good, resulting in depression, excuse
me, substance abuse, and suicidal behavior.
The jury also found that higher excess mortality occurred
in lockdown areas and that CDC COVID-19 hospitalization data
were likely inflated due to financial incentives that impacted
reporting. Unfortunately, the WHO is in the process of drafting
a pandemic treaty. This treaty would expand the power, their
power, in response to a pandemic, and this would have
pernicious implications for the sovereignty of the United
States and our citizens here.
Under the leadership of Governor DeSantis, Florida has
always been a leader in protecting personal freedoms. I'm
honored to be here today to discuss these issues. I'm grateful
to the Committee's commitment to upholding individual liberties
and common sense, and I am very grateful to the Committee's
recognition that these impulses to curtail individual rights
and overcome personal responsibility and individual liberty are
still present and unfortunately just as strong as they ever
were four years ago.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ladapo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Roy. Thank you, Dr. Ladapo. Ms. Geoghegan.

STATEMENT OF CLAUDINE GEOGHEGAN

Ms. Geoghegan. Chair Roy, Ranking Member Scanlon, and the
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to
appear today. My name is Beanie Geoghegan.
I'm a visiting fellow at the Independent Women's Forum, an
educator, and a mother of four children, three sons and one
daughter, all whom were profoundly impacted by the cruel COVID
era policies. My daughter is here with me today. We live in
Jefferson County, Kentucky.
While the government response to COVID affected all my
children differently, today I will focus on how the school
closures delegitimized school for my youngest son, Colin. Colin
always thrived in school, participated in activities and
sports, was well liked by his peers and teachers, and was even
told by his 4th grade math teacher, Stacey Porter, that he
would probably be President someday. This was a kid who
understood and appreciated the value of education and did not
harbor any ill feelings toward school.
Unfortunately, school closures changed that. They brought
what is arguably the most fun time in high school to an abrupt
halt for Colin and many other students who were robbed of so
much during that time. March 13, 2020, was a defining day in
our home.
My two oldest were home from college on an extended spring
break that would last until August. As word spread that school
was being canceled for two weeks to slow the spread, our family
could not have imagined it would be the last day my two
youngest children would see the inside of a public-school
classroom. Two weeks to slow the spread turned into 18 months
to stunt my son's academic growth and delegitimize school for
him.
Virtual learning lessons usually equated to briefly logging
on to get credit for attendance and listening to a teacher talk
for a few minutes to give an assignment that may or may not
have been relevant. To make matters worse, instead of
capitalizing on all the free time students had to read great
books in English class, his teacher focused on topics like
intersectionality and identity. Meanwhile, I was working with
other parents locally trying to get our school board to reopen
schools so our children could return to normal.
One board member responded to my school closure concerns
with each of your emails is more absurd than the last. The
particular email he's referring to remind the board about
everyday counts campaign they launched before COVID school
closures. When I emailed that Chicago public schools had found
a way to reopen, another board member replied, feel free to
move to Chicago.
Meanwhile, Colin was becoming more frustrated and
indifferent toward school. Despite his and his friends'
indifference and lack of effort, they were awarded high school
diplomas. They knew they hadn't earned them since the
expectations for the last 18 months were minimal, but they were
ready to move past high school.
A few months after Colin's socially distance outdoor
graduation ceremony, we moved him into his college dorm with
his lifelong best friend. Unfortunately, but not surprisingly,
the bad habits and negative attitudes about school he had
developed during virtual learning didn't translate into success
at college. After three very discouraging semesters, he moved
back home.
Because he is a hardworking, industrious young man, he
quickly found a job to keep him busy and earn money while he
thought about his future. Many of his friends' parents shared
that their sons and daughters struggled with similar issues.
They seem to be lost, unmoored by a sense of direction or
purpose.
A friend's daughter was a part of a nursing program in the
public high school when schools closed. As a result, she didn't
get the training she needed. Therefore, she could not pass the
anatomy and math classes required in her first semester at the
community college.
Students like here incurred a greater financial burden
because they had to pay for remedial college courses to cover
material that their free public schools should've taught. To
add salt to the wounds of many students, the leaders in my
district boasted about the all-time high graduation rates in
the years following school closures, even though only 23
percent of the students were proficient in reading and 21
percent performed a proficient level in math on State
assessments. Public schools sent functionally illiterate and
innumerate young people out into the workforce or world of
higher education woefully unprepared to thrive or flourish.
Too many young people today, especially young men, do not
feel prepared to take on adult responsibilities or the
challenges of college life. In 2022, about one million fewer
young men were in college than in 2011. Approximately one-third
of the students who have enrolled in college have dropped out.
That can't be good for those individuals who spent the
money, lost the time, and had their confidence tested. While
everyone doesn't need to attain a college degree and plenty of
noble careers out there do not require one, fewer people with
college degrees will negatively impact our Nation's economy.
This will not be fixed by increasing funding to the very
institutions that shut their doors to millions of students
nationwide and left the parents to pick up the broken pieces.
The solution was and is to allow families, not the
government, to choose the best learning environment for their
children. The families who had that choice during COVID are
mostly free from this fallout because their schools reopened
quickly. Since this is my son's story, I want to conclude with
his advice.
There needs to be a better process to prevent something
like this in the future. Families should have had a vote in
school closures rather than the government deciding without
their input. His peers felt hopeless about their future and
witnessed their family's helplessness in directing their
children's education. This must never happen again. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Geoghegan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Roy. Thank you, Ms. Geoghegan. Professor Goodwin.

STATEMENT OF MICHELLE BRATCHER GOODWIN

Ms. Goodwin. Subcommittee Chair Roy, Subcommittee Ranking
Member Scanlon, and distinguished Members of the House
Judiciary Committee and Subcommittee on the Constitution and
Limited Government, thank you very much for inviting me today.
My name is Michelle Bratcher Goodwin. I am the Linda D. and
Timothy J. O'Neill Professor of Constitutional Law and Global
Health Policy at Georgetown University Law Center where I'm
also the Co-faculty Director of the O'Neill Institute for
National and Global Health Law.
COVID-19 is the greatest public health threat the United
States has experienced in over a century. Not since 1918, the
influenza pandemic, has the Nation experienced such a dramatic
menace to its health. In its early months, reporters noted that
COVID-19 in the United States by far led all other Nations in
confirmed corona-
virus cases.
Within barely one year, the death toll associated with
COVID-19 exceeded a staggering 500,000 losses in the United
States, compounded by more than 28 million confirmed cases. To
place the suffering in context, more Americans died during the
first three months of COVID-19 pandemic, over 100,000 by June
2020, than all American deaths suffered during the Vietnam War,
the fatalities of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan, as well as the deaths resulting from the 2009
H1N1 pandemic, Ebola, and Zika virus all combined. In the first
three months when fatalities were roughly 100,000, COVID-19 had
killed more people in the United States than what Americans had
witnessed in the past 50 years of war and disease combined.
In essence, COVID-19 took barely two months to surpass
deaths suffered by Americans in the 19 years of the Vietnam
War. While the Vietnam War is long over as of this hearing,
COVID-19 persists in the United States and throughout the
world. While the range of deaths associated with this disease
may be underreported, what is clear is its severity and the
loss of lives.
What the staggering death toll brings to light are two
interrelated matters.
First, it exposes questions related to capacity,
compassion, and competency in American leadership from the
Federal Government down to local officials. The failure to heed
international warnings and develop effective test kits in
December 2019 and January 2020 highlights serious weaknesses in
pandemic preparedness and American leadership.
Hasty and imprudent political rhetoric in February and
March 2020, compared COVID-19 to seasonal flu was not only
inaccurate and misguided, it likely contributed to a sense of
false security amongst Americans who came to believe the virus
was no more infectious and no greater a threat than the
seasonal flu. Sadly, this view persists among some Americans
including in government.
Second, fundamental questions of constitutional law have
also emerged. The coronavirus crisis brought to the forefront a
national debate related to the interactions between
constitutional rights, State's police power, and federalism.
Namely, what are the limits of government action during a
pandemic?
One thing that we should take away from this is that
mandatory vaccination is constitutional. It's something that
has been constitutional in our country since the Jacobson v.
Massachusetts decision. Even before our own Constitution dating
back to 1738, we've had the upholding of quarantine and other
measures to protect the public's health.
The legality of compulsory vaccination is not a matter that
is in question. In 1905, the Supreme Court held that State
compulsory vaccination laws are constitutional when they are
necessary for public health and for public safety. The case was
Jacobson v. Massachusetts, a case taught in first year
constitutional law classes.
In the years since then, the court has affirmed the
constitutionality of State compulsory vaccination laws in cases
like Zucht v. King which upheld childhood vaccination
requirements for entrance to public schools. In fact,
compulsory vaccination laws have existed in the United States
in some form since the 19th century. Much of that is detailed
in my written testimony.
I do want to flag, however, that there are times in which
the government has exceeded its authority. In 1917, the
American health officials in El Paso, Texas, began a campaign
known as gasoline baths to do so-called disinfection of people
seeking to enter the United States. In 1927, in a case called
Buck v. Bell, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld compulsory
sterilization of poor White girls and boys who were thought to
be unfit. We have seen time and time again where there has been
the exceed of government authority when it has been the most
vulnerable of people, most often racial minorities who have
been targeted under the umbrella of preserving the public
health in ways that demean them and demean the dignity of our
democracy. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Goodwin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Roy. Thank you, Professor Goodwin. We will not proceed
under the five-minute rule with questions. The Chair--I will
yield myself the five minutes on questions. So, Dr. Ladapo,
about 100 million Americans were placed under essentially
Federal mandates with respect to vaccines. Some of those have
been struck down, correct?
Dr. Ladapo. That's correct.
Mr. Roy. Nevertheless, there was still a whole lot of
pressure for people to be vaccinated and to get the vaccine or
lose their job. Is that correct?
Dr. Ladapo. Tremendous pressure. Many people, in fact, did
lose their jobs.
Mr. Roy. Can you expound on the extent to which both
whether whatever happened in the grand jury or in your own
observation what has led you to believe the mRNA vaccine should
be taking a second look and shouldn't be out there and your
concerns about the health issues the million cases that have
been reported in the VAERS system, et cetera? Can you expound
on your concerns about the vaccines?
Dr. Ladapo. Sure. Thank you for that question, Chair. It's
hard to be an honest person or have any relationship with
honesty and not acknowledge that over the last few years
negative information, negative scientific findings, negative
impressions about the mRNA COVID-19 vaccines have been to at
least some extent suppressed. Most people, I think, with some
relationship to honesty would agree that they have actually
been quite strongly suppressed often.
However, there are a number of scientists in this country
who have been vocal about the problems with the mRNA COVID-19
vaccines. It's noteworthy to view the fact that never in our
history have there been so many physicians and other scientists
who have been outspoken. It's unusual for scientists.
Scientists usually pursue their science for the benefit of
their curiosity and research or for the benefit of human
health. Scientists are usually not political figures.
Mr. Roy. Do you share my concern that a mere 11 COVID
countermeasure injury claims have been paid out through the
compensation fund?
Dr. Ladapo. Absolutely.
Mr. Roy. Is that an astoundingly low number given the
millions of Americans that have been effectively forced or
strongly encouraged or coerced to take the vaccine?
Dr. Ladapo. I think it's obvious, and it would be hard for
anyone with, again, any relationship to honesty and facts to
deny that.
Mr. Roy. Do you believe that has been somewhat encouraged
by the extent to which there is liability protection for
vaccine manufacturers that dates back to 1986 and that we
should at least revisit the nature of liability protection for
liability--I mean, for pharmaceutical companies?
Dr. Ladapo. Actually personally, I completely agree with
that. I think liability protection for any medical product is
something that really shouldn't exist. It's particularly
egregious when it's a product that's being mandated, whatever
that medication might be.
Mr. Roy. To be clear, though, you like me are pro-vaccine,
right, but tested vaccines and so forth. For example, my father
had polio. I am grateful that we have a polio vaccine. They
should be thoroughly tested, thoroughly reviewed, not under
emergency use authorization, not forced on the American people,
and not under the rubric or umbrella of liability protections
that potentially endanger the American people. Would you agree
with that sentiment?
Dr. Ladapo. Totally. I think it's important that whatever
the medication is, it receives a fair evaluation and not a
biased evaluation. Unfortunately, vaccines in general in the
United States but particularly COVID-19 vaccines have not
received unbiased scrutiny.
Mr. Roy. Ms. Dhillon, could you comment a little bit
further on--you mentioned something. You don't need to repeat
the ones in your opening statement, but some of the egregious
violations of people's First Amendment rights because churches
were shut down or the extent to which in your experience
lockdowns forced on the American people a massive restriction
of their ability to assemble under the Constitution or carry
out their First Amendment rights. Use the microphone, Ms.
Dhillon.
Ms. Dhillon. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question, Chair.
I'll give you one example. In our third case that's now set
major precedent in the U.S. Supreme Court on religious
liberties, Tandon v. Newsom, the case involved members of a
very small congregation who wanted to do Bible study in a
private home.
Under our Governor's restrictions, this was illegal. This
was a violation of his Executive Orders. At the same time,
those three people could've met in the aisle of a Costco and
had a prayer meeting there without violating any rules.
This is clearly irrational, and it is frankly
unconstitutional because I don't have a constitutional right to
go to a big box store and buy supersized bags of toilet paper.
I do have a constitutional right to worship with other fellow
Americans. The Supreme Court recognized that.
Yet, another example of this irrationality is the closing
of the beaches of Orange County in retaliation for Orange
County's attempts to pass some reasonable business opening
measures. I see my--
Mr. Roy. Finish the question.
Ms. Dhillon. One more, I would add is the fact that Patio
World was forced to close and couldn't sell outdoor furniture
because it was a small retailer. Costco could sell the same
products. Costco had better lobbyists than Patio World. These
are the irrationalities that we all tolerated and nodded
importantly that this was necessary to protect the public.
Clearly nonsense.
Mr. Roy. Thank you, Ms. Dhillon. I'll now recognize--
Ms. Scanlon. I would just seek unanimous consent. I'd like
to have unanimous consent to enter into the record the CDC and
FDA's March 2023 response to the Florida Department of Health's
misleading statements about the COVID-19 vaccine. The letter
sets the facts straight on the safety and effectiveness of the
mRNA COVID-19 vaccines while noting the dangers of perpetuating
misinformation about vaccine safety, including unnecessary
death, severe illness, and hospitalization.
Mr. Roy. Without objection.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Mr. Roy. I will now recognize the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Professor Goodwin, in my
opening statement, I argue that in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, public health officials at the local, State, and
Federal levels acting in good faith, doing the best they could
under tremendously difficult circumstances to respond to a
novel disease that in the early days of the pandemic was
killing almost 1,000 Americans a day before a vaccine was
developed. Do you agree with this characterization?
Ms. Goodwin. It's an accurate characterization. It's a
characterization that is confirmed by leading medical
organizations and scientists that were studying COVID-19 and
its impacts at that time.
Mr. Nadler. Can you remind us of the conditions that public
health officials were operating under at the beginning of the
pandemic?
Ms. Goodwin. They were operating under extreme difficulties
during that time given the number of deaths that were taking
place at that time, given the number of individuals that were
being hospitalized at that time. The grieving of family members
whose loved ones were dying, and they were working as quickly
and as effectively as they possibly could. It's also worth
noting that they were operating under threat as well. That was
something incredibly unique which I think we cannot forget in
these times the level of violence that was threatened at public
health officials which we've not seen in the last 50, 100, or
200 years in this country.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Professor Goodwin, while the
Constitutions secures our rights even in an emergency, it also
empowers government to secure and protect the public,
especially in response to public health emergencies. Can you
explain how these two principles work together?
Ms. Goodwin. Well, these principles work because the
government has parens patriae authority. That means that in
times where there are national security threats, when there are
threats to the public health and safety, government can act to
preserve lives. We've seen this before.
This predates the 1905 Jacobson v. Massachusetts decision.
That case before the U.S. Supreme Court confirmed that States
have the authority, the responsibility, in fact, one could say
to step in and engage in measures that will protect the
public's health and safety. This is not anything that is new.
As I mentioned before, it actually even predates that
decision. It's something that actually goes back millennia. If
you think about it, this idea of trying to protect people when
there is a concern for public health outbreak.
This is something that was important to international
trade. It was important to trade coming into the United States
that we safeguard our harbors, that we safeguard people from
being able to come off the ships into the United States. There
is a robust history of this, and I offer citations in my
written testimony.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Professor Goodwin. Longstanding
Supreme Court precedent grants broad discretion to government
officials and especially those at the State and local levels to
take measures to protect public health even when individual
liberties might be burdened by such steps. Can you elaborate on
the balance that government officials must strike when
responding to an emergency?
Ms. Goodwin. This is a really important question because
there are times in which a government may, in fact, exceed its
authority. I mentioned some of those instances. There is a
balance in trying to protect and preserve the public's health.
It does not mean that individual's civil liberties or their
constitutional rights go away.
Our constitutional rights are not always absolute, even
that involving the First Amendment which is acknowledged by our
U.S. Supreme Court. I do take note and have identified
instances in which our government has gone too far. I will give
you an example that I think we would all be repulsed by.
In 1967, the United State Supreme Court struck down
Virginia laws that banned interracial marriage. Now, that might
not seem like a public health matter. The State of Virginia had
passed laws that forbade interracial marriage based on this
idea that somehow White people would be polluted and their
offspring would be polluted and that it would be a public
health crises if White people were to marry people who were
non-White. You can see that in the record of the case called
Loving v. Virginia.
Mr. Nadler. Yes, Professor Goodwin, my last question is
we've heard from some of the other witnesses the terrible
tyranny of government ordering people not to go to church and
closing schools. This was unnecessary and terrible. Could you
comment on that, please?
Ms. Goodwin. The effort to try to preserve and protect
everyone includes people who practice in their faith. It
includes children who want to go to school. The interest of a
government in making sure that children do not die during a
time of a global pandemic is something that would seem to be
logical in that we should all embrace.
It was mentioned the importance of vaccination.
Vaccinations have done an incredible job in saving individual's
lives, saving children's lives. If a vaccine is not available
as it wasn't at the early part of COVID, the best the
government tried to do was to protect children by having them
least exposed to the virus.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Roy. I thank the Ranking Member. I'll now recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank you
especially for convening this Subcommittee to finally begin
sifting through the damage that the lockdown left caused to our
society by suspending the most fundamental constitutional
rights we hold as Americans.
There is a reason the founders created a constitution that
sets limits on the powers that the government can wield. As
Ronald Reagan once observed, the Constitution is not the
government's document telling the people what we can and cannot
do. The Constitution is the people's document, telling our
government those things that we will allow it to do.
The fact is, we never allowed it to close millions of
businesses, lock people in their homes indefinitely, censor
dissenters, forbid peaceable assemblies, shut down churches,
and yet in the jurisdictions that the left controlled this is
exactly what they did. They were spectacularly wrong.
We knew from the beginning that young people were virtually
unaffected by this disease, and we knew that the elderly were
at extreme risk. So, what did these lockdown leftists do? They
closed the schools and forced infected patients into nursing
homes.
We knew from the beginning that obesity was a major
contributing factor to the severity of the disease, and what
did these leftists do? They closed the gyms and left the liquor
stores open. We knew from the beginning that outdoor
transmissions were very rare, and that 80 percent of the
infections occurred in people's homes. So, what did these
leftists do? They closed the parks, beaches, and forced people
into their homes.
Sweden never closed its schools, never closed its
businesses, and never required masks or vaccines. They trusted
their citizens to make these decisions for themselves. The
United States, unfortunately, imposed all these mandates in the
States controlled by the Democrats, and here is the result.
The United States has suffered 3,600 deaths per million
from COVID. Sweden suffered 2,600 deaths per million. So, let
me put it another way. If we had followed Sweden's policies and
had Sweden's results, 340,000 more Americans would be alive
today, and that doesn't include the millions of additional
excess deaths that these policies caused from suicides, drug
and alcohol-related deaths, deaths caused by delayed health
screenings, and deferred health treatments. It is heartbreaking
and sickening to think about the butcher's bill from all this
folly.
Ms. Goodwin is dead wrong. These policies didn't save
lives. They cost lives, hundreds of thousands of lives. The
foolish people responsible for this carnage have yet to be held
accountable. I understand why they don't want to answer for the
decisions that they advocated, imposed, defended, enforced, and
still defend today. It is time we acknowledge the damage that
they did and take steps to assure that they can never do it
again.
Our Constitution was supposed to protect us from such
people, and this time it didn't. So, the question I have, and I
direct it to Ms. Dhillon, who has been very active on this
legal front, how do we prevent this from ever happening again?
Ms. Dhillon. Thank you for the question, Congressman
McClintock. I think the biggest thing that Congress could do
right now is to overrule by legislation the outdated precedent
Jacobson v. Massachusetts. I hear people in this hearing
praising it. At the time, Jacobson v. Massachusetts was the
law, Black people couldn't eat at the same places as White
people. People like me from Punjab weren't allowed to buy
property in the United States.
We have had a lot of outdated laws and dark times in our
country, and that precedent is one of them. So, when I hear
passionate advocates for abortion cited as a constitutional
right, it is legally premised on tiered scrutiny under the
Fourteenth Amendment, which is scrutiny developed by
progressive courts to protect our constitutional rights. That
is all I am asking for is that well-established, tiered
scrutiny be applied today, in 2024, to the problems of 2024,
not the problems of--
Mr. McClintock. My time is very limited, but I would be
very, very interested in seeing your suggestions in writing on
this subject. I think that Congress, looking back on this now,
can see the folly.
I want to direct the same question to Dr. Ladapo really
quickly. What is the most important thing we can do to prevent
this from ever happening again?
Dr. Ladapo. Thank you for that question. As you know, I
didn't go to law school. I went to medical school. My answer
would be based more on my understanding of people and my
relationship with people. I think that has to do with really
helping people taking more of their power as human beings,
their right to sovereignty, and their right to control what is
put into their bodies, which is an absolute right from God.
If more people really understood that within themselves, it
would be harder for our sometimes tyrannically inclined leaders
to lead them in different directions, which we saw very loudly
and clearly and too much heartbreak during the pandemic.
Mr. Roy. I thank the gentleman from California.
I now will recognize the gentlelady from Vermont, Ms.
Balint.
Ms. Balint. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. --is it Ladapo? Is that how you pronounce--Ladapo?
Dr. Ladapo. Sure. It is all good. Either way.
Ms. Balint. No. How do you pronounce your name?
Dr. Ladapo. Ladapo. It is--
Ms. Balint. Ladapo. I would like to get it right.
Dr. Ladapo. OK, ma'am.
Ms. Balint. Are you a specialist in infectious diseases?
Dr. Ladapo. I am board-certified in internal medicine, and
internal medicine doctors take care of a wide variety of
patients, especially in infectious disease.
Ms. Balint. Understood. Are you a specialist? I asked a
very specific question. Are you a specialist in infectious
diseases?
Dr. Ladapo. So, I am board-certified in internal medicine,
and I take care of patients with infectious diseases.
Ms. Balint. OK. The answer I guess is no. Which is OK. We
are moving on. Are you a specialist in epidemiology?
Dr. Ladapo. I have Ph.D. training in epidemiology.
Ms. Balint. I see where you are going. OK. So, you are not
a specialist in epidemiology.
Dr. Ladapo. I have Ph.D. training in epidemiology and
biostatistics and health economics.
Ms. Balint. Are you a vaccine researcher?
Dr. Ladapo. I am not a vaccine researcher.
Ms. Balint. OK. I am curious why you altered key findings
in a State-driven study about COVID-19 in your State of
Florida. Why did you alter the results of a State-driven
survey?
If I could, Mr. Chair, enter into the record an April 24,
2023, Politico article, ``Florida Surgeon General Altered Key
Findings in Study on COVID-19 Vaccine.''
Why did you alter the information in that study?
Dr. Ladapo. Thank you for your question. That is factually
incorrect. I did not alter any findings in any study, and I
have a record of multiple NIH grants as a professor at UCLA and
a professor at Florida. Those are not easy to get.
The study you are talking about is a study that was very
unpopular because we had a finding that actually was in sync
with what you might expect from myocarditis.
Ms. Balint. So is it--Dr. Ladapo?
Dr. Ladapo. It is just that we found that there was an
increased risk of myocarditis and cardiac death in young
people.
Ms. Balint. So, when other people in your home State had
said on the record to the press that you altered the study, are
you saying that is inaccurate?
Dr. Ladapo. I am saying we have a study that showed that
young men were at increased risk of--
Ms. Balint. Did you alter the study?
Dr. Ladapo. I have already answered that question, ma'am. I
said absolutely not.
Ms. Balint. Did you--
Dr. Ladapo. I have never altered any study. We had a
finding of increased cardiac risk that translated into excess
deaths in young men, in particular. That was a very unpopular
finding, but it is very consistent with the finding that
myocarditis is especially increased in young men. The study was
performed by epidemiologists at the Florida Department of
Health, not by me. I oversaw the study, and that was the
finding, and I personally believe that this finding is
accurate.
Ms. Balint. I have another question. You had said in
multiple op-eds--USA Today, March 26, 2020; Wall Street
Journal, April 9, 2020--that you spent time taking care of
patients with COVID-19 at UCLA's flagship hospital, and yet
your colleagues at that institution said that was not true.
Did you in fact, while you were on staff at UCLA's flagship
hospital--were you the person charged with treating COVID-19
patients?
Dr. Ladapo. I have taken care of at UCLA hospital as the
attending physician many patients with COVID-19.
Ms. Balint. Thank you, Mr. Ladapo.
Ms. Goodwin, would you agree that longstanding Supreme
Court precedent grants broad discretion to government officials
and especially those at the State and local levels to make
measures to protect public health, even when individual
liberties might be burdened by such steps?
Ms. Goodwin. I would agree.
Ms. Balint. Do you think in the instance of COVID-19, when
we were dealing with a pandemic that we had never seen in our
lifetime, do you feel like the steps that were taken were in
line with Supreme Court precedent?
Ms. Goodwin. Based on the evidence that I shared that
within the first three months we saw more deaths than the 19
years of the Vietnam War, then I would say yes.
Ms. Balint. What is disturbing to me about this hearing is
that there is some idea that folks who were in positions of
power were somehow trying to manipulate the public for some
nefarious means.
I was the majority leader in Vermont, the Vermont Senate,
working closely with a Republican Governor in Vermont, meeting
in Rules Committee, which is bipartisan in Vermont, to make
decisions in a bipartisan manner to try to protect the health
and safety of Vermonters.
I am very sympathetic to the position Ms. Geoghegan--
Ms. Geoghegan. Geoghegan.
Ms. Balint. Geoghegan. I understand. I had two kids in
school as well. I am very sympathetic to how challenging it
was. It was very challenging.
Mr. Roy. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Balint. I will yield back.
Mr. Roy. I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. I will yield my first two minutes to Mr.
Massie.
Mr. Massie. Mr. Ladapo, the gentlelady from Vermont just
questioned your credentials. Isn't it true you have a Ph.D. and
an M.D. from Harvard?
Dr. Ladapo. Yes, that is correct. Apparently not enough.
Mr. Massie. I guess not.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Massie. I am going to say that the Pfizer CEO is a
large animal veterinarian, OK? Then the person who actually
approved the vaccines at the FDA is a hematologist/oncologist,
who ran off the two top vaccine scientists at the FDA, Marion
Gruber and Phil Krause, because they said that they would not
skip steps to approve the vaccine.
Then they also had hesitation about the boosters. They said
not everybody is going to need a booster, especially not eight
months after they have received the vaccine. They were the
vaccine experts working at the FDA who were removed of their
responsibilities by a guy who didn't replace them with vaccine
experts.
How do I know this? I was in a transcribed interview for
seven hours with this gentleman from the FDA yesterday. What we
also found out is that the FDA, whose role is to regulate the
manufacturers, to make sure that what they say is true, that
the claims can be verified, the FDA itself was going out and
making one-minute videos saying things that not only did the
vaccine manufacturers not claim--for instance, that their
vaccines could stop or slow the spread--but the vaccine
manufacturers never asked for approval to be able to say, and
that the vaccine manufacturers would have gone to jail, the FDA
would have probably arrested somebody if they had made the
claims that the FDA itself was making. So, we will find out
more about that later.
Let's talk very quickly, Ms. Dhillon, about the PREP Act,
or Mr. Ladapo. Is that something that Congress could remedy?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, the PREP Act effectively protects the
big drug companies from the defective products that they make.
I find it, as a civil rights lawyer, very problematic that this
type of protection is granted freely by the government without
even requiring anything on the part of the drug manufacturers.
I know we want to promote industry, but I think it is time to
reexamine the PREP Act and roll it back.
Mr. Massie. I think it is--
Mr. Bishop. Well, let me--
Mr. Massie. --medical malpractice, martial law, and I will
yield back.
Mr. Bishop. I think Mr. Massie is picking up--I am going to
pick up right there. There was a case decided by the North
Carolina Court of Appeals back in March in which a student
athlete--minor--went for a compelled COVID test and was
administered a COVID vaccine without his parents' permission
and without his consent. They just said, ``Give it to him.''
He sued, and it was the PREP Act that the Court of Appeals
just said they were constrained to hold, completely deprive the
parents of any claim for relief. Now, they didn't have Federal
constitutional claims there.
I note that in the Ninth Circuit, Ms. Dhillon, in February,
in Maney v. Brown, the PREP Act was cited, and it said that not
only did Congress immunize and eliminate almost any claim that
statutory or tort claim, but it also eliminated any claim under
Section 1983, any constitutional claim.
So, it seems to me that there is--that with the PREP Act
that Congress has so sweepingly deprived Americans of their
fundamental constitutional rights that the only conceivable
claim I can think of would be an ex parte Young prospective
injunctive claim, and you would have to know they are going to
do something, right? You can't have any claim at all if you
have been damaged by the violation of a constitutional right
based on a vaccine administration.
Ms. Dhillon. I would agree with that. I was discussing this
with a civil rights lawyer yesterday, and the problems go
beyond this. They include that under restrictions of the
Bibbins decisions in the U.S. Supreme Court there is no sort of
fundamental constitutional claim that can be brought absent
some legislative enablement.
Mr. Bishop. Right.
Ms. Dhillon. So, I think Congress really needs to look at
this problem of preemption as a significant one that erodes
States' rights. In this case, there is a competing fundamental
constitutional right, the right of parents to control their
children's education, which has been guaranteed time and again
by the Constitution and is effectively abridged in the case
that you just mentioned--
Mr. Bishop. Right.
Ms. Dhillon. --involving the forced vaccination of a child
against the parents' permission.
Mr. Bishop. Absolutely. I have got one more thing to try to
squeeze in, and that is talk about this WHO treaty, this W-H-O
treaty. What is the design there? The biggest thing that
concerns me is that as of now, if we had another crisis emerge,
it almost looks like the same events would be repeated. Some
are out there I think trying to make sure that government--that
the factors limiting government, like litigation under the
Constitution, and so forth, will be even less effective by
ceding power to international bodies like the WHO. Can you
speak to that treaty we hear so much about?
Ms. Dhillon. Absolutely. So, we had a mere iota here or
there of some fundamental liberties being recognized by the
Federal courts. Under this WHO treaty, we would effectively be
ceding all such discretion to international bodies. We have
seen how that has worked out in real life in many other spheres
of our lives.
This is a country based on Federalist principles, so
generally speaking, States should be able to pass laws that
protect rights. Judges should apply modern, not ancient,
constitutional principles dating back to bad eras of our
country, and instead we are going in the opposite direction
with considering treaties that would cede that to countries
that share none of our egalitarian values.
Mr. Bishop. My time has expired.
Mr. Roy. I thank the gentleman from North Carolina.
We are going to continue our side of the aisle. If the
gentleman from California is ready, I will recognize him.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. At this point, there is
really no room for reasonable debate that the extreme and
extended lockdown and school closure policies were a historic
mistake. In light of this, you see two basic tactics for those
who are responsible for these policies.
The first is to say, well, we just didn't know at the time.
So, here is a quote from perhaps the individual who did the
most damage during COVID of anyone in the country, if not the
world, and that is the Governor of California, Gavin Newsom,
who recently said on Meet the Press,

I think we would have done everything differently. I think all
of us, in terms of our collective wisdom, we have evolved. We
didn't know what we didn't know. We are experts in hindsight.

So, Dr. Ladapo, you are the Surgeon General of Florida. My
question for you is, how did you and the Governor of Florida
manage to time travel into the future and gain access to
knowledge and wisdom that is only available to the likes of the
Governor of California in retrospect?
Dr. Ladapo. Right. Thank you for your question. What was
different with the policies that the Governor enthusiastically
endorsed, and, frankly, had company in every State just about
with the exception of a few, including Governor DeSantis, was
that those were actually not classic public health principles.
These are published studies and published papers about how to
approach pandemics and public health crises.
One of those principles is to, as much as possible, help
people maintain their normal routines. Old published papers
state very clearly that the benefits, if any, of things like
forcing people to stay home are unlikely to be realized. This
is not new knowledge. This is old stuff. Unfortunately, none of
it was followed when the COVID-19 pandemic started.
Mr. Kiley. Well, thank you for your commonsense and
science-based policies. Millions of people, particularly kids
in Florida, are much better off because of it.
Now, the first tactic is to simply say, ``Well, we didn't
know at the time.'' The second tactic is simply to deny that
these events occurred altogether. We have seen that actually in
the testimony of several Biden Administration officials in this
Congress. You had the Secretary of Education, Miguel Cardona,
despite being an enthusiastic advocate for child vaccine
mandates, deny in testimony before the Education Committee that
he had supported that.
You had the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Xavier
Becerra, from my own State of California testify, quote, ``We
never forced anyone to do anything,'' even though he oversaw
the heinous two-year-old mask mandate for Head Start.
Perhaps most incredibly, you had Douglas Parker, the head
of OSHA, also from California, who was responsible for the
Biden Administration's attempt to institute a vaccine mandate
on 70 million Americans who flatly denied in testimony before
our Committee that this had occurred.
So, it is this attempt, sort of like the memory hole that
they have in 1984, to simply pretend that these events never
occurred, that it was all a bad dream.
So, Ms. Dhillon, you lived through what I lived through in
California. You fought back as valiantly as anyone in our State
against these abuses. For the sake of sort of preserving our
historic memory of what life actually was like in California
during this period, could you just give us a few snapshots of
sort of some of the worst abuses that we all had to endure?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, thank you, Congressman Kiley. By the
way, you were also a fellow warrior in that battle and went to
court to challenge our Governor. I appreciate that as a fellow
lawyer.
To me, the absurdity that certain people could cross county
lines during the pandemic, but our Governor forbade the rest of
us from crossing county lines unless we had an essential
purpose, is one of those crazy issues.
The fact that you needed a vaccine passport to eat in
restaurants well into the pandemic when in fact Governor Newsom
with glee ate in the French Laundry restaurant that was cutoff
from the rest of us. The fact that Governor Newsom and other
wealthy California elites were able to educate their own
children in their backyards in pods and relegated the most
vulnerable members of our society--intercity children, children
for whom English is a second language in Los Angeles County--to
destroyed careers in education, to a lifetime of less earning
and less liberty, really, is an outrage, and everyone just
simply wants to say, well, mistakes were made. We did the best
we could at the same time.
In fact, there were different rules for the elites in
California and different rules for the rest of us.
The fact that judges pointed to Jacobson and said,

Ms. Dhillon, we are not talking about deferential or irrational
basis scrutiny. No scrutiny is due to the government's action
in shutting us down.

So, my fear as a civil rights lawyer is that with the snap
of a finger or the stroke of a pen the very same civil
liberties catastrophe could happen to us again, unless Congress
takes action to right that wrong.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Roy. I will now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Scanlon.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Professor Goodwin, I do appreciate the dispassionate and
accurate review of constitutional law that you have provided us
with the respect to public health authority, and particularly
vaccine mandates, because today we have heard some pretty
astonishing attacks on that authority and suggestions that
Congress should overrule centuries of common law and Supreme
Court holdings with respect to what kind of actions the
government can take in the face of a public health emergency.
We just heard advocacy for ending vaccine requirements for
students attending public schools. Could you comment on those
suggestions?
Ms. Goodwin. Let me refer to something that I have
submitted in my statements, that the CDC reports and finds that
between 1994-2014, 700,000 American children were safe from
death, and over 322 million cases of childhood illnesses were
prevented due to vaccination.
The American Academy of Pediatrics states that most
childhood vaccines are 90-99 percent effective in preventing
diseases. I think it has been so long that we have lived with
children being able to go outside and play, being able to run,
being able to have a fulfilling life, that we ignore what it
was like before we had vaccines, what it was like for children
who were struck with polio, what the threats were for their
families, the fear, the concern.
We have been able to have a flourishing life in the United
States because of vaccines. They do work, they are safe, they
are efficacious, and that doesn't mean that there aren't
sometimes adverse results.
The same could be said with seatbelts. We understand the
importance of there being seatbelts. Does that mean that there
are times in which a life might not be saved due to seatbelts?
Sometimes that is the case. We know overwhelmingly millions of
Americans have been saved by seatbelts and regulations that
people use them.
Ms. Scanlon. Yes. I think it kind of brings us back to one
of the things I spoke about in my opening remarks, which is
that freedoms have consequences. So, if you want to exercise a
freedom not to get a vaccination, then that may impact your
ability to decide where you are going to work or what
educational opportunities your children will have or whether
you can attend church or other things when we are in the midst
of a public health crisis.
We have heard some really extreme examples. Yes. In my
community, there were restrictions on public gatherings, but
people adapted. We still have more people attending the virtual
church ceremony at my church than attending in person. People
had services outside. Schools adapted to online learning and
implemented mask mandates. So, these weren't complete
restrictions on people's lives, and it is a little bit
disingenuous to suggest that there weren't workarounds.
Was there something you wanted to add?
Ms. Goodwin. Yes. Well, Americans adapted because they were
compassionate, they cared about their neighbors, they cared
about their family members, and for that reason they did adapt.
There were people--many of us--who suffered something during
that time. My daughter was educated in Europe during that time.
It was a time in which I had to see her by looking at a
screen to be with my daughter because the restrictions also
included travel. I cared about her health. I cared about her
safety. I wanted her to be safe. So that was an adaptation, and
many people make them and we have been able to come to a space
where we could have a hearing such as this where it looks like
almost everyone in this room is unmasked.
Ms. Scanlon. OK. You did mention the fact that sometimes
public health imperatives, or lack of imperatives, are visited
most harshly on our most vulnerable people. One of the concerns
during the COVID crisis was that people who were particularly
vulnerable to that virus could die if their neighbors didn't
observe mask mandates or vaccination requirements. Isn't that
the baseline purpose of public health requirements?
Ms. Goodwin. That remains the case today. There remain
individuals who are vulnerable, who are immunologically
vulnerable, and who have to guard their health. One of the
things that we learned during COVID is that families that had
members who were antivaccination, who did not believe in COVID,
experienced the deaths of those relatives. There were families
that learned from that kind of rhetoric.
At the end of the day, what we want to do is to be able to
preserve and protect as much life as possible, and at the same
time it is important that we understand civil liberty, civil
rights, and how they are balanced out. We could have that
conversation, and I think one example is with Kaci Hickox, and
we could talk about in the Maine case.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Mr. Roy. I thank the Ranking Member.
I will now recognize Mr. Fry, the gentleman from South
Carolina.
Mr. Fry. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for having this hearing
today. I think it is really important. We have examined a lot
of ways in which COVID-19 was used against the American people.
The bureaucratic processes were put in place to restrict the
freedom of movement and freedoms in general for the American
people.
I want to highlight something that I think is very
essential to the preservation of our republic, and that is the
right to vote. During COVID-19, processes by unelected
bureaucrats were put into place to restrict the right of people
to vote freely, that things were changed contrary to a State
legislature, that Secretaries of State were allowed to do
things within their State to change the way in which people
voted. Of course, a lot of that has been challenged. Despite--
and, quite frankly, when you look at what was changed, this was
despite public health officials saying that in-person voting
was completely safe.
So, Ms. Dhillon, I want to turn to you. To what extent did
COVID-19 serve to change the election processes in this country
in the lead-up to the election?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, thank you for the question, Congressman.
COVID-19 was used as an excuse by mainly Democrat lawmakers to
one-way ratchet down the election integrity that we enjoy as
Americans. For example, you just referred to the way that
voting should be safe. Well, if masks worked, and social
distancing worked, and we were all required to observe those
measures, why couldn't we have voted in person using those
measures just like we all went to the grocery stores and did
our other business that way?
It is a fact that in combination with the fact that we have
unclean voter rolls in the United States, combine that with
all-mail voting, and you suddenly have a system where there are
millions of unaccounted ballots floating around and not tied to
voters who are entitled to vote.
Unfortunately, many States right and left, red and blue,
used those COVID restrictions--used the COVID restrictions as a
cover to change those laws, and now that COVID is effectively
over, as it was pointed out. None of us are wearing masks here
today, which by the way the paper masks don't work anyway. Why
haven't we returned to those previously well-respected,
documented ways of safe and secure voting?
The net result is that many Americans have lost confidence
in the accuracy of our elections and don't want to vote anymore
because they don't believe their votes are going to be
accurately counted. This is a significant problem in voter
confidence.
Mr. Fry. Ms. Dhillon, do you think that the motivation,
then, in the lead-up to the election was about public health
and public safety? Or was it more about changing the way in
which Americans vote?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, I think in most instances many of the
restrictions were a well-intentioned but wrong attempt to
protect public safety, but also an exercise and a flex of
power. In the case of the voting requirements, I think it was
entirely for purposes of loosening one man, one vote, voter ID,
and clean voter rolls leading to secure elections.
Mr. Fry. What do you think are the long-term effects of
those changes on American elections?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, as a volunteer political figure in my
State and nationally, what I have heard from thousands of
Americans is that they believe as a result of the crazy rules
or suspension of rules we saw in 2020, including citizens not
being allowed to exercise their constitutional right to observe
the counting of ballots, counting taking place outside the
views of cameras, no security that we are normally entitled to,
ballots showing up, suspension of the enforcement of laws,
including laws regarding ballot harvesting, regarding drop
boxes, and so forth, that many Americans don't think their vote
counts anymore. That is a very big problem for our country.
At the same time, the bigger problem of course is that the
elections are not necessarily accurate when you don't have one
man, one vote, when you have literally tens of thousands of
ballots delivered from California to other States and some
people voting those ballots.
Mr. Fry. Ms. Dhillon, how do you think Congress can work to
(1) prevent that from ever happening again? (2) To be part of
the solution to roll back some of those policies, because,
again, I agree with you, and in fact some cases--Trump v.
Booker in Pennsylvania, some courts have come in and stepped in
and said that these Secretaries of State, that these boards of
elections, have stepped too far.
So, to what extent can Congress lend to fix this problem to
make sure that it never happens again, and that we enhance that
right to vote for all Americans?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, for the most part, sir, I actually
believe that Congress should stay out of it, and H.R. 1, other
rules like that, should be rejected by right-thinking people.
To the extent that Congress participates in Federal elections
and funds them, they should insist that the money goes to
States that honor laws.
We have a couple of Federal laws on the books, Help America
Vote Act and other restrictions. I think that we need to make
sure that States should not spam the entire populace with
ballots that aren't attached to legitimate voters like we see
in California. In fact, Los Angeles County in 2017 was found to
have over one million people on the voter rolls who were not
entitled to vote. They were dead, duplicates, moved, et cetera.
This is wrong.
Mr. Fry. Thank you for that.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Roy. The gentlelady--
Ms. Scanlon. Yes. Since we have moved from vaccine
conspiracies to voting conspiracies, I just want to have
unanimous consent to introduce an article entitled, ``Trump
Politicized Mail-In Voting in 2020, but it Came to Pennsylvania
with Strong Republican Support.''
Mr. Roy. Without objection.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Mr. Roy. I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hunt.
Mr. Hunt. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My colleagues on the left
keep telling me about how Donald Trump is a fascist and how
they think he is the next Mussolini. What we experienced during
the pandemic from Democratic Governors and local leaders with
their hypocritical and unscientific policies is the closest
thing you will ever see to fascism in the history of this
country.
They told us to stay in our homes. They told us not to go
to church. They told us not to attend funerals and only to
leave our homes for what they deemed to be essential travel.
When we rightly questioned the efficacy of their decrees, they
told us to trust the science.
Well, I am about to show you what real fascism looks like.
I am about to show you what their science really looks like.
During the pandemic something struck me. People weren't
allowed to use jogging or biking trails even in my hometown of
Houston, Texas. Speaking of Houston, our Democrat mayor ordered
around 500 basketball nets removed from public courts because,
God forbid, anyone have any fun outside to get essential
vitamins and fresh air.
Skate parks were filled with sand in California, so people
couldn't play outside and, again, get fresh air. In Malibu,
paddle-boarders were arrested for the crime of paddleboarding
alone in the middle of the ocean.
However, one group of people were exempt from lockdowns
from mandates, and apparently from the virus itself. Now, I am
of the opinion that this group of people should have their
blood tested because who knows? Maybe they had the cure before
we had the vaccine. I think you know what group I am talking
about. That is right. I am talking about the righteous George
Floyd protestors.
According to one Politico article, these protestors risked
their health and their life for, quote, ``the health of our
Nation.'' Do you remember those same health professionals
telling us to stay home or else you are going to kill grandma?
One thousand of the health professionals signed a letter
saying, ``Don't shut down protests using coronavirus concerns
as an excuse.'' Interesting. As an excuse. People lost their
jobs and their livelihood in this country because they chose
not to take the vaccine. People weren't allowed into
restaurants because they didn't show their vaccine papers.
Their vaccine card.
Our schools were shut down and our children were sent home.
The result: Youth suicide rates increased dramatically, and
children lost years of education that they will never get back.
Dr. Ladapo, thank you for being here, sir. Yes or no, in
your professional medical experience and Harvard education, as
the Surgeon General of Florida, are Democrats and liberals
immune to COVID-19?
[Laughter.]
Dr. Ladapo. No, sir. To the best of my knowledge.
Mr. Hunt. A followup question to that. You set Florida's
response to COVID-19, and how would you explain bodies not
piling up in Los Angeles after the George Floyd protests?
Dr. Ladapo. For one, there was very, very, very little
transmission outdoors. That was a major part. Most of the
protestors, from what I saw, were young people that probably
also contributed, but there was almost no transmission
outdoors. It broke my heart when they pulled the basketball
hoops in the playgrounds that I was taking my kids to in Los
Angeles. I could have--I will stop it there, but it broke my
heart.
Mr. Hunt. Thank you. Thank you for your response. It looks
like the vast majority of liberal policy is rules for thee and
not for me. Apparently, that also applies to COVID lockdowns
and mandates. It was OK to make exceptions for what the left
believed was their righteous cause.
The left said it was safe for 100,000 people to protest--
100,000 people--in the middle of a pandemic, but they were
giving you grief for letting people sit on the beach or a
paddleboard in the middle of the ocean. Why? Because in the
case of the George Floyd protest, it was a righteous cause in
their opinion.
By the way, it wasn't just protest. It was rioting. It was
looting. It was attacking and burning a police station in
Minneapolis. It was rioting in front of the White House to such
an extent that President Trump had to be ushered into a bunker.
All of this was acceptable because it was deemed righteous by
the left.
Speaking of righteous causes, let's take a look at Black
Panther. I am sorry. Kunta Kinte. I am sorry. Nancy Pelosi.
Wakanda Forever. This is the absurdity of the COVID-19
lockdowns, liberal mandates, and of course even a little
cultural appropriation. This is very ridiculous. We must never
allow something like this to ever happen again in this country.
It is why we have a constitution in the first place, to protect
us from the exact type of government overreach that we saw
during the pandemic.
No matter which side of the political aisle that you find
yourself, you should always be on the side of freedom and
preserving our rights via the Constitution. That is why many of
us walked away from the pandemic and the protests that
followed, asking the question, ``Were the COVID restrictions
really about public safety, or were they about winning an
election?'' You decide.
Thank you for being here.
Mr. Roy. I thank the gentleman from Texas.
I will now recognize the gentleman from North Dakota.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was going to ask a
bunch of questions about strict scrutiny, rational basis, and
all those things, but eventually this all goes away. I have at
least a little bit of different take.
I had two kids in two different school systems during
COVID. Ladapo, does COVID spread differently when you have to
take half the kids out of a classroom and then let them all go
to football practice together the same night?
Dr. Ladapo. No, sir. It doesn't.
Mr. Armstrong. You can't wear a mask under a football
helmet. If you take your mask off in school you will at worst
get asked to put it on by a teacher very--in a different way
and, more importantly, they could lose government--State
funding, local funding, if they do that. Does a mask work
better in a classroom than on a football field?
Dr. Ladapo. It turns out it works about the same in both
settings.
Mr. Armstrong. OK. Is there a difference between Menards
being open and a locally owned business?
Dr. Ladapo. To the owners, yes, but probably not to the
virus.
Mr. Armstrong. Is there some super-secret ventilation
system I am not aware of at Menards that local businesses are
incapable of having?
Dr. Ladapo. I actually couldn't comment on that, but I
probably would assume not.
Mr. Armstrong. When a bar--when the clock turns 11 p.m. at
a bar, does COVID become more contagious?
Dr. Ladapo. In some precincts. No, I am kidding. No, it
doesn't. It doesn't become more contagious.
Mr. Armstrong. These are all the ridiculous things that
happened in my State, and I don't blame the teacher. I actually
don't blame the public health officials. I blame politicians on
the right side of the aisle, the left side of the aisle, local
officials, State officials, Federal officials, who all hid
under their desks and abdicated their responsibility to people
who had never been elected to anything.
If you care about vaccines, which I do, then you should
care about the fact that we were told COVID vaccine would give
you immunity to COVID. Then we were told it won't give you
immunity to COVID, but it will keep you out of the hospital.
Then we were told that you have to take boosters 1, 2, 5, and
17, and then you still have to socially distance and wear masks
but not at football practice.
People aren't stupid. When they get lied to constantly, and
they get told something and nobody ever comes out and says
things--masks don't help stop COVID. Well, what we found out is
we didn't have enough masks. So, we were being lied to.
Then once we had enough masks, we wanted to make everybody
wear masks. People in long-term nursing care facilities died
alone because their families couldn't come in there, and the
facility that ran it had no choice because their Federal
dollars were tied to it.
These are all the real things that happened. So, why we
need to pass laws? So, it never happens again. I don't care
about a Supreme Court case from 40 years ago, 50 years ago, or
70 years ago. I care about the fact that people need to be
protected because civil liberties only matter when they matter.
When you have the head health official on CNN saying, ``Who
cares about civil liberties at a time like this?'' then you
need your elected officials to stand up and say, ``We do. We
do.'' Because that is the only time they matter.
All the best free speech cases in front of the U.S. Supreme
Court are with undeniably bad people. All the best Fourth
Amendment cases in front of the U.S. Supreme Court, it is not a
schoolteacher sitting next to the defense attorney when those
cases are decided. It is because constitutional rights and
civil liberties have to matter all the time, and they have to
matter at our worst moments in time. Otherwise, they don't
matter ever.
So, as we walk through this--and I appreciate you all being
here, and I appreciate from each side of this--we can talk
about strict scrutiny or rational basis or dealing with another
case, but the world failed at COVID. It wasn't the teacher and
it wasn't the restaurant owner and it wasn't the small business
owner. It was the people that got elected to represent people
in times of crisis that hid under their desk and let somebody
whose only job was medical make decisions that affected far
more things than medical decisions.
Also, I just think we didn't learn a whole lot about risk.
With that--and there is a difference between the front end of
COVID and after about six weeks, and we made the most
ridiculous decisions on behalf of our citizens, and we allowed
them to happen. People looked at it and they knew they were
ridiculous.
You know why people don't trust vaccines as much anymore?
Because they got lied to about vaccines for two years straight.
If we care about smallpox, and if we care about all those
things, we should be held to account for that as a government.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Roy. I very much thank the gentleman from North Dakota.
I will recognize the gentlelady from Wyoming.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you and thank you for being here today.
Call me a bit of a skeptic when I hear the Democrats talk about
that we have to do these things just to save one life. Just one
life. It is imperative that we destroy our Constitution and
take away the constitutional rights of 330 million people just
to save one life, when the Democrat party right now is more
radical on abortion than at any time in the history of the
world.
Their position on abortion and a woman's right to kill her
baby is the most extreme position that they have ever taken.
So, I am just a little bit skeptical when they talk about how
critically important it was to force people to use masks or to
be vaccinated just to save that one life when they have taken
the position on abortion that they have.
Ms. Geoghegan?
Ms. Geoghegan. Geoghegan.
Ms. Hageman. Geoghegan. As a parent and former teacher, can
you describe the harm that the closure of schools and remote
learning inflicted on your children?
Ms. Geoghegan. Yes. Thank you for the question. Well, as I
said in my oral testimony, and went into greater detail in my
written testimony, that mostly for my youngest son, because he
was a junior when schools closed, and then his entire senior
year was virtual, the best word I can use to describe that is
it just delegiti-
mized school for him. I know it is not just him; it is many of
his peers.
I have talked to lots of parents. I was involved with
parents in my community trying to get schools to reopen, and it
is the same thing that--and you can see that with the chronic
absenteeism that we are now dealing with. Not only did it
delegitimize school for the students, but it delegitimized it
for the parents as well, because, let's be honest, the parents
are the ones that need to prompt their children to get to
school every day, and they are not seeing the need to do that
quite as much.
I was just told that I think 60 percent of the students
here--of the high school students in D.C. are chronically
absent, which is--that is a big problem. So, that is--
Ms. Hageman. A lot of that stems from the policy decisions
that were made during COVID.
Ms. Geoghegan. Absolutely.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Did you know that the declines in reading
and math achievement during the pandemic were among the largest
declines observed in a single assessment cycle of the National
Assessment of Educational Progress program?
Ms. Geoghegan. Yes. I am very aware of that.
Ms. Hageman. Can you describe how students with special
educational needs may have been particularly affected by school
closures, mask mandates, and other COVID-19 measures?
Ms. Geoghegan. So, those stories are particularly
heartbreaking, because the students with special needs were
especially hurt by those policies. The parents who really
depended on the special education teachers who are tremendous
at what they do, they were disconnected from them.
I actually have a special education degree. It is very
challenging to provide special education via a screen. In many
cases, it is nearly impossible.
Ms. Hageman. Are you aware that studies have shown that
wearing a face mask in school has led to an increase in anxiety
and depression and a decrease in communication and
socialization skills development among our students?
Ms. Geoghegan. I am aware of that, and I witness that on a
very regular basis. I volunteer in a school that was actually
started because their schools were closed. This is an urban
school. I walked in--and we were never masked in that school,
and the students in that school who were just failing in their
public schools are now thriving. They were never masked. They
are very sociable. They communicate. In fact, one has even
testified in Frankfurt, Kentucky, in front of the Education
Committee.
So, I can see the vast difference between the students who
were masked and shut out and the students who were allowed to
be in person, unmasked, and fully children.
Ms. Hageman. That is an excellent observation to make. As a
civil rights attorney, I think one of the things that was so
stunning to me was how readily our elected officials, and even
our unelected officials, were willing to go down the road of
absolutely ignoring every aspect of the Bill of Rights by
claiming that this was an emergency.
While I think for the first couple of peaks--weeks people
could understand we didn't quite know what COVID-19 was, we
didn't know how it was going to affect us, we didn't know what
it was going to do, pretty quickly we figured it out. Pretty
quickly we figured it out. Then, at that point, what we figured
out and what we learned even more is that there are an awful
lot of totalitarians that live among us, and they want to
control every aspect of our lives.
We see it in so many areas. We see it with the global
warming hysteria. We see it with this pandemic hysteria. We see
it with their effort to try to turn over the decisionmaking
authority of the United States to the WHO and the U.N.
I want to thank all of you for coming here today, being
willing to testify, being willing to make sure that the
historical record is accurate, because we can't prevent
something from this from happening in the future unless we are
prepared for it.
So, thank you for being here, thank you for being in the
fight, and thank you for working to protect our civil
liberties, unlike so many on the other side who are unwilling
to do that.
Thank you.
Mr. Roy. I thank the gentlelady from Wyoming.
I certainly want to thank all the witnesses.
If you noticed, we were scurrying around. We have got votes
that have been called, so we are going to be running over to
the floor to catch our votes, which are about to close out over
there.
This concludes today's hearing. We thank the witnesses for
appearing before the Committee today.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the witnesses
or additional materials for the record.
I also want to make clear, it was Ms. Balint had made a
consent request, she started asking a question, and I didn't
say ``without objection.'' Without objection her consent
request is in the record.
Ms. Balint. Thank you.
Mr. Roy. So, with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:29 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

All materials submitted for the record by Members of the
Subcommittee on the Constitution and Limited Government can
be found at: https://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent
.aspx?EventID=116919.

[all]
