- THE BIDEN BORDER CRISIS: NORTH DAKOTA PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE BIDEN BORDER CRISIS:
NORTH DAKOTA PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION INTEGRITY, SECURITY, AND ENFORCEMENT

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, MAY 29, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-82

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-970            WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chair

DARRELL ISSA, California             JERROLD NADLER, New York, Ranking
MATT GAETZ, Florida                      Member
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                  ZOE LOFGREN, California
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin               STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
CHIP ROY, Texas                          Georgia
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina           ADAM SCHIFF, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             ERIC SWALWELL, California
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          TED LIEU, California
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon                  PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  J. LUIS CORREA, California
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota        MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            LUCY McBATH, Georgia
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
KEVIN KILEY, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming             CORI BUSH, Missouri
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               GLENN IVEY, Maryland
LAUREL LEE, Florida                  BECCA BALINT, Vermont
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina
Vacancy

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION INTEGRITY, SECURITY,
AND ENFORCEMENT

TOM McCLINTOCK, California, Chair

KEN BUCK, Colorado                   PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington,
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                      Ranking Member
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin               ZOE LOFGREN, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      J. LUIS CORREA, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 ERIC SWALWELL, California
WESLEY HUNT, Texas                   Vacancy

CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Majority Staff Director
AARON HILLER, Minority Staff Director & Chief of Staff
C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, May 29, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Tom McClintock, Chair of the Subcommittee on
Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State
of California..................................................     1
The Honorable Kelly Armstrong, a Member of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of North Dakota.......................     3

WITNESSES

The Hon. Drew H. Wrigley, Attorney General, North Dakota
Oral Testimony.................................................     5
Prepared Testimony.............................................     8
Jesse Jahner, Sheriff, Cass County, North Dakota
Oral Testimony.................................................    12
Prepared Testimony.............................................    15
Rebecca Davis, Executive Director, Wahalla Area Chamber of
Commerce
Oral Testimony.................................................    18
Prepared Testimony.............................................    21
Roger Hutchinson, Sheriff, Renville County, North Dakota
Oral Testimony.................................................    24
Prepared Testimony.............................................    27

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

All materials submitted for the record by the Subcommittee on
Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement are listed
below..........................................................    51

A letter to Alejandro Mayorkas from Members of Congress, March
25, 2024, submitted by the Honorable Mike Kelly, a Member of
the Committee on Ways and Means from the State of Pennsylvania,
for the record
A letter to the North Dakota and South Dakota Congressional
Delegate from Jesse Jahner, Sheriff, Cass County, North Dakota,
Jan. 29, 2024, submitted by the Honorable Tom McClintock, Chair
of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and
Enforcement from the State of California, for the record
A document entitled, ``U.S. Border Patrol Seizes 67 Abandoned
Firearms at the Border,'' May 29, 2024, U.S. Customs and Border
Protection, submitted by Kelly Armstrong, a Member of the
Committee on the Judiciary from the State of North Dakota, for
the record

THE BIDEN BORDER CRISIS:

NORTH DAKOTA PERSPECTIVES

----------

Wednesday, May 29, 2024

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security,

and Enforcement

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
the Alerus Center, Ballroom 3, 1200 S. 42nd Street, Grand
Forks, North Dakota 58201, the Hon. Tom McClintock [Chair of
the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McClintock and Tiffany.
Also present: Representatives Armstrong, Kelly, and
Fischbach.
Mr. McClintock. The House Judiciary Subcommittee on
Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess at any time.
I want to welcome all of you here to today's hearing on
``The Biden Border Crisis: North Dakota Perspectives.''
Without objection Mr. Armstrong, Mr. Kelly, and Ms.
Fischbach will be permitted to participate in today's hearing
for the purpose of questioning witnesses and will receive five
minutes for that purpose, and I will now recognize myself for
an opening statement.
Again, I want to welcome all of you here today. The
Subcommittee meets here in Grand Forks, North Dakota, at the
request of Congressman Kelly Armstrong. As you all know,
Congressman Armstrong has been a leader in opposing this
Administration's open border policies, and he wanted the
Subcommittee to come here and listen directly to the people of
North Dakota whose own communities have been so seriously
harmed by this crisis.
This is an official hearing of the House of
Representatives, and I do want to lament the absence of any
Democratic Members or even Democratic witnesses or staff at
today's proceedings. This is not the first time that they have
refused to participate in our border hearings, and I think it
speaks volumes about their attitude toward this unprecedented
national crisis.
On the morning of Inauguration Day 2021, our borders were
secure. The Trump Administration's Remain in Mexico policy had
reduced phony asylum claims to a trickle, the border wall was
nearing completion, and we were actually enforcing court-
ordered deportation. By the evening of that very same day, Joe
Biden had reversed these policies and thus began the greatest
illegal mass migration in history. Since that day, nearly six
million illegal migrants have been allowed into this country.
While the Border Patrol has been overwhelmed, an additional
two million known got-aways have entered as well. Put another
way, since Biden took office, he has admitted into our country
an illegal population the size of eight States of the size of
North Dakota. The laws did not change that day. The presidency
changed. Elections have consequences, and this is the most
tragic.
In response, the House of Representatives passed H.R. 2,
much of which came from this Subcommittee's work. Among other
things, it would require future Presidents to take the steps
that Donald Trump took that successfully secured our border.
Senate Democrats killed that while proposing a bill that would
actually forbid future Presidents from taking the actions that
Trump took until illegal crossings exceed 4,000 a day, more
than a million and a half a year, and that so-called bipartisan
bill couldn't even pass the Senate.
When I met with Border Patrol agents in Yuma more than a
year ago, I said to them the Congress writes the laws, but the
President and only the President can enforce them, so what laws
do you need us to write. They unanimously answered, we don't
need new laws, we need to enforce our existing laws. Now, while
the Southern border gets all the attention, as the Border
Patrol officers have warned us for more than three years now
this crisis doesn't stay at the Southern border. These millions
of unvetted, impoverished, and desperate illegal migrants are
being trafficked into our own country into every corner of it,
making every community a border community. As Congressman
Armstrong has repeatedly warned us, this is having terrible
consequences for States like North Dakota as well.
Mr. Biden has stripped Border Patrol agents assigned to the
Northern border to process millions of illegals at the Southern
border. That leaves the Northern border virtually unprotected
and drastically curtails the hours at legal ports of entry that
communities here rely on, tearing apart their commercial and
social connections with Canada. The number of aliens illegally
crossing from the North, meanwhile, has increased
exponentially, and as we will hear, the Border Patrol has now
ceased to cooperate with local law enforcement as they
encounter criminal illegal aliens in their own community.
Illegal migrants now streaming across our Northern border
and the mass migration coming up through the Southern border
combined to doubly tax the resources of States like this one.
Across the country, our public schools are being packed with
illegals requiring education. Our homeless shelters and social
programs have been overwhelmed to the point that services are
now being cut or denied for Americans. Hospitals are forced to
provide billions of dollars of uncompensated care. Fatal drugs
like fentanyl are now flooding our streets. Entirely
preventable and tragic violent crimes reported almost daily.
Violent criminal gangs and international crime cartels are now
operating in our cities, and sanctuary policies protect these
criminals from deportation and, in many cases, from even
detention.
Today, we will hear from North Dakotans who will describe
how things have changed for their communities and their State
during the last 3\1/2\ years. They will describe increased
illegal immigration and drug trafficking, increased worry about
who and what is coming across the Northern border with Canada,
and decreased cross-border economic activity, and here is the
fine point of the matter. The President has the authority to
stop all this. Trump did. Biden won't. Far worse, it is obvious
that this is a deliberate policy of this Administration. It is
what they promised to do. It is what they have done, and it is
what they have defended for 3\1/2\ years. Ultimately, this
crisis can only be fixed by replacing this Administration with
one that is determined to secure our borders, protect our
people, and uphold the rule of law, and that can only be done
by the American people at the ballot box.
I am now pleased to yield to Mr. Armstrong for opening
remarks.
Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Chair, and I want to say a deep
heartfelt thanks to you personally, the Judiciary staff and,
most importantly, the Members who have taken the time to come
to North Dakota to hear these stories. It is really, really
important, and as we all know, particularly those of us who
live here, we very much appreciate it when we have the
opportunity to tell our story to people who might not
understand it. We do everything we can to make you feel like
Grand Forks is your home, like North Dakota is your home, but
we Also recognize we are all busy. You are all busy, and it is
not the easiest place in the world to get to, so we really,
really appreciate the opportunity to do this.
I am really excited about the witnesses we have here today.
I have known most of them for as long as I have been in
politics and some of them even before. I think that is a good
example of what we deal with on the Northern border because
another lifetime ago, the Attorney General was U.S. Attorney
for the State of North Dakota. I was a wet-behind-the-ears
young criminal defense attorney in Grand Forks, and I think 15
of my first 20 public defender cases in Federal Court were
illegal reentry cases. Those existed back in 2003. The first
time I ever appeared in Federal Court was in front of
Magistrate Senegal on a detention hearing, but the difference
is they were detained. They were detained, and that is no
longer the case, that is no longer the policy. That is why the
structural difference under this Administration from prior
Administrations is so important.
Fast forward a lot longer, probably two summers ago, I had
the opportunity to meet with the Grand Forks County Sheriff who
is not a witness but is here today, and I asked him what his
top three issues were, and he said fentanyl, fentanyl, and
fentanyl. He gave me his top three issues. They were all the
same thing, and you can't be farther away from the Southern
border than Grand Forks.
We are 70 miles from the Canadian border, but in every
single community across the State of North Dakota, somebody is
dying from fentanyl poisoning. A hundred percent of those
fentanyl pills are made by the cartels in Mexico--a hundred
percent. We oftentimes get into this conversation about whether
they are coming in by ports of entry, between ports of entry,
U.S. citizens, non-U.S. citizens, all those different issues.
We lose sight of the fact of the very simple, simple fact that
they are all made by the cartels, and they are all in our
communities, so I don't particularly care how they are getting
here. I want it to stop.
You are going to hear from four witnesses who have been
dealing with these issues from a law enforcement standpoint,
and with all due respect to my law enforcement witnesses, I
think I am really excited for Ms. Davis being here because what
gets lost in this conversation is a community that shares a
border with Canada, shares friends and family with Canada, has
a tremendous amount of economic activity, whether it is at a
retail store in the mall in Grand Forks, or it is trying to get
a grain truck across, or maybe just going to your sister's
kid's birthday party after 5 p.m. We have introduced
legislation to revert the hours at our border crossings back to
pre-COVID levels, but do you know how frustrated a farmer on
the Northern border is when they can't cross over after a
certain period of time, and then they turn on the news and they
see what is happening at Eagle Pass?
So, I am really excited that you all have the opportunity
to hear not just about the stressors and the pressures that law
enforcement is facing, that our communities are facing. Also,
that our legal commerce is facing, because of really bad policy
decisions by this Administration, and diversion of resources
which are necessary to put a band-aid, essentially, on a
gunshot wound at the Southern border. Really is disallowing
North Dakota and Canadian businessmen and women, farmers on
both sides of the border, friends, and family from actually
engaging in the types of activity that they have been able to
do their entire adult lives. Until this Administration through
really terrible and sometimes intentional policy has taken that
away from them.
So, thank you all for being here. I hope we take this
seriously. It is a serious issue. There is a reason that we
wanted to do this hearing here, and I am glad that my North
Dakota constituents and law enforcement officers get to tell
your story. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. I want to thank you, Mr. Armstrong, for
your leadership on this issue, for your invitation for us to
come here to North Dakota today. I must say as a Californian, I
love to visit States like North Dakota. It gives me a chance to
catch up with all my former California constituents.
Mr. Armstrong. We just made sure you didn't come in
February.
Mr. McClintock. Without objection, all other opening
statements will be included in the record, and it is now my
pleasure to introduce today's witnesses.
We have with us today Hon. Drew Wrigley. Drew Wrigley is
the current Attorney General of North Dakota. Mr. Wrigley has
served the State of North Dakota twice as a U.S. Attorney and,
also, as Lieutenant Governor. He graduated from the University
of North Dakota with honors in economics and philosophy and
holds a juris doctor from the American University Washington
College of Law.
Sheriff Jesse Jahner is the sheriff of Cass County, North
Dakota. During his more than 25 years with the Cass County
Sheriff's Department, he has served in multiple roles,
including patrol deputy, detective, and captain. Sheriff Jahner
has many awards, including three Distinguished Service Medals,
Meritorious Unit Citation, the Sheriff's Medal, and Combat
Action Cross. Sheriff Jahner has a Bachelor of Science degree
from the North Dakota State University in humanities and social
sciences with an emphasis in criminal justice, and has attended
several leadership courses.
Ms. Rebecca Davis is with us today. She is the Executive
Director of the Walhalla Area Chamber of Commerce, a position
she has held since September 2022. Originally from Monroe,
North Carolina, Rebecca moved to Walhalla, North Dakota in May
2021. In addition to her role at the Chamber, she is a
dedicated Girl Scout troop leader, a small business owner, and
a stepmom of two. Rebecca Also serves on the board for the
Gorge Arts and Heritage Council and is a writer for the
Borderland Press.
Finally, we have with us Sheriff Roger Hutchinson, a
Sheriff of Renville County, North Dakota. He has served 35
years in local, State, and Federal law enforcement, including
time as a patrol officer, firearms instructor,
Counterintelligence Special Agent on the U.S. Marshals Fugitive
Task Force, and on the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force.
Sheriff Hutchinson has, also, deployed in support of the global
war on terrorism. He holds a degree from Louisiana State
University, is an honor graduate of the Federal Law Enforcement
Training Center, and the National Sheriffs' Institute at the
FBI Academy.
I want to welcome all our witnesses and thank them for
appearing today, and I will begin by swearing you in. Would you
please rise and raise your right hand?
Do you solemnly swear or affirm under penalty of perjury
that the testimony you are about to give is true and correct to
the best of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help
you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Mr. McClintock. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative, and you may be seated. Please
know that your written testimony will be entered in the record
in its entirety and, accordingly, we ask that you summarize
your testimony.
Attorney General Wrigley, we will begin with you, sir.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DREW H. WRIGLEY

Mr. Wrigley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good morning to you and
the Members of the Committee. To the Members of the audience
who showed up this morning, I think it's encouraging to see so
many people responding to a Committee hearing like this, and we
appreciate the attention that's being paid to this important
issue. I won't go over my bio but thank you for those
introductions.
I was elected Attorney General in 2022. Serving as North
Dakota's Chief Law Enforcement Officer is a privilege and a
solemn responsibility that I welcome each day, but the
opportunity to come in here today to talk to you about border
insecurity, which is what we have in this country, and the
impact that this is having on our State is an opportunity that
we're glad to have today. As you mentioned, I've twice served
our State and the country as North Dakota's Presidentially
appointed United States Attorney. Each day I draw on my
responsibilities as the Attorney General for North Dakota. I
draw on my experience of both as a Federal and State prosecutor
and my time now as the Attorney General.
As been noted elsewhere, the catastrophically porous
Southwest border of the United States has led to the present
reality that all America is now very much a border State, and
I'm not referring to the Northern border impact, that North
Dakota is very much a Southwest border State as a result of the
policies of the last years. Our sector along the Northern
border has long required security attention of its own,
especially in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks on this Nation. However, the situation has
deteriorated significantly in recent years, and the current
situation is untenable with millions of illegal aliens
streaming across the America's Southwest border.
North Dakota is already experiencing negative law
enforcement impacts as a result of the Biden Administration's
refusal to shut down the border. My concern is that the worst
is very much to come, both in the context of street crimes and
violence being experienced even as far away here as in North
Dakota, but as well as in the arena of America's national
security.
As the Attorney General of North Dakota, I have the
privilege of overseeing the operations of our highly trained
and well-equipped North Dakota Bureau of Criminal
Investigation. In that capacity, I am routinely briefed on
narcotics trafficking investigations, criminal intel gathering,
and statistical information regarding all crimes and activity.
While someone unfamiliar with our State might be forgiven for
assuming that narcotics trafficking is something that happens
somewhere else, people in North Dakota are well aware that our
State has become a significant target region for narcotics that
were produced in Mexico, as Congressman Armstrong was referring
to earlier, smuggled across a relatively open international
border between Mexico and the United States, then sold at a
dramatic profit in a relatively prosperous State where you find
yourselves this morning.
Methamphetamine, marijuana, and synthetic opioids such as
fentanyl are the poisons most commonly trafficked to North
Dakota from Mexico. A quick view of the basic economics of
fentanyl, by way of just one example, illustrates the problem
exacerbated by the lax border policies of the Biden
Administration: The large-scale production of fentanyl that is
well-documented in Mexico, precursors coming in from China and
other Nations produced in Mexico and then comes across the
porous border--``porous'' is maybe giving it too much credit--
conduits into the United States. Other synthetic opioids are
routinely available at the Southwest border for 25 cents a
pill, 15 cents a pill, or 10 cents a pill, depending on the
week, depending on the supply at that exact time. The pills are
then easily transported to a variety of locations around the
United States.
My concerns this morning, particularly to North Dakota, we
have become a significant draw for the traffickers because the
premium price that is available for those pills up in our State
is routinely $60, and it's not uncommon to have them be $80 a
pill. A two-day car trip from the Southwest border of the
United States. I get the information from the BCI every single
week on seizures taking place across North Dakota how thousands
of such pills are making their way up from the Southwest
border. Some are coming here to be used by addicted people
here, be pushed on to those who are not yet addicted, new
customers, as they say, or through our area to other areas. The
crime that accompanies this is growing in our State with each
passing year.
In addition to the worsening narcotics trafficking dangers
caused by the Biden Administration's refusal to enforce the
Southwest border, we are all faced with a perilous public
safety crisis regarding violent criminals, enemy combatants who
pose a clear and present danger to our national security.
Relative to the onslaught of illegals entering our country
through the Southwest border, the Federal effort to stop them
is abysmal by any fair assessment. At the very same time, it
appears as though the Biden Administration's permissiveness has
signaled weakness at the Northern border, resulting in a
significant uptick in illegal activity here as well, and the
statistics are alarming.
I recently requested a briefing from my BCI personnel with
relevant information on the topic. I point out to the Committee
that we have 18 ports of entry along the Northern border. It is
a 310-mile portion of America's Northern border, and just three
of those ports are open 24 hours a day. Travel across that
border in our segment is robust due to commerce, due to
tourism, and due to families on both sides of the line.
Troublingly, however, between Fiscal Year 2021, Fiscal Year
2022-2023 rather--border encounters for the North Dakota sector
of the border have escalated in a dramatic rate, calling the
integrity of the Northern border into serious question.
Border encounters include apprehensions of illegals
attempting to cross the border, people deemed inadmissible by
U.S. border security personnel, and expulsions. There were 548
such entries attempted and refused in Fiscal Year 2021, then
2,100 in Fiscal Year 2022, and an explosive 4,444 in Fiscal
Year 2023. Early indications are that for the Fiscal Year 2024,
we are going to continue that statistical climb. The fact that
these numbers would be troubling enough when viewed even as an
affront to our national sovereignty.
However, when we consider the fact that it took just 19
terrorists--19 terrorists--to significantly hobble our Nation
in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, our respective States are
faced with the stunning reality that our communities are in
danger and must be alerted to the reality that significant
number of our foreign adversaries have made their way into our
midst, and they are undermining public safety and the long-term
national security of the United States. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The prepared statement of the Hon. Wrigley follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much for your testimony. Our
next witness is Sheriff Jahner. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF SHERRIFF JESSE JAHNER

Sheriff Jahner. Welcome. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, and thank you for allowing me a few minutes
here. I appreciate Mr. Armstrong inviting us here to testify
and, also, his cooperation over some of these issues. I've
visited him on different occasions, and he has been very
helpful through different obstacles that we have encountered.
Before I get started this morning, I want the Committee to
recognize that Cass County is not a Northern border county.
We're just down the interstate here from Grand Forks, and I
want to make sure that the Subcommittee understands that my
testimony is not meant to make a political statement. It is not
based on assumptions, hypotheticals, or opinions. It is based
on facts. In North Dakota, sheriffs don't run on party lines.
My intention for this testimony is to bring attention to border
issues as they pertain to my ability as sheriff to protect
human life, our citizens, and provide public safety.
My name is Jesse Jahner, and I am the elected sheriff of
Cass County, and I'm currently in my second year of my second
term as sheriff. I was first elected in 2019, and I have served
26 years as a law enforcement officer.
Cass County, North Dakota, has a population of
approximately 186,000, encompasses 1,768 square miles, and has
27 cities. The Cass County Sheriff's Office has approximately
235 employee positions and the Cass County Jail houses 348
inmates. We are currently in the process of adding another 192
beds to our jail to bring our capacity to 540 beds because of
the overcapacity issues we are currently experiencing. A large
number of those housed in our jail and who are most definitely
a contributor to our overcrowding issue are incarcerated for
charges associated with addiction, mental health, and
homelessness.
There are two major highways that run through Cass County,
Interstate 94 and Interstate 29, which connects Cass County to
both the North and South borders of the United States, making
narcotics trafficking to our area accessible and enticing. For
example, you can purchase M30 pills near the South border for
as little as 25 cents a pill and sell that same pill in our
area for $60-$80, drastically increasing profit margins, which
is what narcotics traffickers are looking for.
In 2023, I served as the President of the Dakota Territory
Sheriffs Association. The Dakota Territory Sheriffs Association
represents all sheriffs in both North and South Dakota. In that
capacity, I wrote a letter that I have submitted as testimony
on behalf of the Dakota Territory Sheriffs Association that
each of you should have. In that letter, I highlighted our
concerns over our country's lack of border security and
enforcement of immigration laws on both the North and South
borders, as well as the effect that it is having on communities
in North and South Dakota. The focus of that letter were our
concerns as sheriffs over public safety, human trafficking,
narcotics trafficking, and overdose deaths that are occurring
from narcotics trafficked into our communities from the
Southern border. Those overdose deaths have been rising.
In South Dakota, in 2022, overdose deaths totaled 35. In
North Dakota in that same year, statewide opioid overdose
deaths totaled 518, and fentanyl-specific deaths totaled 110.
This increase in narcotics trafficking is not only causing loss
of life, but also a huge strain on our criminal justice system,
driving up our crime numbers and placing extreme pressures on
jail capacity, addiction services, and mental health services,
which in most cases we already lack.
In that letter, I also mentioned quantities of narcotics
seized, and the numbers I listed in there are specific seizures
linked directly to the Southern border. We have seized way more
than is listed in that letter that we know are coming up from
the Southern border, but I listed those that directly came from
our investigations collaborative. As I have taken part in
numerous law enforcement intelligence briefings, we continue to
see increased terrorism and potential threats of violence to
our communities related to issues involving border security.
Without the proper control of the flow or vetting of those
entering our country, it is not a matter of if anything is
going to happen, it is a matter of when, and how many of our
citizens are going to be hurt or impacted. So, I ask, how did
we not learn our lessons from September 11, 2001?
Last, assistance from our Federal partners when it comes to
immigration and immigration enforcement has dwindled from what
we, what I, was used to in the past. Recently, our office
worked through a situation involving a residence in one of our
rural communities--Absaraka, North Dakota--where several
individuals who are in the country illegally were and are
occupying a residence. As my deputies and I worked through this
situation to try and determine citizenship and check criminal
histories, we were initially told that they were more likely
not going to be able to assist us because of the current
political environment. I have to ask, is this really what it
has come down to, politics over public safety? As sheriff, I
don't get to decide if I want to provide public safety because
of politics.
As we continued to work through these situations, I was met
with what I would term a runaround or lack of importance. This
situation occurred on a Wednesday. I began contacting Border
Patrol on Thursday, and over the next five days, it was hard
for me to talk to an agent. I was given the runaround. I was
forwarded to different offices. I didn't receive callbacks
until finally on that Monday. So, from Thursday to Monday when
I finally talked to Border Patrol again, I said, ``hey, I just
need to know if you guys are going to assist us or not, and if
you are not going to, why is that,'' and I was simply given the
response that it was because of resources.
I do want to iterate that I do not believe that it is boots
on the ground where we are receiving those obstacles. I believe
it is coming up somewhere higher. I don't know where that is,
but I really believe that the boots on the ground want to help
us. They are just being restricted. I was eventually told that
they could not assist us because of their lack of resources,
and whether this was due to a resource or policy issue, or
direction is completely unacceptable.
As I close, I want to emphasize that this is not a Southern
border issue. This is a national security issue and a national
drug trafficking issue, and an inability to protect our country
and our citizens issue. It is time to shut down the borders or
at least come up with a structured policy that sets politics
aside and starts putting citizens of our country first. With
that, I would answer any questions that the Committee has for
me. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Jahner follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Now, we are pleased to welcome Ms. Davis to the Subcommittee.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA DAVIS

Ms. Davis. Chairperson and the distinguished Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to address you today.
My name is Rebecca Davis, and I am the Executive Director of
the Walhalla Area Chamber of Commerce, and I am here to
represent the cities of Neche and the rest of the Rendezvous
Region as well.
I'm here to discuss the significant impacts of the current
border crossing hours at our local ports of entry and to
advocate for the restoration of their former operating hours.
The ports of entry in Walhalla and Neche currently operate on
reduced hours. The Walhalla port of entry is open from 8 a.m.-6
p.m., while the Neche port operates from 8 a.m.-4 p.m. In stark
contrast, the hours to enter Canada at these same crossings
extend until 10 p.m., which causes considerable confusion for
travelers and disrupts the daily lives and economic activities
of our communities.
Prior to COVID-19, both Walhalla and Neche ports were open
until 10 p.m., facilitating smoother cross-border interactions.
The closest 24-hour crossing in the region is located in
Pembina, which is 39 miles from Walhalla and 19 miles from
Neche. The situation presents a substantial inconvenience,
particularly considering the close-knit relationships we share
with our Canadian neighbors.
Walhalla is a community rich in history and natural beauty.
It's home to the Pembina Gorge State Recreation Area, which is
becoming North Dakota's 14th State Park, and Frost Fire Park.
As the second oldest settlement in the Dakotas, Walhalla boasts
a wealth of historical significance and a vibrant cultural
heritage. These attractions draw numerous visitors from both
sides of the border, fostering tourism and economic growth.
However, the restricted hours at our local ports of entry
hinder the free flow of visitors, negatively impacting local
businesses and tourism. For instance, the Riverside campground
located in Walhalla has seen a decline in visitors,
particularly Canadians who are unable to come down after work
due to the early closure of the ports. If they attempt to come
through the Pembina crossing, they face a significant detour,
which discourages many from visiting altogether.
Walhalla, with a population of approximately 800 residents,
has lost our longtime supper restaurant, a favorite among
Canadian visitors. Jackson's Bar has seen a decline in business
due to people not being able to come and enjoy themselves in
the evenings as they once did. Kristi Stremick, owner of the
Parcel Barn, had to hold on to packages for extended periods of
time because Canadians cannot come to pick them up after work.
Additionally, Stremick Farms, a Walhalla potato farmer, has
experienced losses in sales and productivity as trucks sit idle
due to reduced hours. Floyd Clark, manager of the Walhalla Co-
op, mentioned losing three hours' worth of business or three
years' worth of business. The co-op used to be open until 10
p.m., but now closes at 8 p.m., reducing the availability for
cross-border trade and cooperation. Many of our young high
school students worked at the co-op, so the reduction there
affected them. Travelers would fill up with gas on their way
back or grab snacks, even if they were traveling to Grand Forks
or Fargo. Many residents in our communities have family in
Canada, and these restrictions have strained family
relationships. Some of those grandparents have never even been
able to attend a school concert.
Our town survives on Canadian business. City councilman,
Leeroy Carpenter, shared that farm and construction companies
have developed relationships with businesses in Winkler, making
it easy access to parts rather than having to travel to Grand
Forks, which is two hours away. Some of the parts aren't
available in Grand Forks either, but a 20-minute trip to
Winkler was used to solve that problem. Neche, with a
population of approximately 300 residents, faces similar
challenges. As a parent of two children, I often find myself
needing to make last-minute trips for necessities like an
outfit for a school concert or supplies for other school
events. The restricted hours make it difficult to quickly
access Canadian stores that we have long relied on for such
needs, adding stress and inconvenience to our daily lives.
Several residents attend church in Canada, which is
typically a 10-mile trip. However, due to the restricted hours,
they now face an 1\1/2\ journey to return home through the
Pembina ports. The Walhalla and Maida ports would be the border
crossings for the new State park, making their extended hours
crucial for the park's success and accessibility. The Maida
port was open until 5 p.m., or is open until 5 p.m., and had
been extended until 7 p.m., on a trial basis, but that is a
smaller port than the Walhalla port. Mayor Stuart Symington of
Neche has expressed that Neche and Gretna, both being just a
mile from the border, it is like cutting the town in half.
The situation strains our police resources. When our
borders are understaffed, it is the residents who often find
those crossing illegally and call it to our Sheriff's
Departments, diverting time and resources away from the city
needs. The lack of adequate border staff and reduced hours had
severe humanitarian impacts. Families and individuals crossing
illegally have been found in perilous conditions in our fields.
Tragically, an Indian family was found deceased, and another
family, a mother and two children, were found with frostbite.
They cross illegally in our region due to being told it is
easier to cross than the Southern border, putting their lives
at great risk, especially when they don't understand our
climate.
Our towns rely heavily on legal trade and travel with
Canada. Efficient movement of goods and people help to address
supply chain issues. It supports agriculture, energy, and
tourism. The restricted border hours severely hamper these
critical aspects of our local economy. The significance of the
new State park cannot be overstated, particularly in light of
the recent legislative approval. In 2023, the North Dakota
legislature allocated $6 million for the development of new
park facilities. Additionally, $2 million for the initial land
development has been secured through a matching Federal Land
and Water Conservation Fund grant. This funding underscores the
State's commitment to the park's success and highlights the
importance for restoring extended hours at the Walhalla and
Neche ports of entry. Ensuring convenient access for visitors
from both sides of the border is essential to maximizing the
park's potential as a regional and economic attraction.
In Spring 2023, the Walhalla Area Chamber of Commerce,
along with the cities of Walhalla, Neche, and Cavalier,
circulated a petition to restore the border crossing hours to
their previous schedule. The petition garnered over 1,500
signatures, demonstrating widespread support within our
community for this change. Restoring the previous operating
hours at the Walhalla, Neche, and Maida ports of entry is
crucial for the well-being of our communities. It will
alleviate confusion, support local businesses, and strengthen
our cross-border relationships. We urge the Committee to
consider the voices of our citizens and to take action to
restore these hours, facilitating a return to normalcy and
prosperity for the people of North Dakota and our Canadian
friends.
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Davis follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you very much for your
testimony.
Our final witness is Sheriff Hutchinson. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ROGER HUTCHINSON

Sheriff Hutchinson. I would like to thank the Chair and the
Committee for coming to North Dakota. Good morning. My name is
Roger Hutchinson. I am the Sheriff of Renville County. I would
like to say that I am in my second term as Sheriff of Renville.
I hold board positions with the Fraternal Order of Police, the
North Dakota Peace Officer Standards and Training Board, and
the Dakota Territory Sheriffs' Association. I am a member of
the National Rifle Association, the Western States Sheriffs'
Association, and the National Sheriffs' Association. On
multiple occasions I have raised my right hand to support both
the United States Constitution and my State's Constitution.
I would like to tell you a little bit about Renville
County. We are located on the Northern border, just North of
Minot, North Dakota. We are a rural farming community, and our
largest industry is oil production and what supports oil. We
are 900 square miles, we have six cities, and we have a park as
well that supports a lot of Canadian traffic. Located between
Renville and Minot is Minot Air Force Base. It is the Air
Force's only dual-mission base supporting both B-52s and
intercontinental ballistic missiles. The population at the Air
Force Base is over 5,000 personnel, and within Renville's
immediate area, we have three missile alert facilities and
numerous launch facilities with accompanying troops. Our
Sheriff's Department is the only law enforcement entity located
within Renville County. We have seven full-time positions and
three part-time deputies. We contract law enforcement services
to three cities, and we provide support to the border through
Operation Stonegarden.
All right. A little bit about our Northern border in North
Dakota. The Canadian border is 310 miles long and connects to
the Canadian providences of Saskatchewan and Manitoba. There
are 18 Customs and Border Protection ports of entry. U.S.
Border Patrol has three stations in North Dakota--Portal,
Bottineau and Pembina--which all fall under Grand Forks sector.
They have approximately 200 agents. However, Grand Forks sector
covers areas in Montana and Minnesota as well. So, those 200
agents are actually covering 861 miles of Northern border.
North Dakota has eight counties located on the Canadian
border. From West to East, they are Divide, Burke, Renville,
Bottineau, Rolette, Towner, Cavalier, and Pembina. All our
North Dakota border counties participate in Operation
Stonegarden, a federally funded program to support Border
Patrol operations by providing support to local agencies with
grants to pay for personnel to patrol that border area,
reimburse operational costs, and purchase vital equipment to
support the mission.
This next section is hard for me to speak to because I know
our Border Patrol agents with boots on the ground are not
responsible for the policies which take personnel and money
away from Grand Fork Sector operations. This is not meant to be
a negative reflection of our local agents from Portal Station,
but when I first became sheriff, I do not recall a day that
went by that I did not see a patrol agent patrolling. At one
time, we had four patrol agents who lived within our county and
a resident agent in Mohawk, North Dakota. Now, we have one
resident agent in our county who works out of Portal Station.
Our deputies rarely see a patrol agent patrolling anywhere in
our county. I cannot remember the last time Portal Station has
been fully staffed.
Discussions I have had personally in the past iterated
patrol agents who have been temporarily deployed to the
Southern border are having to sit in the Portal Station
remotely, virtually processing undocumented migrants from the
Southern border. With understaffing issues, TDYs, and virtual
processing, who is left to patrol the border? I have been told
the TDY rate has slowed and the number of PAs in Portal has
increased, but we have failed to see any increased patrols in
our area. Our sheriff's office typically has one deputy patrol
per shift, and we came to rely on patrol agents to be in our
area to assist if needed. Sadly, those days have long passed.
As I prepared my testimony, I reached out to North Dakota
Sheriffs on the Southern border. For those who chose to
respond, the stories were familiar. We all have good working
relationships with our local station and patrol agents, but I
have noticed a decline in their presence and our services.
Recently, a North Dakota Patrol Station Chief provided a
presentation at our North Dakota Sheriff's Conference where he
outlined the current policy being followed. The current policy
was not to respond to any instance in which undocumented
migrants were detained by local law enforcement unless other
mitigating circumstances arose, such as criminal charges. Even
with some criminal charges, such as property damage to a
farmer's field, the individuals were still released.
Our North Dakota sheriffs have had to deal with border-
related dead bodies, high-speed pursuits, responding to
numerous border incursions, property damage to croplands, fence
cutting, humanitarian rescues in extreme conditions, illegal
substances, counterfeit goods, and subjects with warrants.
Grand Forks sector acknowledged Pembina Station is their
busiest station for cross-border activity and recently seized
65 firearms attempting to be smuggled into Canada. The majority
of the nationalities that we have come across are Nigerians,
Romanians, and Indians. However, our biggest concern is who we
did not catch.
We have a wide open, vast border with no natural physical
barriers and very few manmade ones. I have traveled to the
Southern border and seen firsthand the chaos our law
enforcement deals with on a daily basis and also the unintended
consequences of our current immigration policy. I am in no way
comparing our Northern border to the Southern border, but what
I am saying is that our Northern border is open and not secure.
Canada's entry requirements into the country different from the
U.S., which provides opportunity for would-be bad actors to
easily gain entry into the U.S.
One last concern would be the operating times of certain
points of entry, which are not open 24 hours. Our North Dakota
POEs close at 7 p.m., but Canadian POEs are open until 10 p.m.,
thereby allowing traffic to pass through our POE with the gates
left open. There is nothing to stop the Southbound traffic into
the U.S.
Again, I would like to thank the Committee for making a
trip to North Dakota and listening to the issues that would
affect North Dakotans. I hope we continue to move forward in
reducing the number of undocumented migrants across our borders
and the crimes they are associated with. I believe hearings
such as these, help to bring light to the issues. Please leave
here knowing that North Dakota sheriffs will keep doing their
part to keep our citizens safe.
Thank you for allowing my testimony. I will be happy to
answer any questions, and as part of my written testimony have
submitted some photographs, so if you have questions on those,
I will be glad to answer as well. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Hutchinson follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McClintock. Thank you. We appreciate that. We will now
proceed under the 5-minute rule of questions, and the Chair
recognizes Mr. Tiffany.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for
another hearing in regard to every State being a border State.
Sheriff Hutchinson, FBI Director Wray, when he appeared
before this Committee in the last year, he said the terror
threat and the danger as a result of what is happening at the
border has never been higher and he is very concerned. Do you
agree with his assessment?
Sheriff Hutchinson. I absolutely agree.
Mr. Tiffany. So, Secretary Mayorkas of Homeland Security
has downplayed that. He has said that, ``no, the Southern
border is not really any worse than it has been previously, and
does not agree with Director Wray.'' Which one do you agree
with?
Sheriff Hutchinson. I agree with Director Wray.
Mr. Tiffany. Also, I don't know if you have ever met a man
named Sheriff Mark Dannels from Cochise County in Arizona. He
told us in Washington, DC, under questioning, under oath, that
the amount of fentanyl coming into this country was severely
exacerbated as a result of the border being opened on January
20, 2021, as the Chair alluded to. Do you agree with Sheriff
Dannels?
Sheriff Hutchinson. I do agree, yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Secretary Mayorkas was there that same day
when Sheriff Dannels made his statement, or Secretary Mayorkas
at least heard it, and he downplayed it and said that,
``Sheriff Dannels was incorrect.'' Who do you believe is
correct, Secretary Mayorkas or Sheriff Dannels?
Sheriff Hutchinson. I believe that Sheriff Dannels is
correct.
Mr. Tiffany. Sheriff Jahner, tell us a little bit about the
scourge of fentanyl, and have you seen a rapid uptick here in
North Dakota over the last few years of fentanyl-related
deaths?
Sheriff Jahner. Mr. Chair and Mr. Tiffany, most definitely
that we have. As I mentioned in my testimony, North Dakota is a
ripe area for narcotics trafficking because of the increase in
profits that narcotics traffickers can make from selling their
product in North Dakota or South Dakota. Typically, what we see
is narcotics being trafficked up to the Southern border to what
we would consider hub cities. Those hub cities for North Dakota
typically are Chicago and Minneapolis. For South Dakota, it is
typically up to Denver, and we see some stuff directly coming
in from the borders just directly in without going through
those hub cities.
We have most definitely seen an increase in the amount of
fentanyl that we have been seizing. My testimony is very
specific in the quantities that I put in the Dakota Sheriffs
Association letter that I presented. Those are based on me
visiting with our narcotics investigators who, through their
investigations, visit with, of course, suspects, victims,
witnesses who have directly linked fentanyl trafficking back to
the Southern border through those interviews.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you have seen a serious uptick, is that
correct, in the use of fentanyl and the number of deaths?
Sheriff Jahner. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Tiffany. Attorney General, we have heard about the
presence of gangs in Montana. At least I have seen news
stories, especially infiltrating some of the tribes out there.
Are you seeing anything like that in North Dakota? When I say
that, the gang-related stuff that is coming up from Mexico.
Mr. Wrigley. Mr. Chair, Mr. Tiffany, the answer is yes.
People, I think they attribute gangs to just something that
they see on television and then they are organized and they
have a headquarters, that sort of thing. It is much more
dispersed than that, and it is absolutely impacting us here
because the profit margins are drawing the attention of any
gang member anywhere. We have got huge gangs, large gang
presence in Detroit, for instance, who have found avenues out
to North Dakota. Predominantly, not only, but they are
targeting our Native American reservations, in large part also
because the BIA typically staffs law enforcement in this part
of the world at about 25 percent. I can speak across 10 years
as a United States attorney.
So, they are under-patrolled, underserved. We had to go to
the State legislature in the last session and ask for
additional resources, so that we can start task forces around
the reservation and address those openings and enforcement and
the legislature responded, and we are attempting to make
grounds there, but the answer is yes.
The gangs have identified an opportunity, as I mentioned
earlier, 2-day drive to North Dakota with pills that cost you a
dime, 15 cents, or a quarter, quarter on a bad day, and you are
fetching $60 a pill, on average up here. The profits are
astronomical, and they are drawing people in. If they get
arrested and they get incarcerated, it is not for long enough
in North Dakota. That is a different speech, but on the Federal
side, they just find someone else to step into that role. So,
the pipeline is there. It is doing grievous harm out here in
North Dakota, on the plains, but everywhere in between.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chair, may I take the liberty of asking
one quick final question of the two sheriffs? Would you be
willing to help a future Administration if they wanted to get
control of illegal immigration to help return those who are
illegally in our country? Would you be willing to help Federal
effort in regard to this?
Sheriff Hutchinson. I would absolutely be willing to help.
Mr. Tiffany. Sheriff Jahner?
Sheriff Jahner. Absolutely, without a doubt.
Mr. Tiffany. I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you. I am next pleased to
recognize Mr. Fitzgerald.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Chair. Thanks, everybody, for
being here today. I was fortunate enough to arrive early
yesterday, and Sheriff Terry Menninger, who is here with us,
Sheriff, was very generous with his time and was able to take
myself and a couple of staff people on a tour of the area all
the way up to the border, and I certainly appreciate that. We
had a great discussion on kind of what is going on logistically
and kind of the inner workings, I guess, of all the different
levels of law enforcement and how they deal with not only
enforcement, but the cooperative efforts when it comes to the
border.
Patrol Agent Andrew Massaro, I don't know that Andrew made
it today, with the U.S. Border Patrol, fabulous briefing, gave
us a lot of information and certainly an overview of all the
ports of entry. So, I thought was very valuable, and I wanted
to thank him as well. Ms. Davis, I wish you were with us
yesterday because when we went up to the port of entry, I could
have put those homeland security guys on their heels with those
questions that you asked earlier, so we will see if we can help
followup on some of that stuff. I think it would be valuable.
I guess where I wanted to start was with the Attorney
General. You touched on a little bit, but there are many
levels, obviously, of law enforcement, and it is a puzzle, but
at the end of the day, you still have to be able to come up
with the resources to fund all these different levels of law
enforcement. I was wondering if you could just talk a little
bit about your view from the AG's level on and how that filters
down?
Mr. Wrigley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Fitzgerald, well, in
North Dakota, Federal law enforcement is under person, I will
say. We got great agents, but there aren't enough of them, and
without dovetailing together Federal, State, local Tribal law
enforcement, you wouldn't have meaningful impactful enforcement
in North Dakota. So, thankfully, people work together well
here. The sheriffs work well together. Our BCI has statewide
reach and works well, the police departments, the sheriffs'
departments, and then the Federal entities that are here.
The one that sticks out to me glaringly all the time is
that the BIA is so grotesquely under understaffed and
underfunded, and part of that is historically because they are
through the Interior Department as opposed to through the
Department of Justice where there can be some coordination,
understanding and deploying of the resources. The agents that
are here, the BIA agents that are here are very good. They
rotate through--well, that is a different question--but it
creates a real lapse that has to be filled and is filled by our
Sheriffs' Departments, do a tremendous job around the same,
working well together in their own counties and with each other
and same with the police departments, and we try to be part of
that. That glue makes us stick together, too.
There are real glitches in the funding mechanisms for a
Federal enforcement. I won't speak on behalf of the Department
of Justice in this instance, but I know that they could use
more resources and we can use them as well.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you. Very good. Ms. Davis, I want to
kind of go back to your topic again because in Wisconsin, I
represent the 5th District in the West suburbs of Milwaukee and
a couple of counties, Dodge and Jefferson County that are very
rural. Our State itself had $8.5 billion in goods that were
moved through the export market, so I know it is a huge issue,
really for everybody, and I am sure some States don't even
realize that. This inadequate staffing is not something I have
just heard here, but also when you are at the Southern border
for some of those ports of entry as well. So, can you just tell
us with the reduced hours, that you were talking about earlier,
have you seen this happen gradually, or it is just something
that happened all of a sudden and then you had to deal with the
impact of that as the Chamber of Commerce?
Ms. Davis. Mr. Fitzgerald and Chair, I believe what
happened was everything shut down for COVID. Then when the rest
of the world essentially, or at least the rest of the U.S.,
went back to normal, the Northern border was essentially
forgotten about. The border was opened back up to reduced hours
being 5:00 in Maida, 4:00 in Neche, and 6:00 in Walhalla. Then,
they just were like, oh, you are good, you don't need any
additional people when we do have the traffic and we are losing
out on that. So, I think it was just a sudden thing that once
COVID happened, they shut the border down. Then they brought it
back, but the rest of the world went back to normal, and we
were just forgotten.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes, and it is similar to what I think we
heard yesterday in the discussions we had. To the two sheriffs,
so when Border Patrol agents from North Dakota are detailed to
process illegal aliens who enter through the Southwest border,
those agents are obviously not performing daily functions. Do
you feel like in your integration to those different levels of
law enforcement, do you guys feel like there are adequate
resources there, or are you watching Border Patrol have to not
complete all those tasks so that falls on you guys? I was
wondering if you could just comment on that.
Sheriff Hutchinson. Sure. Mr. Chair, Mr. Fitzgerald,
whenever the Border Patrol agent has to sit in his office and
virtually process someone on the Southern border, I appreciate
the fact that it is saving the Federal Government some money by
not having to TDY him down to the Southern border, but he is
not out on patrol. He sits there for his whole shift,
processing migrants that are coming across the Southern border,
and he is not out on patrol. So, if they still have people that
are TDY down there or they are sitting in the office and not
able to leave, they are not out there patrolling.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Sheriff, do you have a comment
on that one?
Sheriff Jahner. Mr. Chair and Mr. Fitzgerald, yes. Thanks
for the question. For us not being a border county, we are a
little bit different because we are a little bit farther away
from the border, so it takes those resources a little bit of
time to get to us. When we come into contact with people that
are in the country illegally, literally what we are looking for
and assistance from those agencies is to be able to maybe
conduct a translation for us if we don't have resources to do
that, but then also to help us verify criminal histories,
because I think everyone here on the Subcommittee understands
that when we run a criminal history check on someone, we are
checking them through our resources that are United States-wide
NCIC. We don't have access to checking criminal histories like
our Federal partners do.
So, for us as sheriffs, like I mentioned earlier in my
testimony, it is important to us that we can protect our
citizens in the counties that we serve. Without understanding
what people's criminal histories are and being given the
direction, that they can't do anything that we should just let
them go, that doesn't give us a good feeling because now we are
letting someone go and we don't have any idea who they are, so
that has become a problem. I think it is a resource issue, like
I mentioned before.
Again, when we talk to our Border Patrol partners, the
boots on the ground, that they are not telling us simply, hey,
we don't want to help you. They are simply saying that they
can't, or they don't have the resources, they don't have the
time to come and do that, so that is where we run into these
issues. In my particular situation where I was referring to
Absaraka, I was able to get a hold of ERO through that process,
which is, as you guys know, the enforcement branch and
deportation of ICE and Border Patrol. The ICE agent that I
spoke with was very helpful. They did eventually come out to
assist me at the residence. That same with our U.S. Attorney,
was very helpful. It was just a lack of resources on Border
Patrol's end of things.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you all for being here. I
yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you. Ms. Fischbach.
Ms. Fischbach. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for allowing me the opportunity to participate today.
So, many of you know I am right across the State border, so
I represent about half of Minnesota's border with Canada, and
so a lot of the issues that I am hearing today, we are facing,
too, and so love to be partners on that. I am glad that I have
the opportunity to speak right after Mr. Fitzgerald, because I
had a couple of followup questions, and I was going to ask you,
Ms. Davis, about when the change was made, and you mentioned
COVID, and we have got some of the same issues at our border
crossings in Minnesota. Maybe a little followup for the
sheriffs.
Sheriff Jahner, you mentioned one very specific incident
with the illegals occupying a house where you couldn't get the
help you needed, and I was just kind of curious, when did that
become more of an issue? In the past, have the Patrol Agents
been very helpful? I am just wondering if it is more of a
trend, because you did mention it was politics over policy in
your opening statement, and so I am just kind of curious about
that.
Sheriff Jahner. Yes. Mr. Chair and Ms. Fischbach, thanks
again for the question. Probably over maybe the last year, year
and a half, the situation that I spoke to in Absaraka, is this
one that I brought to light. We have had other instances where
our deputies have made traffic stops with people who are in the
country illegally, and typically through those interactions
we'll contact Border Patrol as well to look for guidance maybe
based on the information that person has given us, and even on
our traffic stops we are not getting the help that we used to.
So, typically, when we would contact them, if we had concerns
or issues with someone, and maybe stories not making sense in
our interactions with these individuals, they will come out and
assist us through those investigations. Most certainly,
operating the jails as a sheriff when we are able to detain
people for illegal activity, we have seen a little bit of maybe
decrease in that as well where our Border Patrol agents would
typically come down to our jail and help further those
interviews, those investigations. Typically, now it is more
over the phone that those type of interactions happen.
Again, much like Sheriff Hutchinson said, this is not meant
to provide any negative commentary for boots on the ground,
because we have worked with those individuals for a long time
and they are good partners. I think they are being restricted,
and they don't have the resources to accommodate our requests.
Ms. Fischbach. No, I appreciate that because I think that
is happening a lot. Actually, I believe it was Mr. Tiffany who
mentioned the sheriff down in Cochise County, and I was down
there visiting the border, too. I can't remember, was it Ways
and Means or what Committee we were there for, but we were
visiting the border. It was funny because that sheriff actually
mentioned the Northern border that he saw it was an issue
there. So, he is sitting there on the Southern border with what
is all happening there, but he recognizes that it is a huge
issue, too, and so we need to deal with the border, period. We
should not talk about Southern or Northern, but we need to deal
with the border because it is a little like a balloon. When you
push on one side, then they are going to find another way in,
and so we need to recognize that.
Sheriff Hutchinson, what is your experience? As we are
taking a look at their assistance, and I agree that we
shouldn't blame the actual agents because I think it is coming
from the top down. They are being pushed in different
directions, but has your experience with assistance been
similar?
Sheriff Hutchinson. Mr. Chair, Ms. Fischbach, yes, ma'am.
It is definitely a change in how they operate that I am
assuming is policy related. So, whenever a Chief of Portal
Station comes to a Sheriffs' Association and literally says
that their policy is not to respond if it is just undocumented
migrant, which before they would definitely send a patrol agent
out to interview and process the person. Even if they didn't
start deportation procedures, at least that person was in the
system and now that is not happening.
Ms. Fischbach. Again, I am almost out of time, but I
appreciate all of you forbeing here and sharing the information
you have and sharing the stories, but I appreciate the public
being here, too, and the Members because it is important that
we get out here and we hear about what is going on, and so I
appreciate them coming way up to North Dakota. We could have
gone to Minnesota, but hey no, I appreciate it because it is a
huge issue.
I think that with the Southern border, getting all of the
attention, we have to continue and they are not paying
attention to the Northern border. Like you said, ``everybody
went back to normal and they forgot about the Northern
border,'' and so we need to make sure that we are addressing
that. So, I appreciate all of you sharing your stories, and I
will say they are similar to what we are experiencing in
Minnesota. So, thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much. Next is the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chair. Thank all of you for being
here. This is difficult to sit and listen to because we keep
asking when something is going to take place. When are we going
to do something about this? I don't know, looking out at your
faces, if any of you have lost a child to these overdoses. Part
of my life has been spent coaching little kids in baseball and
football. I can tell you, as a person, there is nothing more
uplifting than to see the birth of a child. There is nothing
more heartbreaking than to bury a child. When I see what is
happening in our country today, and we come here to talk to you
because we brought the Congress to the country to hear what you
are going through.
Now, Mr. Chair, I am going to submit this letter. This is
to Secretary Mayorkas. We asked him back on, I believe it was
in March, to please respond to us no later than April 25th.
I don't know, he must have misplaced his calendar. You
never get an answer from any of these people.
Mr. Kelly. Now, Chair, you started off, we talked about is
it a red issue. Is it a blue issue? What issue is it? Is it the
Republicans, is it the Democrats? The answer is, yes, it is all
of us. My question is, where is the outrage from the American
people? How can we sit back and watch this dereliction of duty?
Chief, you said it. You raised your hand and you take an oath
of office. If you don't want to do the job, don't take the
oath. If you are not going to enforce the laws, drop out of
that part of society. If you are going to sit back and watch an
entire Nation crumble and lose the most important part of our
future because children represent about 25 percent of our
population, they are 100 percent of our future. How long can we
sit and wait? How long can we be told you are fools, there is
no problem there and what? They right. The problem is
everywhere, not just there.
Now, when I read your testimony, and I got to tell you,
this stuff is of stuff that makes you want to stand up and say,
I am not going to put up with this, I am not going to stand for
this, I am not going to allow this to go on and on and on. I am
tired of burying little kids that I coached. I am tired of
watching my own son sitting in a prison, not because he
committed a crime, but because he is an addict. All of us
should be just outraged at what is happening in this country,
the fact that we are so calm and so under control. What this
Administration wants you to believe, there is no problem here,
move on, folks. You are imagining it, it doesn't exist.
Sheriffs, when I read your testimony, Ms. Davis when I read
your testimony, it is something else. It is not heartbreaking.
I am tired of people telling me they are heartbroken. I said,
well then, get off your rear end and do something about it.
Don't let your heart break. Put it back together and go and
fight for the future.
General, you and I talked a little bit outside, and I want
to get down to this because you can't fix something with
nothing. We have laws on the books. Like people keep telling me
you guys in Congress better pass something. I said, we have. We
are the legislative body. It then goes to the executive branch
to enforce. There is no enforcement. People have to be held
accountable for their breaking their oath of office. General,
you had some ideas because as I said, you can't fix something
with nothing, so we know we have all these folks here. There is
no airplane, there is no bus, there is no ship that you put
them all on and take them back to wherever it is that they came
from. What is it that we have to do?
Mr. Wrigley. I have to answer that everything we are going
to do. Mr. Chair, Mr. Kelly, I appreciate it. Now, you made a
mistake. You gave me your cellphone because you and I are going
to be friends, I can tell, and I wish that my colleagues in the
Attorney General's office are watching right now, because this
is the way most of our days start as we discuss the news of the
day and what is going on with this level of passion, what you
are describing.
One of the discussions we had, and if you are referencing
in the hallway, is the idea that it is a very real problem to
have millions of people who have come into this country
illegally, at least hundreds of thousands of them who are
themselves criminals, even before they make the criminal act of
coming across the border. The Federal Government is not doing a
good job of keeping statistics of crimes that are being
committed in the United States by people who have recently come
across that border. I don't blame them when you consider that
it is their policy that it is allowing that.
The Chair pointed out that this wasn't a problem just prior
to the Administration taking hold and changing the policies and
opening the doors. One of the things that we mentioned in the
hallway was the idea, and I pledge myself to it, I can pledge
this effort in North Dakota. If there is going to be an effort
and there needs to be, let's say there is a change of the
Administrations and there needs to be an effort to deport
people who have come here illegally in way too many instances.
It is not just anecdotal. They mean us grievous harm. They
don't love this country. They didn't come here because they
love the American way. I am sure they can find those anecdotes,
too, but we understand this, and they are coming over from all
sorts of countries, by the way, even through the Northern
border.
Representative Fischbach mentioned when you push the
balloon, it expands elsewhere. Let me go through the list. I
mentioned the border encounters. Here are the countries that
are represented coming across the Northern border: Canada 261,
this is just for Fiscal Year recent fiscal year; India, Mexico,
China, Romania, Ukraine, Philippines, Brazil, Ecuador,
Honduras, Guatemala, Colombia, and El Salvador. The most recent
year for which we have statistics, those countries are Cuba, El
Salvador, China, and Turkey. The list goes on and on and on.
They are just finding a way into the country.
So, I will pledge the Office of Attorney General in North
Dakota to this effort, and I have already started reaching out
to colleagues of mine around the country. It will take a
concerted effort of the Attorneys General, large city DAs,
people in law enforcement, sheriffs, chiefs of police, and
other organizations to band together, pursue Federal policy of
rounding up. It is a foul-sounding word, but it is necessary.
They are releasing people with a slip of paper saying you have
come to this country illegally; we will see what you at your
hearing in 2029 or 2030. It is laughable.
I cite to the 19 hijackers just as a historical footnote to
remind us of when millions are coming across illegally,
hundreds of thousands who mean us grievous harm, untold
thousands, who are committing crimes, heinous, violent crimes
in this country as we speak. The 19 changed the world, and now
we have a policy all in there, except to say every one of us,
our first act of security in our homes for the next day is to
lock the doors. That is our first act of security for tomorrow,
so lock the doors. America's next act of security needs to be,
lock the doors. We need to stop what is happening every day. I
know you all know this. You started the passion part of this.
So, but I pledge myself to do that publicly. If we can get
a change of policy to be one of the attorneys general and there
will be others across the country, we will join in coordinating
law enforcement efforts to do this in an orderly fashion that
protects the American people.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I want to thank you, and all of you, when
I read your testimony, I watched your testimony here, these are
things that just don't bother you because of your office. This
is what bothers you as an American citizen of what is happening
to this country, and it is happening on our watch, and it is in
full view. As we watch it happen, we are told there is nothing
wrong, please quit making an issue out of something that is not
an issue. This is an issue. This has to be addressed and for
all of us. This is not a Republican or Democrat issue. This is
an American issue. Please forget the politics,and take a look
at the policy because until we stand up and say stop, they are
going to continue on this path.
There are no way future generations would have done what
they have done, a million and a half in uniform, and we just
memorialized them on Monday, thanking them for their sacrifice
their life to give us this opportunity. For us to sit here and
watch this coming apart at the seams and people telling us you
guys are just making a big deal about something that doesn't
exist, that is absolutely false. It is a false lie. It is just
one thing I think as a people, not as the Republican Party, but
as a people, the American people need to understand that they
are losing the greatest Nation the world has ever known, it is
happening on our watch, and it is almost going on with our
permission because we sit back, we rub our hands and say I wish
I could do something about it, and I said, ``you can.'' Get
registered and get out and vote and take as many friends as you
can, get them educated. I am not going to lose another son. I
am not going to lose another little kid that I hope to coach. I
am not going to lose anybody that could be a big part of this
Nation coming into the future.
I am sorry for going on, but I will tell you what. We have
been dormant too long watching this happen. It is up to us. If
it is going to change, it is up to us. We cannot expect
somebody in the White House to do it. They are not capable, and
they are not going to. So, with that, thank you all. Sheriffs,
I can't imagine what you go through every day. Ms. Davis, thank
you so much. Gentlemen, we are going to stay in touch, and we
have got to find something to do about this. I am tired of
sending letters and getting no response. I am tired of people
standing up and saying there is no problem right here when we
bury them every single day and we have a blind eye and a deaf
ear to those cries. I am sorry for getting passionate about
this, but if we are not passionate about our future, then we
shouldn't be here, and thank you all for being here today.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. I think I will try to pick up
there and remind us that Abraham Lincoln told his generation
that they were destined to be remembered because they were
destined to either nobly save or meanly lose the last best hope
of mankind on this earth.
Attorney General Wrigley you reminded us of the 19
terrorists of 9/11. We released 5,000 of the most dangerous
terrorists on the planet, and we abandoned Bagram during this
Administration. We know where one of them went. Ten days later
they detonated the bomb that killed 13 U.S. service members at
Kabul airport. We don't know where the other 5,000 are. Is it
conceivable that among the two million known got-aways, the
people that we actually watch cross the border but couldn't
intercept are some of those terrorists, and how long do you
think we have got?
Mr. Wrigley. Mr. Chair, I wish I had an answer for what the
timeline looks like that. I will say that Chris Wray and I have
been friends for a lot of years since he was the head of the
Criminal Division. I was U.S. Attorney under President Bush at
the time. I have known him for a long time. He is a pretty
sober guy. He wouldn't be saying publicly what he is saying if
he didn't have a sense that the threat is imminent. It is very
real. You all get the briefings that the rest of us don't get.
When Chris Wray, who I know, as I said, I know him personally
to not be a person who would be saying that to be trying to be
interesting in public comment. The fact is he always tries to
be uninteresting in public comment, but that should chill us.
To realize the vastness of the numbers is part of the
problem, but the fact that they were allowed in here, they are
here, and we don't talk about sleeper cells anymore. Well, they
are asleep at the moment, but they can be awakened in an
instant, and I think that we are getting that direction from
the FBI.
Mr. McClintock. I fear a coordinated attack at multiple
targets at the same hour, the same day, leaving thousands of
dead Americans all across the country, and I am afraid that
this day is coming. The sheriffs described vast miles of the
Northern border that are completely now unpatrolled so we can't
even watch people crossing the border, is that correct, because
we don't have the eyes there?
Sheriff Hutchinson. Not human eyes. Of course there are
cameras that are out there, but the Northern border is open,
sir.
Mr. McClintock. If we can't intercept them, we know nothing
about them. Sheriff Jahner, in response to Mr. Fitzgerald, you
mentioned that you run a background check on the illegal
migrants that you encounter, but if they are illegally crossing
for the first time, they have no record in the United States.
So, do you know anything about them?
Sheriff Jahner. Mr. Chair, that would be correct, I mean,
and at that point we don't--
Mr. McClintock. So, if this is a convicted murderer who has
escaped Venezuela, you don't have that information available to
you?
Sheriff Jahner. We do not have that information.
Mr. McClintock. As soon as you turn them over to the Border
Patrol, what does the Border Patrol do with them?
Sheriff Jahner. That is what we would try to do, would be
to contact them to help us, and if it is a cooperating country,
as you guys know, they would have access to gain that
information, but we don't.
Mr. McClintock. So, how well vetted would you say these
illegal migrants are?
Sheriff Jahner. Not at all.
Mr. McClintock. Have you encountered any that you would
deem a threat to your community?
Sheriff Jahner. Well, I don't know that because we are not
able to always get cooperation and run those background checks
on everyone.
Mr. McClintock. Sheriff Hutchinson?
Sheriff Hutchinson. I wouldn't know that information
either. I can just tell you that we do have people coming
across the border. Some of them we catch. Some of them we
don't.
Mr. McClintock. Well, how would you describe the difference
between your department's experience with the Border Patrol
during the Trump Administration compared to today?
Sheriff Hutchinson. They were staffed better, and like I
said, we typically only have one deputy on patrol at a time.
Border Patrol was our biggest Agency that would back up our
deputies, and now that doesn't exist because they are just not
out there.
Mr. McClintock. Sheriff Jahner?
Sheriff Jahner. Mr. Chair, I would say that over the last
1\1/2\--2 years is where we have noticed a change.
Mr. McClintock. I am sorry. Say again?
Sheriff Jahner. Over the last 1\1/2\--2 years is where we
have noticed the change.
Mr. McClintock. What is the change?
Sheriff Jahner. With the cooperation; just less
cooperation.
Mr. McClintock. What did the Border Patrol officers tell
you privately?
Sheriff Jahner. Well, no, in the one situation that I
mentioned to you, one of the agents had mentioned to us with
the current political environment, they didn't believe that
they would be able to assist us. I don't know what that means.
Mr. McClintock. Sheriff Hutchinson, what do they tell you?
Sheriff Hutchinson. Mr. Chair, they are as frustrated as we
are.
Mr. McClintock. Ms. Davis, could you describe the local
economy pre-lockdown compared to today?
Ms. Davis. Mr. Chairperson or Chair, the economy, as I
know, seem to be a lot better prior to the restricted hours,
people were able to come across more freely. Frost Fire Park
was booming, hotel stays were up, the campground was full every
weekend, typically, with Canadian visitors, and we had more
restaurants that we could eat at.
Mr. McClintock. You attribute that directly to the
immigration policies in effect now as compared to during pre-
lockdown.
Ms. Davis. I would definitely attribute it to the lack of
staffing for the border hours.
Mr. McClintock. Would you call that more significant or
less significant than, say, the impact of inflation on the
economy in those years?
Ms. Davis. I am sorry. Say that again.
Mr. McClintock. Would you say that the immigration hours,
the restrictions are more significant or less significant to
the local economy than the inflation of the last three years?
Ms. Davis. I think it is more significant.
Mr. McClintock. OK. Thank you very much. We will now close
the hearing with questions from our host, Congressman
Armstrong.
Mr. Armstrong. I told the Chair that you all can get a hold
of me at any time, so I feel like it is really important that
you get to tell your story to other Members of Congress. I want
to start with the reason I don't write questions and the reason
I like going last is because things come up that are really
important. I think the easiest way to start this is with the
Attorney General and the Cass County Sheriff and talking about
the issue that happened in Western Cass County. How would that
have been handled when you were the U.S. Attorney, if a local
law enforcement has illegal immigrants in a house in Western
Cass County?
By the way, just before this, I want to preface this
because I agree with you all, very much so, that the boots on
the ground are as frustrated as anybody else. The policy is not
being written in the U.S. Attorney's Office in North Dakota,
and we will get back to BIA here in a second because I think
that is important. These are leadership decisions that are
causing as many frustrations with Federal law enforcement as
they are with State law enforcement.
So, anybody watching this or understanding this, is we need
to give them the tools they have to do their job, and they know
how to do it because they have done it before. You and I both
practiced in Federal Court at a different time and under
different policies and the Administration, and how would that
have been handled? Do you think it would have waited five days
to get a phone call back?
Mr. Wrigley. Mr. Chair, Representative Armstrong, of course
not. They would have been detained immediately. The day that
this happened, Sheriff Jahner and I were on the phone
discussing the matter, and to leave people with their hands up
not knowing what is to take place next and understand that the
vulnerability is there, to the other question that they are
there illegally, or you suspect that. You know that you don't
know what the records are, you don't know what brought them
here, what their intentions are, what they are up to, and there
is not anything that you can do. Our BCI agents don't have the
ability to swoop in and make that arrest. They are not able to
do that lawfully in that instance, and yet it shouldn't
surprise us.
An Administration that is open at the border is open in the
interior, and so, no, what we would have done there would have
been Federal involvement immediately. The first person, there
would have been an on-the-ground investigation at that point
assisting working with local law enforcement. If they were to
slap detainers on them and move forward with it, they would
have been detained and it would have been determined before
they were ever released--
Mr. Armstrong. That is my second question because this is
really important because this shows you where the policy is the
problem. When you are practicing U.S. attorney either in your
first time or your second time, if an illegal reentry of a
previously deported alien has a detention hearing within 48
hours, what percentage of those people were being released
prior to either deportation or criminal trial when you were the
U.S. Attorney?
Mr. Wrigley. Being released?
Mr. Armstrong. Being released after they were pretrial
detention for being illegal at reentry.
Mr. Wrigley. I wouldn't be able to give you a percentage. I
just wasn't--
Mr. Armstrong. I can tell you 100 percent of my clients
were detained prior to trial, and that is just simply not what
is happening now.
Mr. Wrigley. We weren't targeting you.
Mr. Armstrong. No, I think it was a standard policy, and
that is a very different thing. Sheriff Hutchinson, I think one
of the things I learned when I went to Eagle Pass, and I don't
understand this, and I want to go to the four agents on patrol,
is people forget the border is not linear. The border extends
all the way down into Cass County, all the way into everywhere,
but when you have four patrol agents, Federal patrol agents,
they are not just patrolling the border. They are patrolling a
large rural area of North Dakota, looking for things that may
have gotten across the border. So, when you don't have four
patrol agents at the Federal level, who takes up that slack in
your county?
Sheriff Hutchinson. Oh well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Armstrong, we
try.
Mr. Armstrong. Yes.
Sheriff Hutchinson. One person on duty, like I repeated for
the third time now. It is difficult because, like I said, ``we
don't know who is coming across.''
Mr. Armstrong. Criminals are like water. They will follow
the path of least resistance. Do you think that people,
particularly more sophisticated criminal elements, are aware of
the fact that there are no longer Border Patrol agents
patrolling the Northern border?
Sheriff Hutchinson. From my previous life, absolutely.
Mr. Armstrong. I do, and I want to go to Ms. Davis, because
it is not like we are asking for something new. They took away
something that was essential to these communities. I think for
a lot of people who represent different areas of Congress or
different areas of the country, they don't understand what it
means when you lose one restaurant in Walhalla or when you lose
two hours of business at a co-op, or what that does to the
fabric of the community, and you are on the frontline, I mean
of this. People are angry. People are really, really
frustrated, and not just in the illegal activity, but in the
lack of any kind of care at all for what our communities need
to survive and what we what has been taken away from us in
economic activity because of bad policy.
So, this is more than like one business closing. This is
something that affects the entire community, the entire
economy, and the entire chain of commerce. So, just what is the
frustration level of your communities going through all of this
at the same time, and whether they can watch what is happening
at our Southern border, and just look at this and say, I might
lose my business because we can't have the normal chain of
commerce that we used to have.
Ms. Davis. I would say, Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Chairperson
or Chair, the level of frustration in our community is pretty
high. We aren't able to go see family members. What should be a
quick trip then takes hours. It is two hours from Walhalla to
Grand Forks. So, say if I was to come grocery shop in Grand
Forks, that is two hours down here and then two hours back. Our
grocery store is super small. It is limited. I love the
resource that it provides, but it is not always a one-stop
shop, and then that trickles down because our community then
has the leakage. So, we rely on the Canadians to fill in for
the leakage of funds from the community.
The prom committee were shuffling around trying to find
where to host the dance or the meal prior to the dance. Kids
were having to go to other communities further away to have
their dinner for prom, to take their date or what have you, and
it shouldn't be that way. It wasn't that way to start with, and
it shouldn't be that way now.
Mr. Armstrong. I think that is like the entire fabric of
the community changes, and these are some of the greatest small
towns, and when small towns in the whole country, and by real
policy decisions that have affected how we conduct legal
commerce on the border at the same time, where we just allow
the open flow of illegal commerce on the border is really,
really truly affecting everybody in the AG community, everybody
in the small community, every small sheriff's department on the
Northern border who is diverting resources to do a job the
Federal Government is supposed to do.
I can't leave this without one thing because we talk about
this a lot in D.C., and I think the biggest mistake that the
DOJ ever made was when it started galvanizing all the
leadership in Washington, and this goes to the BIA conversation
and all of that. From somebody who was on the ground and who
has done this job at a law enforcement level, we have to get
back to letting our district offices and our law enforcement
members, whether it is Border Patrol, whether it is FBI,
whether it is BIA, to actually have the tools and resources
they need to do the job out here because I don't care who the
U.S. Attorney is. If it is appointed by a Democratic President
or a Republican President or anybody, they understand the law
enforcement reality on the ground out here in a significantly
more important and better way than anybody in D.C. or Virginia.
We have to figure out how to give them the autonomy to do
their job because I believe this. I believe that people who are
on the ground, Federal offices and Federal prosecutors out
here, if they were allowed to do their job, you would be in a
lot better situation sitting there than if decisions were being
made in Washington, DC.
Then I just want to end because I always find this funny
and coincidental. This morning, the U.S. Border Patrol issued a
statement, and I don't know if it had anything at all to do
with this hearing or if it just really happened, but if you
want to know how fine a point this is, and I am going to read
it and then introduce it into the record:

U.S. Border Patrol agents assigned into the Grand Forks
Sector's Pembina station along with a USBP canine responded to
illegal activity at the border and discovered three backpacks
filled with firearms. In the early morning hours on May 15th,
agents responded to a report of suspicious activity West of the
Neche, North Dakota port of entry. Upon arrival, they observed
two individuals absconding from the area into Canada. Agents
performed a perimeter search for additional subjects, at which
point canine, Odin, led them to three abandoned backpacks.
While searching the backpacks, agents discovered that each
contained firearms. The event resulted in the seizure of 65
handguns, 65 pistol magazines, two rifles, one suppressor, and
two rifle magazines. All the weapons were transported to PMB
for further processing. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms responded, took custody, and seized items, and will
serve as lead investigative agency. There is currently no
threat to the community at this time.

Sixty-five handguns. We spend an exorbitant amount of time
in D.C., going after lawful gun owners instead of dealing with
the actual issue that exists when we talk about this like this
is an issue that only occurs on the Southern border. I guess
one last question. Attorney General, do you think those 65
handguns were going to go to law-abiding citizens?
Mr. Wrigley. I wouldn't have to think about that much, no.
That is the exact issue. Mr. Chair, Representative Armstrong,
it is interesting. Well, you made the point better than I am
going to. That is troubling, should trouble anybody, 65
firearms are being trafficked by people who are themselves
crossing that border illegally, and they just happen to get
caught. That was a good, lucky day. They just happened to get
caught along this little sector of the country. We have the
problem. We have a problem, very significant. The border needs
to be closed. Everyone recognizes it. It is just not happening.
Mr. Armstrong. We want to fight about whether a North
Dakotan can buy a gun legally with a rural route address. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much. Again, Mr. Armstrong,
thank you so much for inviting us here today. Oh yes, without
objection.
Mr. Armstrong. I actually said I want to put this into the
record.
Mr. McClintock. Without objection, the article will be
entered into the record.
Mr. McClintock. I want to thank all of you for coming and
expressing your concerns over this issue. I want to thank the
witnesses for their expertise today. That concludes today's
hearing.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the witnesses
or additional materials for the record.
Mr. McClintock. Without objection, the hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

All materials submitted for the record by Members of the
Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and
Enforcement can be found at the following links: https://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=117373.
