- THE ELECTIONS CLAUSE: CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION AND CONGRESSIONAL EXERCISE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ELECTIONS CLAUSE: CONSTITUTIONAL
INTERPRETATION AND CONGRESSIONAL EXERCISE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 12, 2021

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
http://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-administration

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-743 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Committee on House Administration

ZOE LOFGREN, California, Chairperson
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois, Ranking
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina        Member
PETE AGUILAR, California             BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico

CONTENTS

----------

JULY 12, 2021

Page
The Elections Clause: Constitutional Interpretation and
Congressional Exercise.........................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Chairperson Zoe Lofgren..........................................     1
Prepared statement of Chairperson Lofgren....................     5
Hon. Bryan Steil.................................................     8
Prepared statement of Mr. Steil..............................    11

WITNESSES

Jack Rakove, Coe Professor of History and American Studies,
American University............................................    14
Prepared statement of Prof. Rakove...........................    17
Hon. Michael G. Adams, Secretary of State, Commonwealth of
Kentucky.......................................................    66
Prepared statement of Hon. Adams.............................    68
Daniel P. Tokaji, Fred W. and VI Miller Dean and Professor of
Law, University of Wisconsin School of Law.....................    59
Prepared statement of Prof. Tokaji...........................    61
Franita Tolson, Professor of Law and Vice Dean for Faculty and
Academic Affairs, University of California Gould School of Law.    34
Prepared statement of Prof. Tolson...........................    36

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Jack Rakove, Coe Professor of History and American Studies,
American University, responses.................................    85
Daniel P. Tokaji, Fred W. and VI Miller Dean and Professor of
Law, University of Wisconsin School of Law, responses..........    92
Franita Tolson, Professor of Law and Vice Dean for Faculty and
Academic Affairs, University of California Gould School of Law,
responses......................................................    97

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Avalon Project, Yale Law School, Federalist Paper No. 59
submission.....................................................   107
Avalon Project, Yale Law School, Federalist Paper No. 60,
submission.....................................................   109
Avalon Project, Yale Law School, Federalist Paper No. 61,
submission.....................................................   111
H.R. 6882, Constitutional Authority Statement, submission........   113
H.R. 3412, Constitutional Authority Statement, submission........   114
H.R. 7905, Constitutional Authority Statement, submission........   115
June 15, 2021, Prof. Jack Rakove, The Washington Post, The
framers would have been fine with sweeping national election
reforms, submission............................................   116
November 18, 2019, Prof. Franita Tolson, Yale Law Journal Forum,
The Elections Clause and the Underenforcement of Federal Law,
submission.....................................................   122
Brennan Center for Justice, Legal Analysis of Congress'
Constitutional Authority to Restore Voting Rights to People
with Criminal Histories, submission............................   136
Nicholas O. Stephanopoulos, The Sweep of the Electoral Power,
submission.....................................................   141
Suman Malempati, Emory Law Journal, The Elections Clause
Obligates Congress to Enact a Federal Plan to Secure U.S.
Elections Against Foreign Cyberattacks, submission.............   204
Eliza Sweren-Becker and Michael Waldman, The Meaning, History,
And Importance of the Elections Clause, submission.............   252
Franita Tolson, Articles: The Spectrum of Congressional Authority
over Elections, submission.....................................   322
Franita Tolson, Election Law ``Federalism'' And the Limits of the
Antidiscrimination Framework, submission.......................   399
Franita Tolson, Reinventing Sovereignty? : Federalism as a
Constraint on the Voting Rights Act, submission................   473
Franita Tolson, In Whom is the Right of Suffrage? : The
Reconstruction Acts as Sources of Constitutional Meaning,
submission.....................................................   538
Guy-Uriel E. Charles, Charles J. Olgetree Jr. Professor of Law,
Harvard Law School, submission.................................   552
Honorable Rodney Davis, Ranking Member, The Elections Clause,
submission.....................................................   562
November 5, 2020, Letter from Ranking Member Rodney Davis to
Arizona Secretary of State Katie Hobbs, submission.............   571
House Admin. Committee GOP Twitter Web App, submission...........   572

THE ELECTIONS CLAUSE: CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION AND CONGRESSIONAL
EXERCISE

----------

MONDAY, JULY 12, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:02 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Zoe Lofgren [Chairperson of the Committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Lofgren, Raskin, Butterfield,
Aguilar, Scanlon, Leger Fernandez, Davis, Loudermilk, and
Steil.
Staff Present: Jamie Fleet, Majority Staff Director; Khalil
Abboud, Deputy Democratic Staff Director; Brandon Jacobs,
Legislative Clerk; Dan Taylor, Senior Counsel; Sean Wright,
Senior Elections Counsel; Sarah Nasta, Elections Counsel; David
Tucker, Parliamentarian; Natalie Young, Press Secretary; Kulani
Julata, Elections Counsel; Peter Whippy, Communications
Director; Caleb Hays, Republican General Counsel and Deputy
Staff Director; Gineen Bresso, Republican Special Counsel;
Rachel Collins, Republican Counsel; and Mike Cunnington,
Republican Policy Advisor.
The Chairperson. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order.
We have several Members present, and we will be joined by
several others as this hearing proceeds.
As we begin, I want to note we are holding this hearing in
compliance with the regulations for remote committee
proceedings pursuant to House Resolution 8.
We ask Committee Members and witnesses to keep their
microphones muted when they are not speaking to limit
background noise, and members will need to unmute themselves
when seeking recognition or when recognized for their five
minutes. Witnesses will also need to unmute themselves when
recognized for their five minutes or when answering a question.
Members and witnesses, please keep your cameras on at all
times, even if you need to step away for a moment. Please don't
leave the meeting or turn your camera off.
I would also like to remind Members that the regulations
governing remote proceedings require that we cannot participate
in more than one committee proceeding at the same time.
At this time, the chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the Committee at any point, and all Members will have five
legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks
and have any written statements be made part of the record.
And without objection, that is ordered.
Our hearing today will examine the broad constitutional
authority provided to Congress to regulate Federal elections
under Article I, Section 4, Clause 1 of the U.S. Constitution,
known as the Elections Clause.
The clause reads as follows, quote: ``The Times, Places and
Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives,
shall be prescribed in each State by the legislature thereof;
but the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such
Regulations, except as to the Places of choosing Senators.''
The text is clear. It prescribes a duty to States to make
regulations for the time, place, and manner of congressional
elections--but, critically, also provides Congress with the
superseding power to make or alter such regulations at any
time.
During the Constitutional Convention and State ratification
debates, the Framers fought for the inclusion of the Election
Clause and the broad powers that it confers to Congress. For
its supporters, the clause was necessary for self-preservation
of the Federal Government in the face of potential State
obstructions to congressional elections.
In defense of the Elections Clause, Alexander Hamilton
wrote in Federalist 59 that, quote: ``Its propriety rests upon
the evidence of this plain proposition, that every government
ought to contain in itself the means of its own preservation.''
The Framers raised other concerns as well to defend the
inclusion of the Elections Clause in the Constitution and the
Federal oversight over congressional elections that it would
authorize. They warned about the potential for State lawmakers
to abuse their powers and pass election regulations that would
lead to unequal representation, such as partisan
gerrymandering. They also warned about other forms of voter
suppression in Federal elections that would go unchecked unless
Congress was empowered with the remedy of the Elections Clause
to act.
The Framers' warning rings true today. Since the Supreme
Court's 2013 Shelby County v. Holder decision, State
legislatures around the country have passed a wave of voter
suppression efforts, including strict voter ID laws, improper
voter purges, and increasingly limited opportunities to access
the ballot.
And this pattern has only further escalated since the 2020
general election. Partisan gerrymandering by incumbent
political parties--both parties--remains an ongoing obstacle to
equal voting rights across various States.
In our hearing today, we will hear more about what the
Framers intended when they drafted and included the Elections
Clause in our Constitution.
Likewise, the Supreme Court has been consistent in
construing the Elections Clause as providing, quote,
``paramount,'' unquote, powers to Congress to enact Federal
election regulations that preempt State regulations and has
interpreted such powers be broad and expansive.
For example, in Smiley v. Holm, in 1932, the Supreme Court
said, ``These comprehensive words embrace authority to provide
a complete code in congressional elections,'' which was not
limited to just times and places, but to the ``numerous
requirements as to procedure and safeguards which experience
shows are necessary in order to enforce the fundamental right
involved.''
In another case, Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of
Arizona, in 2013, Justice Scalia, a renowned conservative
Justice, wrote for the court that the National Voter
Registration Act requirement that voters affirm their
citizenship preempted Arizona's proof of citizenship
requirement, relying on Smiley v. Holm and the understanding
that the Elections Clause empowers Congress to preempt State
regulations governing the times, places, and manner of holding
congressional elections and that times, places, and manner are
comprehensive words.
The NVRA is only one example of Congress exercising its
Elections Clause powers. Congress has long exercised its
Elections Clause powers to enact legislation covering various
types of Federal election regulations, from the Apportionment
Act of 1842, which eliminated the general ticket system in
favor of the congressional district, to modern examples,
including the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 and the
Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act of 1986, as
well as the Help America Vote Act in 2002.
Reliance on the Elections Clause as a source of
congressional authority has long been supported on a bipartisan
basis. Since the House began requiring bill sponsors to
identify the constitutional authority for their proposed
legislation in recent years, Members have cited the Elections
Clause as the authority for their legislation more than 230
times. That includes scores of measures introduced by
Republican Members, many of which would have required States to
take certain steps in how they conduct their elections or
prohibited certain activities.
In the last Congress, my colleague, Ranking Member Davis,
introduced legislation to deny Federal election grants to
States that permit third-party individuals or groups to return
voters' completed ballots to election officials. In doing so,
he cited, as the sole constitutional authority to his
legislation, the Elections Clause of the Constitution.
But this authority can be used to empower States and
citizens to make voting easier, safer, and more secure while
ensuring that suppressive tactics and plans may not be used to
limit or deny access to the ballot box.
For example, Congress has endeavored to enact new democracy
reforms, including H.R. 1, the For the People Act, under its
Elections Clause powers, as well as other constitutional
provisions. H.R. 1 would help remedy ongoing voter suppression
efforts across States, just as the Framers intended.
Far from the Federal takeover of elections, as claimed by
some critics, H.R. 1 typifies an appropriate exercise of
congressional authority.
This hearing provides a rare opportunity to explore the
contours of the Elections Clause and the sweeping
constitutional powers it provides Congress to enact
transformational democracy legislation, like H.R. 1.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today.
I understand Mr. Davis is on assignment today, may be
joining us later, but I believe Mr. Steil will be offering his
opening statement.
So, Mr. Steil, you are now recognized for five minutes.
[The statement of The Chairperson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.
Today's hearing is titled ``The Elections Clause:
Constitutional Interpretation and Congressional Exercise.''
This is really a hearing that our Committee should have had
before we had hearings on elections administration, before the
drafting and introduction and passage of H.R. 1, and before the
drafting and introduction of H.R. 4 last Congress.
Article I, Section 4 of the Constitution clearly gives
States the primary role in establishing--and I quote--``The
Times, Places, and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and
Representatives.'' Under the Constitution, Congress has a
purely secondary role in this space.
This is evident from the way it is written--the States are
listed first, and Congress is listed second. Under H.R. 1 and
H.R. 4, Congress is clearly outside these constitutional
bounds.
These bills prevent any State from establishing the time,
place, and manner in which elections are held by establishing a
nationalized election system run by bureaucrats in Washington,
D.C.
And while we are on the subject of H.R. 4, the Supreme
Court ruled this month that States have the power to protect
the integrity of their elections through thoughtful, considered
legislation, making it easy to vote and hard to cheat.
In the case against Arizona, the Court upheld the State's
power to ban the use of third-party ballot harvesting. Justice
Alito's opinion stated, quote, ``One strong and entirely
legitimate State interest is the prevention of fraud. Fraud can
affect the outcome in a close election, and fraudulent votes
dilute the rights of citizens to cast ballots that carry
appropriate weight. Fraud can also undermine public confidence
in the fairness of elections and the perceived legitimacy of
the announced outcome,'' end quote.
Public confidence in our elections is something I, as
Ranking Member on the Subcommittee on Elections, am focused on.
Ranking Member of the Committee Rodney Davis is leading the way
with his Faith in Elections Project.
We have seen this issue in North Carolina. The results of a
congressional race were tossed because of fraud resulting from
ballot harvesting. California has had issues as well. We have
seen it in Madison, Wisconsin.
Despite the well-documented fraud cases with ballot
harvesting, H.R. 1 legalizes this practice nationwide. And
according to Democrats, prohibition of ballot harvesting by a
State is by definition discrimination.
Fortunately, the Supreme Court ruled this is not the case.
Instead, the Court ruled that intent and the totality of a
State's voting system matters.
Justice Alito noted that merely implementing voting
structures intended to bolster voter confidence, such as rules
to increase ballot integrity, does not equal discrimination,
which is what my Democratic colleagues continue to claim.
Not only does the recent Supreme Court ruling invalidate my
Democratic colleagues' claim, but this Committee's record has
demonstrated this as well.
During multiple hearings, my Democratic colleagues have
claimed that voter ID is used to suppress votes. However, the
data clearly disputes this. Contrary to the Democrats' claim
that voter ID requirements lower voter turnout, States with
voter ID laws saw record turnout in the 2020 election.
I thought I would take this opportunity during a remote
hearing to take everyone on the Committee to rural America.
While I haven't found a Kinko's, the Vice President of the
United States may be very interested to learn that I can
confirm folks in rural Wisconsin and rural communities across
the United States have running water, have electricity.
I found this new invention that I don't think was there
when then-Vice President Biden first ran for Senate, but is
available now here in rural America, and it is called a camera
phone. It is amazing. And it is a camera and a phone, and it
can take a photo of an ID and can be submitted electronically.
Shocking, I know.
Now, it may not have come to San Francisco, so Vice
President Kamala Harris may not be as familiar, but I would
encourage everyone to check out these new camera phones that
can be used to provide enhanced integrity in our elections for
people voting by mail remotely in rural America.
Additionally, the data used by Democratic witnesses is
flawed.
During a hearing earlier this year, Democratic witness Dr.
Nazita Lajevardi stated that minority participation in the 2016
election was less than the 2012 election and claimed this was
due to voter suppression.
However, she admitted that her analysis relied on self-
reported voter information from online surveys to reach her
conclusion, not a scientific poll, and essentially reverse
engineered her desired result.
And further, during that Committee hearing I pointed out
that her study did not control for the difference in candidacy
between Barack Obama and the historically terrible candidacy of
Hillary Clinton.
While my Democratic colleagues invited many college
professors to participate in these hearings on H.R. 1 or voter
suppression, they invited no election officials who had
administered elections.
Republicans, on the other hand, have invited multiple
election administrators, including our witness today, the
Kentucky Secretary of State, Michael Adams--and I am
appreciative of you joining us here--and together these
individuals have decades of experience in election
administration, and each one of them have or will testify about
how bad H.R. 1 is for States.
They have repeatedly stressed that mandates throughout H.R.
1 will not work in their jurisdictions, they would be
incredibly costly to implement, and they could even make
elections less secure.
In contrast, the only two election officials the majority
invited had never administered elections prior to testifying.
It is my hope that after a thorough review of the
Committee's record and the recent Supreme Court decisions,
Democrats will abandon their efforts to circumvent the
Constitution and nationalize our elections.
It is clear our election system works best when those
closest to the people are setting the rules for administering
the elections, not unelected bureaucrats in Washington--just as
our Founding Fathers wrote in Article I, Section 4 of the
Constitution.
Madam Chairperson, I yield back. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Steil follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairperson. The gentleman yields back.
And all other Members are invited to submit opening
statements for the record.
We have a very distinguished panel to hear from today, and
I would like to welcome each of them and thank them for
participating.
First, we have Professor Jack Rakove, who is the William
Robertson Coe Professor of history and American studies and
Professor of political science and law at Stanford University,
where he has taught since 1980.
He is a constitutional historian whose principal areas of
research include the origins of the American Revolution and the
Constitution, the political practice and theory of James
Madison, and the role of historical knowledge in constitutional
litigation.
He is the author of six books, including ``Original
Meanings: Politics and Ideas in the Making of the
Constitution,'' which won the Pulitzer Prize in history.
He is a member of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, and a past
president of the Society for the History of the Early American
Republic.
He obtained his Ph.D. in history from Harvard University
and his bachelor's in history from Haverford College.
Next we have Vice Dean Franita Tolson, who is Vice Dean for
faculty at the USC Gould School of Law and is a nationally
recognized expert in election law.
Her scholarship and teaching focus on the areas of election
law, constitutional law, legal history and employment
litigation, political parties, the Elections Clause, the Voting
Rights Act of 1965, and the 14th and 15th Amendments.
Dean Tolson received her J.D. from the University of
Chicago Law School and clerked for the Honorable Ann Claire
Williams of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh
Circuit and the Honorable Ruben Castillo of the United States
District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.
In 2019, her journal article titled ``The Elections Clause
and the Underenforcement of Federal Law'' appeared in the Yale
Law Journal forum, and which examined the broad powers
conferred under the Elections Clause and the underutilization
of such powers by Congress and the constitutionality of H.R. 1.
This year, Dean Tolson's forthcoming book, ``In Congress We
Trust?: Enforcing Voting Rights from the Founding to the Jim
Crow Era,'' will be published by the Cambridge University
Press.
Dean Daniel Tokaji is the Dean of the University of
Wisconsin Law School and is a leading authority in the field of
election law. His scholarship addresses questions of voting
rights, free speech, and democratic inclusion.
He has published over fifty law review articles, book
chapters, and papers on a broad scope of topics. Dean Tokaji is
the author of ``Election Law in a Nutshell,'' second edition,
and coauthor of ``Election Law: Cases and Materials,'' as well
as ``The New Soft Money.''
Previously, the Dean served as Associate Dean for faculty
and was a professor of constitutional law at Ohio State's
Moritz College of Law, and the dean received his J.D. from Yale
Law School and clerked for the Honorable Stephen Reinhardt of
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
He is a former civil rights attorney and has worked on
various free speech, racial justice, and voting rights cases.
Last, but certainly not least, is Secretary of State
Michael Adams. Secretary Adams is Kentucky's 86th Secretary of
State, sworn into his term on January 6, 2020.
Secretary Adams established a private practice in election
law in 2007. He served as General Counsel to the Republican
Governors Association and later expanded his practice,
representing national political committees, national political
figures, and statewide campaign efforts.
In 2016, he was appointed to the Kentucky Board of
Elections. Previously, he worked on Senator Mitch McConnell's
2002 reelection, was Deputy General Counsel for Governor Ernie
Fletcher, and was appointed counsel to the U.S. Deputy Attorney
General in the Bush administration.
Secretary Adams received his J.D. from Harvard Law School
and clerked for Chief U.S. District Judge John Heyburn.
Welcome to all of you.
We will hear your verbal testimony for about five minutes.
There is a clock on the screen which will help you keep track
of the time. When your time is up, we do ask that you please
summarize. Your entire statements will be made part of the
written record.
So let me turn first to Professor Rakove.
It is great to see you, and we would certainly welcome your
testimony.

STATEMENTS OF JACK RAKOVE, COE PROFESSOR OF HISTORY AND
AMERICAN STUDIES, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY; THE HONORABLE MICHAEL G.
ADAMS, SECRETARY OF STATE, COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY; DANIEL P.
TOKAJI, FRED W. AND VI MILLER DEAN AND PROFESSOR OF LAW,
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN LAW SCHOOL; FRANITA TOLSON, PROFESSOR
OF LAW AND VICE DEAN FOR FACULTY AND ACADEMIC AFFAIRS,
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA GOULD SCHOOL OF LAW

STATEMENT OF JACK RAKOVE

Mr. Rakove. Thank you very much.
First off, I would like to thank Chairperson Lofgren,
Ranking Member Davis, and the other Members of this Committee
for this opportunity to discuss the origins of the Times,
Places and Manner Clause.
It is also a special pleasure for me to appear before my
former student, Congresswoman Scanlon, whose law school
recommendation I wrote more years ago than she and I would like
to remember.
The principal concern of my written statement lies with the
original intentions of the Framers of the Constitution in
drafting the Times, Places and Manner Clause. There are four
main conclusions that I wish to present.
First, a reconstruction of the drafting of this clause
indicates that we should indeed read it expansively. Not only
does it give Congress broad authority to correct identifiable
defects in the conduct of congressional elections within the
States, it also empowers Congress to use its legislative power
creatively, to draw upon lessons of experience to design an
optimal manner of conducting Federal elections.
In its original form, the clause first appeared at the
midpoint of the Federal Convention where the Committee of
Detail proposed it as a response to the problem of asking: What
should happen should one or more States default on their
obligation to provide for the election of Members of Congress?
That could occur, for example, if the two houses of a State
legislature simply failed to agree on an election law. But it
could also occur when a State willfully tried to sabotage the
national government.
Knowing the prior history of the Articles of Confederation,
when the States had often fallen short of fulfilling their
Federal duties, the Framers of the Constitution had legitimate
reasons to worry about allowing Federal elections to become
wholly dependent on the voluntary compliance of the State
legislatures.
Second, this reading gains additional authority when we
examine the most detailed speech on the clause, which James
Madison gave on August 9, 1787, the one day the clause was
actively debated.
That debate occurred when two South Carolina delegates
argued that there was no need for any congressional review or
alteration of State regulation of Federal elections.
Madison gave the principal refutation of this motion.
Precisely because times, places, and manners were, Madison
said, words of great latitude, he argued they would be subject
to, quote, ``all the abuses that might be made of this
discretionary power.''
State legislatures, which had their own favorite measure to
carry, could well mold the regulations to favor the candidates
they wished to succeed. And if there were inequalities in the
allocation of seats within the State legislatures, these may
also be replicated in the design of congressional districts.
All these potential sources of abuse, therefore, justified
congressional oversight and revision. The other Framers
evidently agreed, because the South Carolina motion was
rejected without even a roll call.
But in the third place, Madison's speech also identified
the real problems that the Framers faced in designing a system
of national political representation.
Here is Madison's list of problems: whether the electors
should vote by ballot or viva voce; should assemble at this
place or that place; should be divided into districts or all
meet at one place; should all vote for all the Representatives
or all in a district vote for a number allotted to the
district; these and many other points would depend on the
legislatures and might materially affect the appointments.
I believe it is important for members of this Committee to
know that there was no precedent in Anglo-American history for
the kind of representative system the Framers were designing.
The American Colonies' and States' representative seats were
routinely assigned to townships and counties when they were
legally organized.
That principle of community representation would never work
in the extensive and expanding American Republic. Congressional
districts, as the Framers conceived them, would be wholly
arbitrary political entities. The State legislatures would have
to be created de novo and would likely alter with every
decennial census.
As Madison makes clear, the manner of holding elections
embraced everything from the actual method of voting to
deciding exactly what kind of constituency was to be
represented.
Given the novelties of that concept, the clause effectively
empowers Congress to examine how the system of political
representation is working or not working in the clause's own
language at any time.
Fourth and finally, when Americans in the Revolutionary era
thought about political representation, there was, however, one
maxim that consistently guided their thinking. It was the idea
first stated by John Adams in 1776, repeated by others
afterwards, including at the Constitutional Convention, that a
legislative assembly should be a mirror miniature portrait or
transcript of the larger society.
As Adams put it, it should be an equal representation, or,
in other words, equal interest among the people should have
equal interest in it.
Of course, the Founders' conception of who constituted
political society was hardly identifiable with ours but in
their times, this was still a remarkably democratic vision of
what a popular government should look like.
Their idea of equal interest is not very different from the
one-person, one-vote principle that has guided modern American
thinking about representation since the 1960s. It implies that
the true goal of democratic politics is equitable inclusion,
not overt distortion or exclusion.
The Times, Places and Manner Clause invites Congress to
think boldly about how to attain that end, which is, in fact,
part of the process of forming a more perfect Union.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Mr. Rakove follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairperson. Thank you very much, Professor.
Now I would like to call on Dean Tolson for her testimony.

STATEMENT OF FRANITA TOLSON

Ms. Tolson. Thank you very much.
To Chairperson Lofgren, Ranking Member Davis, and
distinguished Members of the committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to appear and speak about the scope of
congressional power under the Elections Clause of Article I,
Section 4, which is a vast source of power, but has,
nonetheless, been significantly underutilized.
Now, under the clause, States, as we know, can set
procedural regulations for Federal elections; but, importantly,
Congress can implement, quote, ``a complete code for Federal
elections,'' end quote. And this code can supplement or,
alternatively, displace the State regulatory regime,
particularly if States have jeopardized the health and vitality
of Federal elections in some way.
Under the clause, Congress can make or alter State law.
Congress can also commandeer State law, State officials, and
State offices to implement Federal law. In certain
circumstances, Congress can regulate voter qualification
standards.
By invoking a number of constitutional provisions that
empower Congress to regulate the times, places, and manner of
Federal elections, as well as regulate voter qualification
standards, H.R. 1 stands on firm constitutional footing
because, first, provisions similar to those in H.R. 1 have
already been validated by Supreme Court case law and by prior
congressional classes.
And, second, Congress' authority to enact Federal voting
rights legislation is substantially broader when it acts
pursuant to the Elections Clause, as well as the 14th and 15th
Amendments, than when proceeding under the latter two
amendments alone.
Despite the Elections Clause's untapped potential, it has
not been a source of much Federal legislation, which
contributes to this perception that H.R. 1 is unprecedented
and, therefore, unconstitutional. It is not.
For example, a 1932 Supreme Court decision held that voter
registration for Federal elections is a manner regulation under
the Elections Clause, a holding that the Court reaffirmed as
recently as 2013. So H.R. 1's voter changes are not
constitutionally problematic.
In addition, Congress can commandeer State offices and
State officials to implement Elections Clause legislation, as
it has in statutes like the National Voter Registration Act,
which creates voter registration agencies out of all offices in
the State that provide either public assistance or State-funded
programs. Courts have found these provisions to be
constitutional, illustrating that those portions of H.R. 1 that
impose additional obligations on State officials with respect
to voter registration are also constitutionally sound.
Moreover, the Supreme Court in a 2015 decision has upheld
the use of independent commissions to draw congressional
districts, thereby validating H.R. 1's use of these commissions
for Federal elections.
Given these precedents, these provisions of H.R. 1 are
arguably constitutional. There will, nonetheless, be inevitable
constitutional objections to provisions of H.R. 1 that touch on
voter qualifications, which are usually within the State's
domain, and in particular the fact that H.R. 1 reenfranchises
those with felony convictions for purposes of voting in Federal
elections.
However, these concerns are also unfounded. Under the
Elections Clause, there are limited circumstances in which
Congress can reach voter qualifications, particularly in
instances where State regulations discourage or unduly impact
voter turnout in Federal elections.
For example, the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee
Voting Act, or UOCAVA, enacted solely pursuant to the Elections
Clause, created a uniform Federal ballot specifically for use
by military personnel and incorporated State voter
qualification standards to determine which personnel were
entitled to vote.
Congress enacted UOCAVA to address an exigency that
threatened the health and legitimacy of Federal elections;
namely, the disenfranchisement of a category of military voters
overlooked and insufficiently protected by State law.
But when the Elections Clause is coupled with Congress'
power under the 14th and 15th Amendments, both of which are
also invoked as explicit authority for H.R. 1, then Congress'
authority to reach voter qualifications is even more
indisputable.
H.R. 1 will prohibit States from barring individuals no
longer in custody from exercising their fundamental right to
vote in Federal elections as protected by the 14th and 15th
Amendments. As it stands, millions of people--a category that
is, unsurprisingly, disproportionately minority, given the
racist status of these laws generally--are disenfranchised for
hundreds of different felonies and misdemeanor offenses.
As the Supreme Court has recognized, Congress has the power
under the Elections Clause to, quote, ``protect the elections
in which its existence depends,'' and, quote, ``to protect the
citizen and the exercise of rights conferred by the
Constitution of the United States essential to the healthy
organization of the government itself,'' end quote. H.R. 1's
felon disenfranchisement provisions serve this exact purpose.
As these judicial and statutory precedents establish, most
of H.R. 1's provisions do not approach the outer limit of
Congress' power under the Elections Clause which empowers that
body to, again, make or alter State law, to commandeer State
law, State officials, and State offices, and, especially when
coupled with Congress' power under the 14th and 15th
Amendments, to regulate voter qualification standards.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to discuss my
research. I welcome any questions that you have.
[The statement of Ms. Tolson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairperson. Thank you very much, Dean.
Now we will turn to the other dean, Dean Tokaji for your
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL P. TOKAJI

Mr. Tokaji. Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and thank you,
Ranking Member Davis, Representative Steil from my State, the
great State of Wisconsin, and the other honorable members of
this Committee.
My name is Dan Tokaji, and I am the Dean at the University
of Wisconsin Law School. My primary research is in the area of
election law, and I have written on Congress' power under the
Elections Clause before.
In a word, one that the U.S. Supreme Court has used
repeatedly for around 142 years, Congress' power over
congressional elections under this clause is paramount. Under
the unambiguous text of the Elections Clause and a long line of
Supreme Court precedent, Congress has broad plenary authority
over the time, place, and manner of conducting congressional
elections.
The most recent explication of this principle was Justice
Scalia's opinion for seven Justices in Arizona v. Inter Tribal
Council of Arizona, back in 2013, where he referred to the
broad and comprehensive scope of Congress' Elections Clause
power.
In the remainder of my testimony, I will provide some
background on what the Elections Clause means and how it has
been construed by the Supreme Court.
So, the Elections Clause, the text of which Madam
Chairwoman read earlier, allows States to prescribe rules for
the conduct of congressional elections, but only insofar as
Congress declines to preempt State legislative choices, as the
Court said in Foster v. Love.
As Justice Scalia explained in Arizona v. ITCA, this grant
of congressional power to Congress was insurance against the
possibility that States would try to undermine the Union by
either failing to have procedures for congressional elections
or for having ones that were inadequate.
As he put it, quoting the Federalist Papers, the State
legislatures otherwise could at any moment annihilate it--that
is, the Federal Government--by neglecting to provide for a
choice of a person to administer its affairs.
Congress has exercised its broad power to regulate Federal
elections repeatedly, through the 1842 Apportionment Act, the
post-Civil War Enforcement Acts of 1870 and 1871, and, more
recently, through the National Voter Registration Act and the
Help America Vote Act.
I won't go through all the precedent that supports these
and other laws in which Congress has previously exercised its
Elections Clause power, but I will hit a few highlights.
The first big case was Ex parte Siebold, in 1879, a case
involving the Reconstruction-era Enforcement Acts, and in that
case the Court said that Congress may exercise its power as it
sees fit and that, quote, ``When exercised, the action of
Congress so far as it extends and conflicts with the
regulations of the State necessarily supersedes them.''
In Smiley v. Holm, in 1932, the Court went on to say that
Congress may provide a complete code for congressional
elections if it wishes, which includes registration,
supervision of voting, protection of voters, prevention of
fraud and corrupt practices, counting of votes, duties of
inspectors and canvassers, and making and publishing of
election returns.
Now, there was a time in the early 20th century where the
Court said that the Elections Clause didn't reach primary
elections, but that was reversed in the United States v.
Classic case in 1941 where the Court clarified that indeed the
Elections Clause does allow Congress to reach primaries as well
as general elections.
That power under the Elections Clause, of course, like any
power, isn't unlimited. The Court in the U.S. Term Limits case
says that the power doesn't include the power to dictate
election outcomes, to favor or disfavor a class of candidates,
or to evade important----
Mr. Tokaji. Thank you.
But Congress does, as the Court clarified in Arizona v.
ITCA, have very broad power, and as Justice Scalia explained,
this power is broader than under other clauses of the
Constitution.
There is good reason for treating Elections Clause
legislation differently and more favorably from laws enacted
under other congressional powers because Congress, in the
Elections Clause area, Congress isn't acting in a place where
the States had preexisting authority before the Constitution.
Now, there is a question of where Congress' Elections
Clause power ends and the Qualifications Clause power begins,
which I am happy to address in my response. But the bottom line
is that Supreme Court precedent confirms that the Elections
Clause means what it says--that Congress has the broad power to
make or alter the rules governing the time, place, and manner
of conducting congressional elections.
Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
[The statement of Mr. Tokaji follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairperson. Thank you very much, Dean.
Last we have Secretary of State Michael Adams.
Thank you for joining us, Secretary Adams, and you are now
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL G. ADAMS

Mr. Adams. Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson and Members
of the committee. Good afternoon. I am Michael Adams,
Kentucky's Secretary of State. It is an honor to be with you
today.
I understand the topic of discussion is the Elections
Clause of our Constitution. Any day that Congress spends
considering the text and intent of our Constitution is a good
day, and I wish you every success. My purpose here is to
address policy concerns with Congress increasing Congress' role
in elections for Congress.
First, some background. I took office last year, and the
elections I supervised as my State's chief election official
all took place amid the pandemic. I asked our legislature for
and received emergency powers, to be shared with our Democratic
Governor, to permit us to implement temporary changes to our
election system to ensure public safety, voter access, and
election security. We expanded absentee voting, and we
established early voting for the first time in Kentucky
history.
In the days before our June 2020 primary election, Kentucky
was singled out in a national campaign of harassment and hate,
with false accusations of voter suppression. Our phones were
clogged with angry callers from Washington, D.C., California,
and New York cursing at us, sometimes threatening violence.
This was directed at us by celebrities on Twitter, including a
certain Member of Congress who now chairs the Senate committee
analogous to yours.
When the dust settled, however, Kentucky had conducted the
most successful election in America at that point in the
pandemic--safe, orderly, and with high turnout. Kentuckians
knew better how to run an election in Kentucky than did the
national media or national politicians.
The expanded voting reforms and enhanced security measures
we implemented proved so successful and so popular that our
legislature just made most of them permanent, with the votes in
both chambers bipartisan and nearly unanimous.
Kentucky is the national leader this year in election
reform. But we are not alone. Bipartisan legislation expanding
voting opportunities has passed in Louisiana and Vermont too.
Why was Kentucky able to pass a bipartisan election reform
measure, the most significant modernization of our system since
1981, that made it both easier to vote and harder to cheat,
that had widespread support across the political divide? Why
did Louisiana and Vermont follow suit? Well, because you did
not stop us. You allowed democracy to work.
There are two lessons here.
One, Kentucky knows best what is best for Kentucky, and I
would urge you to let Kentucky be Kentucky, let Louisiana be
Louisiana, and Vermont be Vermont, and respect the laboratories
of democracy that lead to innovation in a decentralized
election system.
Vermont passed mail-in voting that reflects their political
culture. In Kentucky, even with expanded absentee voting--and
even in a pandemic--most voters last year, including most
Democrats, voted in person. That reflects our political
culture.
The second lesson is that election policy should be made
not by a caucus, not by a think tank, but by election
administrators who work in a bipartisan fashion.
Bipartisanship not only leads to a better product, with
concerns on both sides accomplished, it also shows voters on
both sides that the rules are not being rigged to favor one
party over another.
I understand the concern many of you have with State
legislatures acting in a partisan fashion in passing election
legislation, and I would encourage you to avoid doing the same
thing yourselves. Do not be victims of a false narrative.
I don't agree with every election law that has been offered
by some Republican State legislators, but the reality on the
ground is more complicated and far better than what you are
hearing about here in this Beltway echo chamber.
The desire to accuse red States, especially Southern ones,
of voter suppression is so strong that media outlets covering
Kentucky's achievement are rewriting their own coverage to fit
that narrative.
On April 8, CNN reported, ``Kentucky Governor Beshear signs
into law bipartisan elections bill expanding voting access.''
On June 30, CNN reported, ``Seventeen States have enacted
28 laws making it harder to vote,'' and included Kentucky in
their count.
On April 8, The Washington Post reported, ``Democratic
Governor in deep-red Kentucky signs bill to expand voting.''
On June 2l, The Washington Post included Kentucky in their
list of 17 States that allegedly were undermining democracy.
The cognitive dissonance is so strong that these outlets
don't even accept facts from their own reporting when it
contradicts this narrative.
Our politics has grown increasingly harsh, even dangerous,
the more our big decisions are federalized rather than resolved
at the State and local levels. I urge you to respect the
diversity of our country and the majesty of our 50 different
but well-functioning election systems.
Thank you so much.
[The statement of Mr. Adams follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairperson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
We now come to the time when Members of the committee may
ask questions for five minutes. I will turn first to
Congressman Raskin, who is also a constitutional law professor.
So, Mr. Raskin, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Madam Chairperson, thank you so much for
calling this important hearing, and thanks to all the witnesses
for their testimony.
Dean Tokaji, let me start with you.
In American history, States have sometimes been in the
forefront of expanding and defending the franchise. I know that
New Jersey gave women the right to vote at the very beginning
of the Republic. But at the same time, the States have often
been in the forefront of disenfranchising people with, like,
literacy tests, poll taxes, grandfather clauses, other attempts
to disenfranchise.
So what do you make of the claim we just heard from
Secretary Adams that we should just trust the States and let
Kentucky be Kentucky and let New York be New York and let every
State be itself? Is that consistent with how we have respected
voting rights over the last century, for example?
Mr. Tokaji. Thank you so much for that question,
Representative Raskin.
There are two important principles here, and we have to
recognize both of them.
States are, of course, laboratories of democracy. It is a
great thing about our federalist system that States can
experiment, as they so often do and that includes experimenting
with election reforms, like same-day registration. A number of
States have experimented with and have proved quite successful
in making it more convenient to vote and increasing turnout.
On the other hand, there is a competing principle, which is
that, in the end, Congress must have the authority to regulate
congressional elections, and that includes regulating to
protect the fundamental right to vote, as it has sometimes had
to do.
The first noteworthy example of this, or at least one of
the first, are the Enforcement Acts, which Dean Tolson has
written about in her scholarship and has addressed in her
testimony.
In the Reconstruction period it was absolutely vital for
Congress to exercise its authority under the Elections Clause,
as well as the 14th and 15th Amendments to the United States,
in order to protect the voting rights of newly freed African
Americans. And so, too, after the appalling disenfranchisement
of African Americans that took place after Reconstruction and
throughout most of the 20th century, it was, again, necessary
for Congress to act, in part under its Elections Clause
authority, to protect the right to vote.
So, yes, we do want States to be laboratories of democracy.
At the same time, Congress has to have the ability to protect
the right to vote, particularly in Federal elections, as the
Elections Clause allows.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you for that.
Dean Tolson and Professor Rakove, I want to go to the other
point that was raised by Secretary Adams about election
administrators. So I guess it is two parts.
One, what do you make of the claim that we should really
delegate this decision to election administrators, that they
are a better judge of what America needs in terms of voting
than, say, the representatives of the people in Congress, in
the House and the Senate?
I was struck by that, especially when the good witness said
let Kentucky be Kentucky. There is no one more powerful than
his U.S. Senator, Mitch McConnell, in all of Congress. I don't
think he has got to worry about Kentucky's point of view being
represented in Congress.
But, in any event, I noticed there is an attack on election
administrators going on. I mean, we saw that in 2020 when
Donald Trump literally was calling election administrators and
telling them to revise their vote totals. Most famously, of
course, he called the Secretary of State in Georgia, Brad
Raffensperger, and said, ``Just go find me 11,781 votes. That
is all I am looking for.''
And then, after that appalling attempt at election fraud
was exposed to the whole world, rather than everybody
apologizing for it, running from it, and trying to figure out
what we could do to protect election administrators, now there
is an effort to displace him and run somebody against him so
they have a sufficiently sycophantic and subservient Secretary
of State in Georgia. It is absolutely amazing to watch that.
But what about the idea that these increasingly partisan
election officials who are being targeted around the country
should be deferred to in terms of the voting rights of the
people?
And, Dean Tolson, start with you, and then Professor
Rakove.
Ms. Tolson. Okay. Thank you so much for that question,
Representative.
I do think that I appreciate Secretary Adams' point,
because the States are important laboratories, but sometimes
they are actually laboratories that produce some of the most
disenfranchising measures in our history.
So if you look at the Mississippi Constitution of 1890,
that is a Constitution where a State substantially
disenfranchised most of the African Americans within the State,
and other Southern governments followed suit, mimicking
Mississippi's efforts. So, yes, the laboratory point is well
taken, but at the same time, States sometimes use their
laboratories for ill.
I look at H.R. 1 as a list of best practices. So, it is a
list of things that will further a national conception of
democracy.
To some extent, democracy cannot be a State-level
conception. We must have some sense of who we are as a national
democracy if we are going to hold ourselves out as a democracy.
I think H.R. 1 furthers that goal while leaving election
administrators sufficient discretion over the election
apparatus within the State.
Mr. Raskin. Madam Chairperson, my time is up. Would it be
okay if Professor Rakove just addressed my question?
The Chairperson. Sure.
Mr. Rakove. I don't really have very much to add to the
discussion beyond noting that in the founding years, the whole
idea of having bureaucracy was itself also something of an
innovation.
I mean, I think the best way to think about this is from
kind of a quasi-originalist perspective, simply to recognize
that the fundamental conflict would have--or the fundamental
tension would have been seen as one involving two levels of the
legislatures. The idea that you would actually have anything
like a Secretary of State at the State level responsible for
administering elections, obviously extremely common today,
would have been an anomaly in that period.
So, the basic tension that Madison and others were worried
about was the idea of the political motivations working really
at the legislative level more than at the bureaucratic level.
The Chairperson. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will now turn to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk for five minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, thank you, Madam Chairperson. I
appreciate everyone being a part of this hearing today.
The first thing before we get into my questions, I think we
need to separate the argument that we are having over the
constitutionality of Congress' ability to set the times, place,
and manner.
There are really two issues that are being conflated in
this argument.
The first is the qualification of electors. And that is
very specific within the Constitution, and our Founders and the
courts have upheld that the Constitution establishes clearly
the qualification of electors.
And this is a lot of the argument I am hearing, and a lot
of the Court cases have upheld that, yes, the Federal Congress
has the ability, through the Constitution, to establish who the
electors can be, and the States do not have the ability to
usurp that, because that is set in the Constitution. It has
been upheld several times.
The second aspect of the argument is the times, places, and
manner, which our Founders said should be taken literally. The
British system was very broad when it talked about time,
places, and manner. It included electors in that system. Our
Founders, through their debates in the Constitution and in the
Federalist Papers, were very specific on the time, places, and
manner.
As it was brought up earlier, yes, Hamilton made the
argument that every government ought to contain within itself
the means of its own preservation.
The reason for this was, during the ratification of the
Constitution, the Anti-Federalists and those who were opposed
to this provision believed that factions or parties, as we
would call it today, could manipulate election laws so they
could stay in office indefinitely. That was their argument.
Hamilton, however, a quote that comes out of the Federalist
that I haven't heard quoted here today, clarified that. After
he said every government ought to have--ought to contain within
itself the means of its own preservation, he argued that the
provision was a reasonable compromise that gave Congress
default or secondary powers that would be exercised--and here
is the quote--``whenever extraordinary circumstances might
render that interposition necessary to its safety.''
So what Hamilton is saying is the States have the primary
power, that Congress only has a secondary or default power. And
his argument was in case of States setting times, places, and
manners to where they would not fulfill the seats for Congress,
that they could manipulate, they could hold Congress hostage
per se if they didn't.
And that was the secondary argument that they were making,
and that is why Congress has that secondary power, not the
primary.
Yes, the Federal Government has a primary on qualification
of electors, and this is getting convoluted in the argument
here, and so I think we need to separate that. And the
Republicans' argument here is not with the qualification of
electors. Our argument is that, would the States provide or
hold the primary responsibility for times, places, and manners?
With that, Secretary Adams, as you know, according to
Article I, Section 4, as we have been talking about through all
of this, the time, places and manners, as I have laid out, that
the States have the primary responsibility for setting that.
But even still, many of my colleagues on this committee and
others are pushing this Article I, which is a national takeover
of elections, which would, in my opinion, circumvent the true
intent of our Founders and our Constitution.
My question is, how would this one-size-fits-all approach
impact the election administration across the country? Let's
say especially in Kentucky. Look at the provisions that would
substantially--potentially substantially change how you hold
elections in Kentucky.
Mr. Adams. Well, thank you, Congressman.
Let me give you a pretty riveting example. Back in
December, as I was drafting my election reform measure for
Kentucky, the biggest change of our system, modernization of
our system since 1891, we made absentee voting easier, we
expanded early voting, and so forth, I had a meeting with a
high-level official in our State NAACP. And to my surprise, he
told me, ``Secretary Adams, please don't expand mail-in
voting.'' He said, ``My community doesn't want that.''
And that really struck me, that you think of, for example,
mail-in voting--which, by the way, I am not here to support or
oppose. It is just, should that be implemented from outside of
our State on our State because of what other States like?
Look, if Utah wants it, that is great for them. I respect
that. But in Kentucky, African Americans want to vote in
person, Democrats want to vote in person, everybody does. That
is our culture. We are just different. That is our tradition,
and that is how people feel like they have a voice. And so I
think we have to respect that. The best way to do that is to
let each State do it their own way.
Mr. Loudermilk. All right. Thank you.
I see my time has expired, and I will submit my other
questions for the record.
Let me just say in response to your answer there, we know
historically by far in-person voting is the most secure. That
is why many people prefer to do that. Much more secure than
mail-in voting. And traditionally that is where we have seen
the largest amount of fraud.
With that, Madam Chairperson, I yield back.
The Chairperson. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Let me thank you very much, Madam
Chairperson, for convening this very important hearing today.
And certainly thank you to the witnesses for your
testimony.
And it is good to see all of my colleagues. I look forward
to our return to Washington.
Madam Chairperson, as a law student many, many years ago,
as a lawyer, as a trial judge, supreme court justice, over the
years I have had many occasions to read and re-read and study
court opinions and law review articles all about the Elections
Clause. I have come to the same conclusion every time I read it
and read about it: The Elections Clause seems to me to be
unambiguous.
So, I want to begin today by asking each one of our
witnesses the very same question. Should Congress choose to
pass a regulation affecting Federal elections, do you agree or
disagree that such regulation will preempt those passed by a
State?
Let me go to each one of the witnesses. I guess I can go in
the same order that you testified.
Mr. Rakove. I am just a working historian and I would be a
little averse to offering these kinds of judgments. But, yes, I
mean, the basic answer I would offer is yes. And I see no harm
in it.
Mr. Butterfield. Is it unambiguous in your world?
Mr. Rakove. Say again?
Mr. Butterfield. Is it unambiguous----
Mr. Rakove Yes.
Mr. Butterfield [continuing]. The Elections Clause?
Mr. Rakove. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
The next witness.
Ms. Tolson. It is going to preempt contrary State laws, and
it will create new law in some places. So for those States that
already have independent commissions, for example, it wouldn't
preempt those laws because it requires it for Federal
elections. But in some cases, if there are State laws that
conflict, then absolutely preempts.
Mr. Butterfield. Sure.
Mr. Tokaji. Representative Butterfield, I do agree. It is
unambiguous that under the Elections Clause Congress has broad
plenary power over the time, place, and manner of conducting
congressional elections. And you don't have to take my word for
it. That is what Justice Scalia wrote in the Arizona v. ITCA
opinion reaffirming over almost a century and a half of
precedent.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes.
Secretary Adams, before you respond, you noted in your
testimony that you were testifying today primarily about
policy; in other words, on whether Congress, whether we should
pass election legislation.
And for the sake of clarity, when it comes to the narrow
and legal question of whether Congress can pass legislation--
and that is what my first question is about--would you agree
that the Elections Clause gives us, Congress, broad and
expansive authority to regulate congressional elections,
putting aside the policy concerns?
Mr. Adams. Well, I think that is kind of a subjective
question with kind of a subjective answer. Clearly, there are
certain things Congress could do that would go beyond its
authority. There are guardrails in our constitutional system.
We are a system of dual sovereignty, States and the Congress.
We have seen that time and time again in Supreme Court
decisions. For example, Congress can't require States to do
Medicaid and they can't take away their----
Mr. Butterfield. What about mail-in voting? What about
mail-in voting? Do we have that authority?
Mr. Adams. If I could finish my answer.
There are limits on what Congress can tell the States to
do, how much they can commandeer them, whether they can require
them to do certain things in exchange for Federal funds.
So if you are asking do I think that you have significant
authority, I certainly think that you do, but it is not
unlimited.
Mr. Butterfield. Does that include mail-in voting?
Mr. Adams. I can't tell you that I have researched this
issue. Perhaps the other scholars have. I don't know that you
do or don't----
Mr. Butterfield. You mentioned a moment ago that African
Americans in Kentucky want to vote in person. How did you
arrive at that conclusion?
Mr. Adams. Well, a couple of things. One, I was told that
by a high-ranking official of the State NAACP, which----
Mr. Butterfield. And I can assure you that poll after poll
all across the country is contrary to that position. Minority
groups and all groups want the ability to vote absentee as well
as early voting.
Let me just move on if I can. My time is running out, Madam
Chairperson, let's see how much time. Twenty seconds. I don't
have enough time, Chairperson Lofgren, for my final question,
so I will yield back.
Thank you.
The Chairperson. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Steil is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. My tour
of the rural Wisconsin continues. I have not found a Kinko's,
but I find more and more people that do have access to camera
phones. It is also great to see Dean Tokaji from the University
of Wisconsin Law School, my alma mater, as well as everybody
else on today.
I would like to direct my first question if I could to
Secretary of State Michael Adams.
Ballot access and methods of voting have been subject to
several of our Election Subcommittee hearings. Some have
suggested the importance of providing a mandatory vote by mail.
Would that guarantee an increase in voter turnout in your
analysis?
Mr. Adams. Well, in Kentucky, no, I don't think that it
would. In Kentucky, again, our culture is people want to vote
in person. Before I took office, we were 98 percent vote in
person, two percent absentee, and I have certainly worked hard
to make voting as easy as possible. But I don't know that it
would make much of a difference. I think people really want to
vote in person. That is why, in Kentucky, for example, I just
quadrupled the number of days people get to go vote in person.
That is how we choose to vote.
Mr. Steil. Can I dig in on that? It seems like there are--
political cultures are different in different States how people
prefer to vote. For example, in Kentucky you may want to cast
your ballots in one manner, which may be different than Utah or
Wisconsin. Can you expound on your understanding on that point
of how different political cultures exist in different States
in the United States?
Mr. Adams. Yes. And if I could make one overall point
today, I am not here to criticize the components of H.R. 1. I
don't agree with many of them, but that is not my argument so
much. My argument is I don't want to see a Democratic or
Republican national bill change the election rules. I think
California and Colorado would be upset if the Republicans did
that when they held power.
So seats are different. Utah has a vote-by-mail system.
They are more Republican than Kentucky is, and they seem to
like that, and I don't question that at all. It is super for
them, but I don't think in Kentucky we would take to that as
equally. I think the best way to expand a franchise in
Kentucky, what we saw last year is, even though we made
absentee voting available to all people, they didn't want to
vote absentee; they wanted to vote in person, and they still
came to vote in person. So the easiest way and, actually, the
most cost-efficient way to expand access to the ballot was to
expand the number of days people could vote in person.
Mr. Steil. And so knowing our States have different
political cultures as well as very significant diversity in our
geographic footprints, is the best level of government to make
these decisions to encourage everyone to vote, make it easy to
vote and hard to cheat? Is the best level of government to deal
with that the State government or the national government?
Mr. Adams. Well, I think you just look at the record. Look
at what we have accomplished in Kentucky compared to,
respectfully, what the national government has with regard to
election administration. I am really proud of what our State's
achieved, and we can only do that because you all didn't take
over the system. You allowed us to actually have breathing
space for Democrats and Republicans to come together around the
table and pass something with almost unanimous votes. That is
something that was idealized by a Republican secretary of state
and signed into law by Democratic Governor.
Mr. Steil. So, you are a Secretary of State. You are also
an elections attorney. Could you walk us through your
interpretation of the Elections Clause? Just dive in a little
further in your testimony.
Mr. Adams. Yes. Look, I would be first to admit I have
never researched that issue in a scholarly fashion. I have
never had it pop up in a case I have had for any client of
mine. So, I don't have a whole lot to add in terms of the
history or the text of that. I think it speaks for itself.
Mr. Steil. I appreciate your testimony here today.
And, with that, Madam Chairperson, from rural America, I
yield back.
The Chairperson. The gentleman yields back.
Representative Scanlon is now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you so much. Is this coming through
okay? I am traveling myself.
The Chairperson. She is in rural Pennsylvania. So, yes, you
are coming through.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay. Thank you, Chairperson Lofgren.
And I have been anxious to have this discussion about
Article I, Section 4 and, of course, I am pleased to see my
former professor, Professor Rakove, who, as he said, we knew
each other way back in the day, longer than I care to admit,
but it is great to have him on this hearing today because, of
course, he is a preeminent national authority on the original
meanings of the Constitution. In fact, he authored a book that
won a Pulitzer Prize with that title, ``Original Meanings.'' So
I guess I would like to direct my first question to him about
the clause that we are talking about here Article I, Section 4.
We have heard an awful lot about time, place, and manner, but
the second half of that clause is what gives Congress the power
to do something different than the State legislatures choose to
do.
Can you talk about the drafting of such a clause and what
the second part of it, giving Congress the power, means with
respect to the authority that is given to States in the first
part?
Mr. Rakove. To talk briefly about the drafting, the clause
did not originate in the larger body of the Convention. It came
out of the work of the Committee of Detail, which, you know,
met between July 26 and August 6, 1787, when the Committee took
the general resolutions the Constitution had at the Convention
adopted at that point and turned them into the working text of
the Constitution.
So the idea of speaking more specifically about the conduct
of elections originated in Committee; it was only discussed on
the single day of August 9. And it was discussed primarily, not
solely, but primarily because the two South Carolina delegates
said the clause was superfluous; we should just trust the
States to do what they did.
It is worth noting in South Carolina was kind of a peculiar
State or distinctive State in the sense that they had a long
tradition of the colonial, the State legislature dominating the
politics of its State. Once they made this proposal, four or
five other delegates spoke, and they spoke pretty robustly in
opposition to it.
I think the important point I want to stress and it is--I
think it does involve thinking historically about change over
time as much as legally about decisions and enactments, is to
realize that, you know, this was a deeply experimental process.
There was no example of designing the kind of national
political system that the Framers were creating.
In my written statement, I talk a bit about the British
practice, which is, you know, two knights for every shire or
county and then give Parliamentary representation done on a
corporate basis, but there is no idea of having expanding
electorate of the kind that Americans were bound to have. And
there was a lot of genuine uncertainty in the very beginning
about, you know, were we going to represent the States, you
know, as aggregate constituencies? Pennsylvania voted--in
Pennsylvania in 1789, you vote for the entire State delegation.
Would you do it by districts with voters in individual
districts? Vote for Representatives from each district in the
State? These were all the possibilities.
So I think the important thing to stress, you know,
Congresswoman Scanlon, is that there was a strong prospective
dimension and indeed a kind of experimental dimension to the
clause, the idea that you would learn more about how the
national political system would work on the basis of
experience. That experience would also include the question of
whether issues of discrimination as we think about them now but
for which there were--there was an 18th century way to think
about this, that you have an equal interest in society should
be equally represented in the legislature. In some ways, that
is a very modern notion as well.
So I think thinking about the second half or the latter
part of the clause in these terms I think would be really
helpful. It is not just about protecting the States; it is
about, aren't--there better models of national representation
broadly defined that Congress would want to accept.
Ms. Scanlon. Well, I mean, coming from Pennsylvania, where
over the past decade we have had a number of different voter ID
laws, gerrymandering, et cetera, with a Republican legislature
where the house majority leader was recorded saying that many
of these provisions were implemented in order for his party to
retain power, that seems to be like the very type of conduct
that the Framers were rightly skeptical of. And as we are
hearing about, you know, States having certain cultures of
voting, we also know that certain communities have cultures of
voting. Take, for example, the Black community that has a
tradition of voting on Sunday after church, and we have
recently seen some State legislatures try to undermine that
tradition of voting.
So I guess just finally I was interested in what you wrote
about Madison and the skepticism of the types of activities
they were afraid that State legislatures might undertake,
including closing polling places or preferring certain voters
over other types of voters. I don't know if we can get an
answer to that, but I will yield back because I see my time has
expired.
The Chairperson. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I recognize the gentlelady from New Mexico for her five
minutes. Unmute, though.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. There we go. Thank you, Chairperson
Lofgren, and our witnesses for their important discussion on
the constitutionality of Federal voting laws.
Professor Rakove, you discussed how the Founders so
eloquently described the need to protect the ability of voters
to elect a Representative for assembly that in John Adams words
was a miniature, an exact portrait of the people at large of
the country. You discussed how that representation might not be
what it is today, but today it is supposed to be every citizen
whether they be Native American, Black, Latino, whatever,
right, that they need to be able to elect Representatives that
reflect them, and our concern is that that is not happening,
that the restrictions in terms that are being enacted really
are targeted so that certain communities cannot--cannot--
succeed in getting that beautiful portrait of themselves in
Congress.
Can you explain how the Elections Clause and its history
apply to these present-day concerns? Aren't they in some ways
the concern is similar, correct?
Mr. Rakove. Well, certainly. In some ways, I would just
assume to defer to my two colleagues who have written so much
about the periods of discrimination, the practice of voting.
The phrase we heard earlier was ``laboratory''--the States
viewed as laboratories of democracy, but you could say equally,
well, the States have often served as laboratories of
discrimination. I mean, that is the whole history of the Jim
Crow era restrictions on a Black electorate once it was created
during the time of Reconstruction. The question all of us are
actively considering today, particularly in the aftermath of
the Shelby County decision, is whether we are seeing, you know,
not--obviously not a full-scale revival on the basis of what
happened, you know, in the 1890s and after 1900, but whether
the kinds of laws being enacted at the State level will that
have kind of discriminatory effect.
Congress, as you all know, went to great lengths in its
periodic reenactments of the Voting Rights Act to adduce the
data that the Court now seems fairly anxious to deny. But I
think the question, just quickly on the history side, I mean,
the question of a mirror, it was something that both the
Federalists and anti-Federalists actively debated. If you want
to hear the other side of the question, there is a fascinating
passage from a guy named Melancton Smith from New York, also
known as the Federal Farmer, tried to imagine what an ideal
Congress should look like. And his idea was actually it would
be good if it had a kind of what we would call a middle class
quality, that it is easy for the great to associate. It is easy
for people of wealth to kind of get together and decide what
they are going to do, and they are going to intimidate these
other characters like these Representatives. It is very
important now in the 18th century--actually, every Member of
Congress today should know this, but the ambition of being
reelected was not the dominant motive in 18th century politics.
The mean term of service in the House of Representatives down
to about 1890 was three years, meaning that most Members served
one term or two.
So, the whole idea that our politics would be driven,
including the whole gerrymandering process or, as I said in my
written statement, the idea that, in the United States, voters
don't choose Representatives, Representatives choose their
voters; that idea would have been kind of hard to grasp or
accept in the late 18th or 19th century because, by and large,
it was thought that most Representatives would be amateurs.
They would come, and they would go. They would rotate in
office. So, you know, the striking thing to me, though, is--and
I think Madison is a good example of this. I mean, how much of
what we are debating about today was actively in a certain
sense anticipated by Madison, including, to be honest, the
distrust of State legislatures. I mean, the whole animus behind
the Federalist movement was the belief that State legislatures
could not be relied upon to do their Federal duty, that they
were, indeed, subject to kind of partisan concerns, and
Madison's hope--and maybe he is wrong about this--was the idea
that, in fact, if you had large electoral districts, you might
get less partisan politics.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Professor.
I wanted to get to at least one other question, and it
strikes me that, unlike rural Wisconsin, where we heard earlier
today that everyone has good access to basic infrastructure, I
represent a rural district, and many of the rural areas I
represent don't have such infrastructure. And in high poverty
areas of my rural district, especially in Tribal areas, access
to fancy phones is actually hard.
In response to State laws that were hindering Native
Americans' access to the ballot, H.R. 1 has important
provisions for Native Americans voting. It also includes
provisions to ensure that States receive HAVA funds so that we
have fair and equitable ratings.
Professor Tolson, what is your response to those who
suggest that these and other provisions in H.R. 1 are
unconstitutional?
Ms. Tolson. They are not, you know, and part of it is that,
you know, the text mean what it says. And this is something
that has come out over the course of this hearing. The text is,
although States are mentioned first, that is because States get
a first crack at setting the times, place, and manner of
Federal elections. It is not because States are the primary
focus of the Elections Clause.
In fact, if you look at the history as recounted by
Professor Rakove, brilliantly I might add, you know, consider
the fact that there was one consideration on the table for the
general veto of all State laws by the national government
versus a more limited veto in the context of the Elections
Clause. I think the fact that the general veto was rejected and
they accepted the limited veto in the context of the Elections
Clause really does illustrate the distrust that the national
government had with respect to State legislatures over this
issue. In short, the Elections Clause provides broad authority
for all of H.R. 1.
And let me just make one other point. There has been a lot
of talk about political culture, but making voting harder is
not a political culture, right? Partisan gerrymandering is not
a political culture, right? So we can respect the ability of
States to set time, place, and manner as a first instance, but
where States are abusing that authority, Congress has power to
step in.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much.
My time has expired.
The Chairperson. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I see the Ranking Member, Mr. Davis, has joined us.
Mr. Davis, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Well, thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is great
to see the witnesses. Sorry I haven't been able to be on the
entire time, but we have been keeping tabs on the testimony. Of
course, we are keeping an eye on Mr. Steil. I don't want a coup
d'etat on the minority side, but it is great to see everybody.
I can't wait to see you all in person again.
I want to start my questions with my good friend Mr. Adams.
Mr. Secretary, I do want to say thank you for coming here
today. It was great to see you a few weeks ago in Washington.
As the chief election official for the State of Kentucky, do
you believe the Federal Government should mandate how States
and jurisdictions administer elections?
Mr. Adams. Well, I certainly don't have a problem with the
Voting Rights Act and some basic provisions, HAVA, the NVRA.
There is some good stuff that Congress has done in the past.
What I don't want to have is a micromanagement of our election
systems because States are just simply different. That is my
first argument.
My second argument is, with respect to Congress, I think we
do a better job at the State level of finding space across the
aisle to actually work with each other and get things done. It
is a less toxic atmosphere than what you have in Washington.
Mr. Davis. Well, I mean, it is pretty easy to get a less
toxic atmosphere anywhere compared to Washington, D.C. But, you
know, if you look at the last two election cycles, Mr.
Secretary, we saw record midterm turnout in 2018 and record
Presidential year turnout in 2020, and the Democrats on this
Committee have not been able to produce a single voter whose
vote was suppressed? Of course, even Stacey Abrams has
testified before this Committee that voter turnout really
doesn't matter. So can you explain that one to me?
Mr. Adams. I am sorry. What was the last part of your
question?
Mr. Davis. I said even Stacey Abrams testified before this
Committee that voter turnout, that it doesn't really matter. So
I am at a loss. Can you explain how that makes sense when we
have had record turnout, have not been able to see--this
Committee has not been able to put forth a single voter whose
vote was suppressed, and their leading voice on voter
suppression, Ms. Abrams, said that voter turnout doesn't
matter. I think it does. Do you?
Mr. Adams. Well, sure, I think it does. I am really proud
that in our election last year, in the midst of a pandemic, we
had the highest turnout we ever had; over two million voters
voted. And I am proud of it. I took some hits from my side of
the aisle for some decisions I made to make voting easier, but
we did it in a way that protected the security of our
elections, its integrity, and we made voting easier. We
expanded early voting. We found that about seven out of ten
voters even in a pandemic preferred to vote in person instead
of by absentee.
Again, I don't have a problem with absentee voting, but I
think we should permit the States to respect the wishes of
their constituencies and come up with a model that works for
them.
Mr. Davis. Well, did any of these changes you made, like
voter ID, impact voter turnout?
Mr. Adams. Well, interestingly, the first laws that I got
passed was the photo ID to vote law. That was an issue that I
ran on, and there were Chicken Little concerns about the sky
falling and so forth, but we didn't find that that
disenfranchised anybody. We had, again, record turnout
notwithstanding that.
Now to be clear, our voter ID law was very humanely
drafted. We bent over backwards to sit down with interest
groups on both sides to make sure that we didn't have anything
in there that would unduly prevent anyone from voting. So, we
were very humane in how we did it.
But the fact is we implemented in a pandemic even and we
still managed to ensure people got to vote, but we verified who
they were first.
Mr. Davis. Well, you guys had to work with local election
officials on these reforms prior to enactment, and I know you
offered vote by mail in 2020. Can you tell us briefly how did
you work with the local election officials to get these reforms
that many of my colleagues on this Committee may think are
impossible to implement and how did your vote-by-mail process
impact in-person voting in Kentucky in 2020?
Mr. Adams. Well, I think it is important that election
administrators be at the table, at the center of the table in
devising election rules. These things shouldn't be written up
by a caucus or a think tank; they should be done with election
administrators at the table who are less ideological on these
things or more practical. We have to engage in the customer
service business and that is helping people vote.
So, in our State, we found that democratic county clerks,
urban county clerks didn't like relying on mail-based voting as
the primary method. They found that their constituents
preferred voting in person where possible. Obviously, if you
have an age or disability and you need to vote absentee, we
respect that. We allow for that. It is actually a right in our
State constitution, but all of that said, we found that the way
that most Democrats wanted to vote, most Republicans wanted to
vote was in person. So the question was, how do we achieve
that? And to do so, we expanded early voting for the first time
in our history.
Mr. Davis. Well, thank you very much to all the witnesses.
I ran out of time talking to you, Mr. Secretary, so I didn't
get a chance to ask questions of the others. I appreciate the
opportunity, Madam Chairperson. I am going to have to jump off,
so thanks, again, everyone.
The Chairperson. The Ranking Member yields back.
And I now recognize myself for a few questions.
Dean Tokaji, it has been alleged that, if Congress
exercises its jurisdiction in the Elections Clause, it would
constitute constitutional problems of anticommandeering, and
specifically I am interested in the redistricting provisions
and whether the court has really addressed this issue per se,
for example, in the Rucho v. Common Cause case.
Can you address that?
Mr. Tokaji. Yes. Thank you for that question.
And, in fact, in the Rucho decision, which Committee
members will recall, rejected a constitutional challenge to
partisan gerrymandering. The courts reaffirmed Congress' broad
power to regulate congressional elections, specifically
including redistricting. The Court referenced favorably the
Apportionment Act of 1842, which was the first exercise of
Congress' power over the process of drawing congressional
districts and the congressional representation process, and
went on to explain that Congress specifically does have the
power to make laws regarding congressional districting.
So there wasn't really much question about Congress' power
to regulate congressional reapportionment or redistricting
before Rucho, but if there ever was, Rucho definitively
resolves that. There is simply no doubt that Congress, under
the Elections Clause, has the ultimate in power over the rules
regarding congressional districting.
The Chairperson. Well, let me ask you, Professor Rakove,
why were the Framers concerned, in particular, about State
lawmakers drawing district lines?
Mr. Rakove. I think the best answer really involves
reconstructing the political adversary of the 1780s.
Essentially, it is a function of the fact that the first--our
first system of American Federalism under the Articles of
Confederation allowed Congress to recommend to the States what
needed to be done for national purposes. Congress would pass
requisitions, resolutions, recommendations. It is basically a
system of Federalism based upon the voluntary compliance of the
States with, you know, decisions made by the Continental
Congress. It was the criticism of what Madison would call the
vices of that system, its recurring tendencies to break down,
that, in fact, represent a fundamental decision that for the
national government to work, it had to be competent to enact,
execute, and adjudicate its own laws.
Now elections represented, you know, kind of more
complicated--because you are trying to elect both local, State,
and Federal officials, but I think my general argument that
general failure of the States to fulfill their Federal duties
was the entire pretext for setting up a bicameral national
legislature that would act legally. There is interesting
comparison which I think Congresswoman Fernandez made, between,
you know, the time, place, and manner clause and the ability of
Congress by law to override, and you know, Madison's idea of
giving Congress, you know, a negative on State laws, when, in
effect, you know, the Article I, Section 4, is in its own way a
version of Madison's negative on State laws. And, I think, the
point I was trying to make is it has both negative and positive
connotations; that is to say, you may see, you know,
distortions being committed at the State level, you know,
including kind of pre-Baker v. Carr issues of malapportionment
on the one hand, or you may come up with better ideas how
Representatives would be elected, which is what happened in
1842.
The Chairperson. Let me ask you this: Madison, as you noted
in your testimony, warned at the Constitutional Convention that
States might try to manipulate election laws for partisan gain.
Do you see any parallels between that worry at that time and
current events?
Mr. Rakove. Just randomly, yeah, obviously, I do. I mean,
as you know, Congresswoman, I am, first and foremost, an 18th
century guy, but I do read the newspapers fairly regularly. So,
yeah, there is this whole slew of legislation out there whose
consequences we are waiting to see.
If you ran--I will speak for Madison, since I spent almost
every day thinking about him--if you ran this by Madison, he
would not be surprised to see this. It is consistent with his
analysis of what was wrong with State politics or worse,
specifically, why you are more likely to get the wrong kind of
factuals at the State level than hopefully you would at the
national level. It fits within a Madisonian aegis of rubric
very neatly.
The Chairperson. I thank you very much. My time is expired
and the time of all Members has expired. I would just like to
note as we close that I, very rarely, had concern about local
election officials. Our concern has been with partisan
legislative bodies that are enacting legislation that governs
those actions.
Before we conclude, with unanimous consent, we will add the
following items to the record: Federalist Papers Nos. 59, 60,
and 61; the Constitutional Authority Statement for H.R. 6882,
of the 116th Congress; the Constitutional Authority Statement
for H.R. 3412, in the 116th Congress; the Constitutional
Authority Statement for H.R. 7905, from the 116th Congress;
several Law Review articles discussing the breadth and scope of
the Elections Clause.
And hearing no objection, those materials will be made part
of the record.
The Chairperson. As has been noted, Members may have
additional questions for each of our witnesses. If so, we will
submit them to you in writing, and we request that you would
answer them if you are able to. The record will be open to
receive the answers to those questions.
I want to thank this panel for outstanding testimony today.
Very enlightening, very smart, a real contribution to our
understanding of the Constitution, and we thank you.
And, without objection, then, the Committee on House
Administration will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:29 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
