- VOTING IN AMERICA: THE POTENTIAL FOR VOTER ID LAWS, PROOF-OF- CITIZENSHIP LAWS, AND LACK OF MULTI-LINGUAL SUPPORT TO INTERFERE WITH FREE AND FAIR ACCESS TO THE BALLOT

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VOTING IN AMERICA: THE POTENTIAL FOR VOTER
ID LAWS, PROOF-OF-CITIZENSHIP LAWS, AND
LACK OF MULTI-LINGUAL SUPPORT TO INTER-
FERE WITH FREE AND FAIR ACCESS TO THE
BALLOT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

MAY 24, 2021

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
http://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-administration

VOTING IN AMERICA: THE POTENTIAL FOR VOTER
ID LAWS, PROOF-OF-CITIZENSHIP LAWS, AND
LACK OF MULTI-LINGUAL SUPPORT TO INTER-
FERE WITH FREE AND FAIR ACCESS TO THE
BALLOT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

MAY 24, 2021

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
http://www.govinfo.gov/committee/house-administration

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-612 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

ZOE LOFGREN, California, Chairperson
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois,
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina      Ranking Member
PETE AGUILAR, California             BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico

C O N T E N T S

----------

May 24, 2021

Page
Voting in America: The Potential For Voter ID Laws, Proof-Of-
Citizenship Laws, And Lack Of Multi-Lingual Support To
Interfere With Free And Fair Access To The Ballot..............     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Chairman G. K. Butterfield                                            1
Prepared statement of Chairman Butterfield...................     4
Hon. Bryan Steil, Ranking Member                                      6
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Steil...................     8

WITNESSES

Dr. Lonna Rae Atkeson, Professor and Regents' Lecturer,
University of New Mexico.......................................    56
Prepared statement of Dr. Atkeson............................    59
Matthew L. Campbell, Staff Attorney, Native American Rights Fund.    65
Prepared statement of Mr. Campbell...........................    67
Dr. Nazita Lajevardi, Assistant Professor, Michigan State
University.....................................................    93
Prepared statement of Dr. Lajevardi..........................    95
Andrea Senteno, Regional Counsel, Mexican American Legal Defense
and Educational Fund...........................................   103
Prepared statement of Ms. Senteno............................   105
Lori Roman, President, American Constitutional Rights Union......   113
Prepared statement of Ms. Roman..............................   115
Dr. Matt A. Barreto, Professor, University of California, Los
Angeles........................................................   163
Prepared statement of Dr. Barreto............................   166
Terry Ao Minnis, Senior Director of Census and Voting Programs,
Asian Americans Advancing Justice AAAJC........................   177
Prepared statement of Ms. Minnis.............................   179
Kira Romero-Craft, Managing Attorney, Southeast Office Latino
Justice PRDLEF.................................................   192
Prepared statement of Ms. Romero Craft.......................   194
Harmeet Dhillon, Dhillon Law Group, Inc..........................   202
Prepared statement of Ms. Dhillon............................   205

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Dr. Lonna Rae Atkeson, Professor and Regents' Lecturer,
University of New Mexico, responses............................   220
Matthew L. Campbell, Staff Attorney, Native American Rights Fund,
True North Group, responses....................................   223
Dr. Nazita Lajevardi, Assistant Professor, Michigan State
University, responses..........................................   231
Andrea Senteno, Regional Counsel, Mexican American Legal Defense
and Educational Fund, responses................................   242
Lori Roman, President, American Constitutional Rights Union,
responses......................................................   249
Dr. Matt A. Barreto, Professor, University of California, Los
Angeles responses..............................................   253
Terry Ao Minnis, Senior Director of Census and Voting Programs,
Asian Americans Advancing Justice AAJC, responses..............   262
Kira Romero-Craft, Managing Attorney, Southeast Office Latino
Justice PRDLEF responses.......................................   266
Harmeet Dhillon, Dhillon Law Group, Inc., responses..............   280

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Reexamining the ``Politics of In-Between'': Political
Participation Among Mexican Immigrants in the United States,
Matt A. Barreto and Jose A. Munoz, 2003........................   294
A New Barrier to Participation: Heterogenous Application of Voter
Identification Policies, Lonna Rae Atkeson et al., 2009........   315
Translating into Votes: The Electoral Impacts of Spanish-Language
Ballots, Daniel J. Hopkins, 2011...............................   323
English Proficiency and Latino Participation in U.S. Elections,
Michael Parkin and Frances Zlotnick, 2011......................   341
The Challenge of Obtaining Voter Identification, The Brennan
Center for Justice, 2012.......................................   364
Voter ID: Who Has Them? Who Shows Them, Charles Stewart III, 2013   401
Who Asks for Voter Identification? Explaining Poll-Worker
Discretion, Lonna Rae Atkeson et al., 2014.....................   434
Issues Related to State Voter Identification Laws, United States
Government Accountability Office, 2014.........................   449
The High Cost of `Free' Photo Voter Identification Cards, Richard
Sobel, 2014....................................................   658
Voting Rights for Whom? Examining the Effects of the Voting
Rights Act on Latino Political Incorporation, Melissa J.
Marschall and Amanda Rutherford, 2015..........................   720
Voter Identification Laws and the Suppression of Minority Votes,
Zoltan Hajnal et al., 2017.....................................   737
The Racial Implications of Voter Identifications Laws in America,
Matt A. Barreto et al., 2018...................................   755
Who Does Voter ID Keep from Voting?, Bernard L. Fraga and Michael
G. Miller, 2018................................................   767
A Disproportionate Burden: Strict Voter Identification Laws and
Minority Turnout, John Kuk et al., 2020........................   821
Obstacles at Every Turn: Barriers to Political Participation
Faced by Native American Voters, The Native American Rights
Fund, 2020.....................................................   831
The Facts About Election Integrity and the Need for States to Fix
Their Election Systems, The Heritage Foundation 2021...........  1007
The Other Voting Right: Protecting Every Citizen's Vote by
Safeguarding the Integrity of the Ballot Box, Yale Law & Policy
Review.........................................................  1014

VOTING IN AMERICA: THE POTENTIAL FOR VOTER ID LAWS, PROOF-OF-
CITIZENSHIP LAWS, AND LACK OF MULTI-LINGUAL SUPPORT TO INTERFERE WITH
FREE AND FAIR ACCESS TO THE BALLOT

----------

MONDAY, MAY 24, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Elections,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:02 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. G. K. Butterfield [Chair of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Butterfield, Aguilar, Leger
Fernandez, and Steil.
Also Present: Representatives Scanlon and Davis.
Staff Present: Jamie Fleet, Staff Director; Daniel Taylor,
General Counsel; Brandon Jacobs, Legislative Clerk; David
Tucker, Senior Counsel and Parliamentarian; Sean Wright, Senior
Elections Counsel; Andrew Kasper, Elections Counsel; Sarah
Nasta, Elections Counsel; Peter Whippy, Communications
Director; Natalie Young, Press Secretary; Tim Monahan, Minority
Staff Director; Caleb Hays, Minority General Counsel & Deputy
Staff Director; Nick Crocker, Minority Deputy Staff Director;
Gineen Bresso, Minority Special Counsel; Rachel Collins,
Minority Counsel; Ashley Phelps, Minority Communications
Director; Mike Cunnington, Minority Policy Advisor; Will
Neitzel, Rep. Steil Personal Staff.
Chairman Butterfield. The Subcommittee on Elections of the
Committee on House Administration will now come to order.
I am delighted that we have several of our members with us
today. I realize that we are mostly in our districts this week,
but thank you to the members for logging on and being a part of
this very, very important hearing.
We have Mr. Aguilar, Mr. Steil, Ms. Leger Fernandez, Mr.
Davis, Ms. Scanlon--if she is not on now, she is soon to
arrive--and, of course, the Chairman. So thank each of you for
joining us today. We do have a quorum.
As we begin, I want to note we are holding this hearing in
compliance with the regulations for remote committee
proceedings pursuant to House Resolution 8. Generally, we ask
Subcommittee members and witnesses to keep their microphones
muted when not speaking to limit background noise. Members will
need to unmute themselves when seeking recognition or when
recognized for their five minutes.
Witnesses--and thank you for joining us today. The
witnesses will also need to unmute themselves when recognized
for their five minutes or when answering a question.
Members and witnesses, please, please, keep your cameras on
at all times, even if you need to briefly step away. Please do
not leave the meeting or turn your camera off. That would not
be a good idea.
I would also like to remind members that the regulations
governing remote proceedings require that we cannot participate
in more than one committee proceeding at the same time.
At this time, I will ask unanimous consent that the chair
be authorized to declare a recess of the Subcommittee at any
point and that all members have five legislative days in which
to revise and extend their remarks and have any written
statements be made part of the record.
I don't hear any objections. Thank you to my colleagues for
that. Hearing no objections, it is so ordered.
Ladies and gentlemen, today's hearing is the third in a
series of hearings this Subcommittee is conducting this year
examining voting and election administration in America. Today,
we will examine three types of State and local election
administration laws: those requiring voters to present
identification to vote, those requiring voters to provide
documentary proof of citizenship in order to register to vote,
and those governing the provision of multilingual voting
support.
Since the Supreme Court back in 2013, in the case of Shelby
County v. Holder, a number of States have adopted very strict
voter ID laws requiring voters to present a qualifying voter ID
in order to vote, some doing so immediately after the Court's
decision. Voter ID laws have been shown to disproportionately
burden minority voters. That is a demonstrated fact. I don't
believe there are many experts who would dispute that.
Voter ID laws have been shown to disproportionately burden
minority voters. African-American and Latino and Native
American voters, for example, are less likely to have
qualifying forms of ID. They are particularly burdened by the
cost of obtaining IDs. And studies have shown that strict voter
ID laws disproportionately decrease minority turnout. We should
all be concerned about that.
Voter ID laws adopted in Texas, in my State of North
Carolina, impose particularly troubling burdens on minority
voters. Now, before the Shelby decision, both Texas and North
Carolina had to obtain preclearance of their voter ID laws from
the Department of Justice. Within days of that decision back in
2013, these States imposed restrictive voter ID laws, laws that
their legislatures knew, they knew would not have survived the
Department of Justice's review.
Federal courts found that the laws were enacted with the
intent, not just the effect, but the intent to discriminate
against minority voters. The courts relied on evidence that the
legislatures knew the laws would disproportionately burden
minority voters and provided pretextual justifications for
enacting them.
In my State of North Carolina, a Federal court found that
our voter ID law in particular targeted African-American voters
with almost surgical precision, and I put that in quotes,
almost surgical precision. That was a Federal court.
The Texas and North Carolina voter ID laws illustrate the
critical role the Voting Rights Act played in protecting the
rights of minority, voters and exemplified the need for
Congress, for us, to enact new legislation to revitalize
Federal protection of minority voting rights.
Like voter ID laws, laws requiring voters to provide
documentary proof of citizenship to register to vote have been
shown to disproportionately burden minority voters. Studies,
qualitative studies, have shown that obtaining the required
documentation can sometimes cost in excess of $1,000, leading
some to characterize these laws as imposing a modern-day poll
tax.
These documentary proof-of-citizenship laws have been shown
to disenfranchise tens of thousands of voters and are justified
by little more than unsupported claims of voter fraud. Lack of
access to multilingual voting support also poses a significant
burden on minority voters.
Studies, credible studies, have shown that language
minority voters are more likely to be registered and turn out
at a higher rate than they have access to voting information in
their native language. I hope we will get into that today.
Despite this evidence, States and localities continue to
deprive voters of multilingual voting support.
The testimony provided today will help us, will help this
Committee as it seeks to understand what needs to be done to
ensure that voter ID laws, proof-of-citizenship laws, and laws
and processes governing the provision of multilingual voting
materials are nondiscriminatory. We must do that. We should be
making it easier for all citizens to vote, not leaving State
and local governments with unchecked authority to enact
legislation that imposes discriminatory barriers to the ballot.
And so I know this was a little long, but I look forward to
hearing from today's witnesses and working with my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle on these important issues.
Thank you for listening.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Steil. And
thank you to the Ranking Member for visiting me in my office
the other day. We had a very delightful and productive
conversation, and this will continue to happen throughout our
work. So thank you, Mr. Steil, for visiting with me.
And now I will recognize you for an opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Butterfield follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is good to
see you today. It was a great conversation in your office last
week.
I appreciate you holding today's hearing on this important
topic. I think it is absolutely critical we find ways to work
to ensure our elections are free, fair, and secure, and photo
ID is a simple, commonsense way that we can ensure that every
legal vote is counted and only legal votes are counted.
Thirty-six States currently require some form of voter ID
to vote. In 2020, we saw more people cast their vote than in
any Presidential election in history. In fact, voter turnout
increased in every State, including some of the sharpest
increases occurring in States with a required voter ID. And
further dispelling the myth that voter ID laws deter voting,
voter turnout increased among all race groups in 2020.
And contrary to some of the written testimony put forward,
in the real world, I think it is clear that voter ID does not
deter people from legally voting. The data just doesn't support
it. Common sense doesn't support it, and I think the American
people know that.
Among the States that ask for ID to vote, as my home State
of Wisconsin, as well as the home State of the President of the
United States, Delaware, other States include Connecticut,
Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and the list goes on. And for the
purpose of this hearing, I will reiterate what I have said at
previous hearings: Republicans want to ensure that every
eligible person who wants to vote is able to cast a vote, that
we make sure that every lawful ballot is counted according to
State law. We want to make sure that it is easy to vote and
hard to cheat.
The far left has been working overtime to mischaracterize
new voting laws across the United States. The left's
characterization of voter laws, like those recently passed in
Georgia and other States, earned multiple Pinocchios and pants
on fires when they were rated by fact checkers. Unfortunately,
Democrats' election legislation, H.R. 1 or S. 1 in the Senate,
it guts voter ID laws. And they continue to push this false
narrative that election safeguards, like voter ID, are somehow
racist or an attempt by Republicans to suppress the votes of
Americans from minority communities.
Americans are used to showing their ID to do common things,
like open a bank account, buy alcohol, flying a plane. I don't
believe my local bank or the QuikTrip convenience store or the
TSA is racist or has discriminatory intent when they ask for my
ID. I think it is common practice. But even if a voter doesn't
have an ID on election day, States have a process to allow the
voter to cast their vote by filling out a provisional ballot.
This ensures their vote, if proven lawful, is counted and that
the voter is not denied their constitutional right to vote.
For example, Texas, whose voting practices are often, I
think, unfairly characterized, accept a voter's utility bill,
bank statement, government check, birth certificate, or a
paycheck. Delaware also has a process for this. These options
make sure that access to the polls for all Americans to legally
participate in the process.
Equally as important as ensuring voters have access to the
polls is ensuring people have confidence in our election
results, and voter ID laws can help with this. Most Americans
would agree that it is important that only U.S. citizens are
voting in our elections.
We recently saw in Illinois issues where hundreds of
noncitizens were accidentally registered to vote through the
State's automatic voter registration program. This is a problem
for the obvious reason that we don't want illegal votes cast in
our elections. But it is also a problem because if an
ineligible individual voted because flawed automatic voter
registration made them think that they could, they would face
serious consequences if caught, all because of the State's
error. And, unfortunately, the Democrats' legislation, H.R. 1
or S. 1, it mandates automatic voter registration, but it
doesn't mandate any of the safeguards be built in to ensure
mistakes like that don't happen.
These kind of issues also undermine public confidence in
our elections which we should be working to promote. We should
be supportive of safeguards like voter ID that do not make it
more difficult for people to vote, but it does make it more
difficult for people to cheat.
The success of our elections is reliant on the trust voters
place in the system. So if we are exploring ways to ensure more
people vote, I think it would be good to have a discussion
about how the level of confidence people have in the accuracy
of our voting system can impact people's choice to vote or not.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I look forward to
today's hearing. I yield back.
[The statement of Mr. Steil follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Steil. Thank you very
much for your opening statement.
I am going to--I have two methods for unmuting myself, and
so I thought I would go back to the original one. One way is to
touch the space bar, but if you have got Microsoft Word in
front of you, the space bar only spaces the line and does
nothing with the muting. But, anyway, thank you, Mr. Steil, for
your opening statement.
Before proceeding, let me recognize the Ranking Member of
the full Committee, my friend, Mr. Rodney Davis, for any
opening words that he might have.
Mr. Davis. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I do want to
commend you for the way that you are running this Subcommittee.
I appreciate the opportunity to have a wide variety of
witnesses come in, and I am very anxious to hear their
testimony.
I am a little miffed at you, though, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Ranking Member. I had no idea you guys were meeting together
right next door to my office. If I would have known, you know,
I would have at least come and pounded on the window, do
something to disrupt the meeting; but would always love to see
both of you because I think it is a testimony to the
bipartisanship that exists in this Congress that a lot of
people don't see and the media doesn't talk about. So cheers to
both of you for getting together to talk about issues. And
thanks again, Mr. Chair, for letting us talk about the issues
today.
I want to echo one of the comments that Ranking Member
Steil mentioned. We believe H.R. 1 will be a disaster not just
for State and local governments to be able to administer their
constitutional authority and run elections from the States and
localities where they should be run. H.R. 1 is going to put in
place different policies and procedures that we have seen have
gotten many people into trouble. They think that they might be
registered to vote, but, unfortunately, they are not. And when
they go cast that vote, they are held to the same
accountability that anyone else would if they knew.
So we are talking here about voter ID. Mr. Steil, Ranking
Member Steil, made great points in stating we have had record
turnout in the last Presidential election, but let's also not
forget we had record turnout in the election that was the
midterm election of 2018.
During those two election cycles, we in Washington failed
to celebrate what we did right to make sure that we had that
record turnout. We have failed to talk about what the American
people prefer, and 75 percent of likely voters surveyed in a
recent Rasmussen poll actually believe voter ID is necessary
for a fair and secure election. Two recent polls show broad
support among African Americans and other minorities for voter
ID. Rasmussen found 69 percent of African Americans support
voter ID, while another poll by The Atlanta Journal-
Constitution finds two-thirds of voters in Georgia support
voter ID. Eighty-two percent of Arizona's voters support
election integrity reforms, which include stronger voter ID and
voter roll cleanup.
One of the recent hearings we had at the full Committee in
the last Congress was to talk about voter roll cleanup, where
we had then Secretary of State, now Senator of California, Alex
Padilla, not commit to us to take off already identified dead
people from the California voter rolls.
At some point we have got to take a serious look at
ensuring that the voter rolls that are used at every single
polling place in this country are updated according to law.
These are the types of things that this Subcommittee has been
debating.
I am glad to be here today, Mr. Chair and Mr. Ranking
Member. And, again, I am really interested to hear the
testimony.
And I would ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to include
some of the studies and polls that I just mentioned for the
record.
Chairman Butterfield. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. And thank you to the Ranking Member.
Now, in just a moment, I will introduce today's
distinguished panel, but before I do so, as a reminder to our
witnesses, each of you will be recognized for five minutes.
There is a timer on your screen, and I am sure that you have
seen it by now. There is a timer on your screen. Please be sure
you can see the timer and are mindful of the five-minute time
limit.
Your entire written statements will be made a part of the
record, and the record will remain open for at least five days
for additional materials to be submitted.
And so I welcome, I welcome each one of our witnesses.
Joining us today are five very distinguished individuals. First
is Dr. Lonna Atkeson of the University of New Mexico. The next
is Matthew Campbell of the Native American Rights Fund. The
next is Dr. Nazita--and I know I am going to botch this, so
please excuse me--Dr. Nazita Lajevardi, and she can correct it
when it is her turn to speak, but thank you, from the Michigan
State University. The next is Andrea or Andrea Senteno of the
Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund. And our
final witness is Lori Roman of the American Constitutional
Rights Union.
Dr. Lonna Rae Atkeson is a professor of political science,
regents lecturer, and Director of the Center for the Study of
Voting, Elections, and Democracy, and the Institute of Social
Research at the University of New Mexico. Dr. Atkeson is an
internationally recognized expert in the area of election
sciences, survey methodology, voting rights, election
administration, public opinion, and political behavior. She has
written over 50 articles and book chapters and dozens of
technical reports, monographs, amicus curiae briefs, and other
works on these topics.
Now let's talk about Matthew Campbell. Matthew L. Campbell
is a Staff Attorney with the Native American Rights Fund. Mr.
Campbell, an enrolled member of the Native Village of Gambell
on the Saint Lawrence Island in Alaska, has litigated numerous
constitutional and statutory claims on behalf of Native
Americans in areas ranging from water rights to religious
freedom and freedom of speech. In the area of voting rights,
Mr. Campbell recently brought a successful challenge to a North
Dakota voter ID law on behalf of the Spirit Lake Nation and
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe.
Next is Dr. Nazita Lajevardi. The doctor is a Professor of
political science at Michigan State University. She holds a
Ph.D. degree in political science from the University of
California, San Diego; a law degree from the University of San
Francisco School of Law. Her research focuses on issues related
to race and ethnic politics, political behavior, voting rights,
and immigration. Her work has been published in numerous
leading peer review journals and featured in a variety of media
outlets, including The Atlantic, The New York Times, The
Washington Post.
Andrea or Andrea Senteno is regional counsel in the Mexican
American Legal Defense and Educational Fund's D.C. office.
Andrea leads MALDEF's efforts to protect Latino voting rights,
including working to restore the vitality of Section 5 of the
Voting Rights Act. She, Andrea Senteno, who previously served
as a legislative staff attorney at the EAC, the Election
Assistance Commission, holds a law degree from the American
University of Washington College of Law.
Lori Roman, President of the American Constitutional Rights
Union. Her diverse career exemplifies her expertise and
management in public policy, strategic planning, and public
relations. Formerly, she served as the deputy director chief of
staff of the White House Center for Faith-Based and Community
Initiatives at the Department of Education, where she was
responsible for strategic planning and management of resources
to achieve the goals outlined in the President's Management
Agenda. She also served as the Director of School Choice,
senior advisor on family educational rights at the Department
of Education. She holds a bachelor of business administration
degree, a master of science degree in administration.
So each one of the witnesses will now be recognized for
five minutes, starting with Dr. Atkeson. You are now recognized
for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF DR. LONNA RAE ATKESON, PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF
NEW MEXICO; MR. MATTHEW LEE CAMPBELL, STAFF ATTORNEY, NATIVE
AMERICAN RIGHTS FUND; DR. NAZITA LAJEVARDI, PROFESSOR, MICHIGAN
STATE UNIVERSITY; MS. ANDREA SENTENO, REGIONAL COUNSEL, MEXICAN
AMERICAN LEGAL DEFENSE FUND; AND MS. LORI ROMAN, PRESIDENT,
AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS UNION

STATEMENT OF DR. LONNA RAE ATKESON

Ms. Atkeson. Thank you.
Chairman Butterfield, Ranking Member Steil, and members of
the Committee, especially my own Congresswoman, Teresa Leger
Fernandez, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today. I am Professor Lonna Atkeson from the University of New
Mexico, and I study elections, voting behavior, and voting
rights, and have written extensively on voter ID implementation
and voter confidence.
While most of the focus on issues related to voter ID
policies has been on how they affect turnout, an equally
important and alternative question to consider is whether voter
ID policies are administered equally across groups. This is an
important question because, historically, laws like voter ID
have been used to create barriers to participation and have
been implemented unequally across segments of the voting
population.
In the case of voter ID, the effects of minorities might be
more subtle and difficult to discern because these laws may not
directly result in reduction in turnout, but may affect voter
confidence and satisfaction in the election process, which may
have long-term consequences on voter turnout or lead to
increases in provisional voting.
Several studies of poll workers and voters suggest the
implementation practices can result in unequal implementation
and application of voter identification laws.
In my original study in New Mexico, we found that many
voters were asked by poll workers for ID inappropriately and
that Hispanics and men were asked for photo ID more often than
Whites and women. In another study in Massachusetts,
researchers found that Blacks and Hispanics were asked for
photo identification at higher rates than Whites. In subsequent
studies in New Mexico, we have found various degrees of
differences between Whites and Hispanics, sometimes showing
significant differences and sometimes not, but always showing
the inappropriate requests by poll workers for photo ID.
Unequal application appears to be related to the
interaction between the poll worker, the amount of discretion
the poll workers have, along with the complexity of the voter
ID law, especially having different voter ID rolls for
different types of voters and having variety of rules that
allow many different options for the type of ID that the voter
can use and poll workers can request.
For example, both New Mexico and Massachusetts had adopted
minimum Help America Vote Act requirements that first-time
voters who registered by mail and did not include photocopies
of valid IDs with their mailed registration forms were required
to show a physical ID. In addition, Massachusetts required a
physical ID for voters who were identified as inactive.
Otherwise, for most voters, the minimum standard for voter ID
in Massachusetts was the name and address of the voter, and in
New Mexico, it was the name, address, and birth year, but it
was the voter's choice, and they could also use a photo ID,
such as a driver's license, a Sam's Club card, their voter reg
card, or a utility bill to identify themselves.
This means that many States have the most accessible voter
ID laws are the most likely to have problems with voter ID
implementation. States that have easier to follow and
consistent rules across voter ID have fewer problems with the
application of policies, but, of course, those States may have
different impact on turnout.
Why does this happen? It seems the poll workers do not
always follow or appear to know the law. Poll worker studies
indicate that poll workers are likely to misinterpret,
misunderstand, or disagree with the voter ID laws and,
therefore, to misapply voter ID policies.
Poll workers are temporary workers working long hours a few
times a year. They are often poorly trained, likely with no
background in public policy or law. Consequently, when they are
faced with the decision on how to apply policies to which they
may be uncertain, they choose to require voter ID or not based
upon their personal beliefs or normative judgments about what
they believe those laws should be.
Can this problem be resolved? While proper training can
reduce poll worker discretion substantially, it likely cannot
eliminate it. In addition, it is clear that the county clerk
has to be continuously vigilant because without constant
emphasis during poll worker training, discretion results in
uneven implementation.
In conclusion, it is important to note that many States
have hybrid policies that have different ID requirements for
different types of voters and offer many options for voter IDs.
These laws are more likely to produce voter and poll worker
confusion, allowing poll workers to set their own standards.
As legislators and policymakers grapple with this issue,
they should consider how the design of laws affects their
implementation and what the means for creating uniform policies
for voter ID would be. Voters should be treated equally by
their election administrators.
[The statement of Ms. Atkeson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Thank you very much for that.
We will now recognize Mr. Campbell for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW LEE CAMPBELL

Mr. Campbell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Steil
and Davis, and all the members of the Committee.
My name is Matthew Campbell, and I am a staff attorney at
the Native American Rights Fund, also known as NARF. I am an
enrolled member of the Native Village of Gambell in Alaska and
work at NARF's Boulder, Colorado, office.
NARF is the oldest and largest nonprofit law firm dedicated
to protecting the rights of Native people across the country. I
am honored to address the Committee today about the impacts of
voter ID laws on Native Americans.
Native Americans have historically faced discrimination
when attempting to vote. For example, the Arizona Supreme Court
held in 1928 that Native Americans could not register to vote
because they were wards of the Federal Government. That
decision stood for 20 years. Utah and North Dakota were the
last States to officially afford Native Americans the right to
vote in the late 1950s. We have seen, however, the
discrimination against Native voters still exists today in the
form of voter ID.
Native Americans face many obstacles to voting. They live
in isolated communities, disproportionately far away from State
governmental offices. They have high levels of poverty within
their communities. They disproportionately lack access to
transportation, and all over the West, they often lack
residential addresses on their homes. These and other
conditions make it extremely difficult to obtain basic
governmental services like healthcare or government-issued IDs.
For many Americans, obtaining identification is a simple
act of going to the local DMV. But given the isolating
conditions Native Americans live in, the high levels of
poverty, lack of access to transportation, the distance to the
DMV, the process is far from simple and, in fact, severely
burdensome.
When faced with the option of paying for gas to travel 2
hours to a State DMV or buying food or diapers, Native people
have little hesitation in choosing survival over a State ID.
State IDs are often unnecessary for Native people in their
everyday lives. They are able to get by just fine with their
Tribal IDs. However, many Tribal IDs do not have residential
addresses on them because they often do not exist on the
reservation.
North Dakota is a perfect example. In 2011, the North
Dakota legislature overwhelming shot down the greater
restrictive voter ID law because it would be burdensome to
voters. The legislature heard testimony that Native voters in
particular would be harmed by the laws given their lack of
addresses.
When the Native vote was instrumental in the 2012
elections, however, the legislature passed the most restrictive
voter ID law in the Nation in 2013. The law was limited to four
forms of ID, a State driver's license or ID, a Tribal ID, or a
long-term nursing care certificate. The law required voter IDs
to have a residential address on them. The problem was that
many Tribal members only had Tribal IDs with no addresses or
only a P.O. Box because many homes on the reservation lacked
physical addresses. The law required something that was often
impossible to obtain.
Elvis Norquay, who testified before this Committee in
February of 2020, was one of the individuals that was
disenfranchised by the law. He, like many Native people, had
been in and out of homelessness, lacked access to
transportation, and only had a Tribal ID that did not have a
residential address. But he had been voting in North Dakota for
more than 20 years and knew all of the election workers at his
polling location. Because of the new and unnecessary law,
however, he was denied the right to vote.
Native people all over the country are in a similar
position to Elvis. There are high levels of poverty. There is a
lack of access to transportation. There are oftentimes no
residential addresses on homes on the reservation, and
governmental offices are prohibitively far away. These ultra
strict voter ID laws are unnecessary and disproportionately
burden Native American voters.
Sadly, Elvis passed away earlier this year, but we will
continue to carry his message to Congress, a message that
action is needed to protect the right to vote of all Americans
and especially the most vulnerable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Campbell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Thank you for your testimony. And I
recall being part of the panel that went to North Dakota and
heard the testimony of our dear friend, Norquay I believe his
name was. So thank you for making reference to that, and he
will be missed without question.
At this time, I am going to recognize our next witness.
This is the name that I fumbled in the beginning, and I am
certain I will fumble it again. But, Dr. Lajevardi, you are
recognized for five minutes. I am sure you have gone through
this throughout your lifetime, so please forgive me. Thank you.
You are recognized.
Ms. Lajevardi. It is not the first time.
Chairman Butterfield. Yes.

STATEMENT OF DR. NAZITA LAJEVARDI

Ms. Lajevardi. Chairperson Butterfield, Ranking Member
Steil, and distinguished members of the Committee, it is an
honor to offer testimony before the Subcommittee today. My name
is Dr. Nazita Lajevardi, and I am an assistant professor of
political science at Michigan State University. I was asked
here to provide my expert opinion on the effects of voter
identification laws. My scholarly work over the past 4 years
has in part evaluated the impact of voter identification laws
on minority voter turnout in American elections.
Across the board, my colleagues and I have found that these
laws impose a disproportionate burden on minority voters. Our
research consistently has found a negative and significant
empirical link between voter ID laws and minority turnout in
the United States.
Voting is the most fundamental tenet of American democracy.
Through the vote, citizens elect their representatives, they
influence policy, and they participate in democracy. And,
importantly, any barriers to the vote should be carefully
assessed to ensure that they do not significantly and
systematically reduce the voices of marginalized groups such as
racial and ethnic minorities.
Today, voter ID laws represent one of the Nation's most
important barriers to voting and, thus, one of our country's
most important civil rights issues. By raising the cost of
voting for some individuals more than others, they affect who
votes and who does not, and in doing so, they substantially
shape whose voices are represented in our democracy.
As of 2020, the National Conference of State Legislatures
estimates that 35 States have laws in force that request or
require voters to show some form of identification at the
polls. What is more, these laws are becoming stricter and more
common.
I have coauthored three studies that directly examine the
effects of voter ID laws on minority voter turnout. In each
study, my colleagues and I found a persistent, negative, and
significant effect of these laws on minority voter turnout.
Our first paper, which was published in The Journal of
Politics in 2017, evaluated whether strict photo identification
laws reduced turnout among registered survey respondents in a
large national survey from 2006 and 2014. Our results from the
study indicate that these laws serve not only to diminish
minority participation but also to increase the gap in the
voter participation rate between White Americans and non-White
Americans in our study.
We have another paper that was published in Politics,
Groups, and Identities in 2020, and in this paper, we changed
course and used yet another methodological technique to
evaluate whether voter ID laws affect minority turnout across
U.S. counties. In that paper, we focused on turnout changes
across the 2012 and 2016 Presidential elections when Alabama,
Mississippi, Virginia, and Wisconsin all implemented strict
voter ID laws.
Specifically, we looked to see if turnout in racially
diverse counties declined more relative to turnout in
predominantly White counties in those States that had enacted
strict ID laws compared to those States that had not enacted
strict ID laws over the same time period, and we found that
turnout declined significantly more in racially diverse
counties relative to less diverse counties in those States that
had enacted strict ID laws over that time period compared to
the other States.
I would like to note that my scholarship on this matter is
supplemented by a host of other scholars who have similarly
found evidence of a negative effect of voter ID laws on
minority turnout. And in addition to the evidence presented on
the specific question of whether voter ID laws suppress the
minority vote, it is important to highlight two additional
points.
First, minorities are less likely to possess valid forms of
ID necessary to comply with these statutes. As such, the
material burdens of voter ID laws fall harder on minority
populations compared to their White American counterparts.
Second, there is also some scholarly evidence demonstrating
that minority citizens are often more likely than White
Americans to be asked for identification at the polls.
In closing my testimony, my professional opinion is that
voter ID laws disproportionately reduce minority voter turnout
and increase the gap between the voices of minorities and that
of White Americans and American democracy.
I suggest members of this Committee address the
undemocratic and disproportionate effect of these laws on
racial and ethnic minorities in the drafting and passage of
future voting rights legislation.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Lajevardi follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Still having trouble with the mute
button.
Okay. Ranking Member, I am still having problem with the
mute button.
All right. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Next will be Ms. Senteno. You are recognized for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREA SENTENO

Ms. Senteno. Good morning, Chair Butterfield, Ranking
Member Steil, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. My name is Andrea Senteno,
and I am the Regional Counsel of MALDEF's Washington, D.C.
office.
For over 50 years, MALDEF has worked to promote the civil
rights around Latinos living in the United States. Since its
founding, one of MALDEF's top priorities has been securing
equal voting rights for Latinos and promoting increased civic
engagement and participation within the Latino community.
Over the years, MALDEF has litigated numerous cases under
Section 2, Section 5, and Section 203 of the VRA, challenging
at-large systems, discriminatory redistricting, ballot access
barriers, undue voter registration restriction, and failure to
provide bilingual ballot materials or language assistance.
For almost two decades, Latinos have constituted the
largest racial or ethnic minority group in the U.S. As the
growth of the Latino population expands, States and localities
have worked to slow the registration and participation of new
voters, and, thus, MALDEF's work in voting rights continues to
increase.
As Federal protections for voting evolve, policymakers
seeking to limit the right to vote turn to alternative
restrictions that restrict access to the ballot and which often
disproportionately affect voters of color and language minority
voters.
In the last two decades, there has been an accelerating
pattern of ballot-access restrictions enacted to address
baseless myths of widespread voter fraud. Increasingly
restrictive voter identification requirements, proof-of-
citizenship requirements for new registrants, and restrictions
on how and when voter registration drives may occur are all
State electoral changes seemingly implemented to stem the
growing Latino vote in Texas, Arizona, and other States.
In 2004, Arizona passed Prop 200, the Nation's first
statewide proof-of-citizenship mandate for registering voters.
From 2000 to 2010, Arizona's Latino population increased by
almost 600,000, which is 30 percent of the State's population.
Prop 200 changed the State's voter registration rule to require
all new registrants to provide documentary proof of U.S.
citizenship, and after enactment, more than 30,000 individuals
had their voter registrations rejected by election
administrators in Arizona. Prop 200 created significant burdens
for new registrants, and of those with rejected registration,
less than one-third subsequently registered to vote.
The law also had a disproportionate affect on Latinos. The
percent share of Latino voter registration in the State fell
after the law was enacted, and evidence showed that Latinos
made up a disproportionate 20 percent of those who did not
manage to register after an initial rejection, and only 11
percent of Latinos who were rejected were successful in
eventually re-registering.
Meanwhile, the State failed to identify a single instance
in which an undocumented immigrant registered or voted in
Arizona. Nationally, more and more research confirms that
instances of noncitizen voting are exceedingly rare. In fact,
many non-U.S. citizens are hesitant to provide their personal
information to the government and are afraid of the potential
negative criminal and immigration-related consequences that may
result from improper voter registration or voting.
Proof-of-citizenship requirements have yet to prove
effective in making our elections more secure or to be more
effective than the safeguards against improper registration and
voting that already exists. Meanwhile, such requirements have
shown to significantly impede the political participation of
voters of color.
On the issue of strict voter identification requirements,
Latinos and other voters of color disproportionately lack the
identification documents required to register and vote, and
they are more likely to be excluded because of this. Obtaining
the requisite documentation can be a significant and oftentimes
prohibitive expense, and for some registrants or voters, it
requires travel to government offices, sometimes ones that are
far away or inaccessible, waiting in lines, and waiting for
documents to be received.
The growing Latino population is often seen by the
political establishment as a threat in many places. As a
result, we are likely to see an increase in efforts to
disenfranchise the Latino electorate, including many
naturalized citizens, and to limit the influence of our vote.
Congress must take action to adopt and strengthen policies and
laws that protect and encourage the participation of each
eligible voter.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Senteno follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Thank you for your testimony.
At this time, the Chair recognizes Ms. Roman for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF LORI ROMAN

Ms. Roman. Good morning, Chairman Butterfield, Ranking
Member Steil, and members of the Committee. Thank you very much
for this opportunity to testify. I am the President of the
American Constitutional Rights Union and ACRU Action Fund.
It is important that we address the duty to ensure access
to the ballot box while also protecting the integrity of the
voting process. Put bluntly, we should all agree to work
together to make it easy to vote and hard to cheat.
Some of my remarks today refer to an article in the Yale
Law and Policy Review called ``The Other Voting Right:
Protecting Every Citizen's Vote by Safeguarding the Integrity
of the Ballot Box.'' This article is cowritten by a colleague
of mine, former Ohio Secretary of State and U.S. Ambassador to
the United Nations Human Rights Commission, J. Kenneth
Blackwell. Unfortunately, his schedule did not permit him to be
with us today.
Our country has spent many decades advancing the rights of
citizens to fully participate in our Republic. And this,
unfortunately, has always been a fight between the political
factions.
First, we fought, quite literally, for freedom for all
Americans. And after the Civil War, a war in which my great-
great-grandfather was a Union soldier who was wounded and
imprisoned at the notorious Andersonville Prison Camp, the 14th
Amendment to the Constitution was ratified giving citizenship
to persons born or naturalized in the United States, including
former slaves. This was passed by Republicans with no Democrat
support.
For Black-American men, the right to vote came with passage
of the 15th Amendment from 1870. The amendment passed with
Republicans supporting the right to vote and Democrats blocking
that right.
Despite the amendment, Black Americans endured violence,
intimidation, literacy tests, poll taxes, designed to block
them from voting. These actions were committed mostly by
southern Democrats.
In 1920, women were finally granted the right to vote with
the 19th Amendment, and that was pushed and passed by a
Republican-led House and Senate.
As Americans, sometimes we have fought each other on this,
but we should be proud that we fought hard for freedom and for
access. And now it is time to fight for voting integrity to
protect every person's vote from being diluted by fraudulent
votes.
Today, we will talk about voter rolls that must be kept
updated according to Federal law and voter identification,
which is a popular solution used throughout the world.
The National Voter Registration Act, or motor voter law,
makes it easy to register people to vote, but it also mandates
procedures to update the registrations of those who have moved
or died to ensure accurate rolls. Unfortunately, the rolls
across this country are filled with the names of people who
have moved, died, or are not U.S. citizens.
Over the years, my organization has brought lawsuits
against counties which have ignored the law. In one county,
ACRU found that not one single person that had moved or died
had been removed from voter rolls for 3 years.
Some people have tried to reassert that clean voter rolls
are racist, but moving people from the voter rolls who have
moved or died has nothing to do with the ethnicity of the
voter.
As for voter ID, it seems to me completely unnecessary to
make the case for something so commonsense of what has been
used throughout the world. In fact, polls repeatedly show that
Americans of all ethnicities support voter ID, and it is in
many State laws.
I quote the Yale Law and Policy Review article: States have
significant authority under the Constitution to protect legal
votes from illegitimate dilution. In 2008, a plurality opinion
of the Supreme Court asserted that if a State's burdens on
voting are merely inconvenient and if its restrictions are
nonsevere and nondiscriminatory, those burdens are evaluated
under a much less demanding important regulatory interests
standard that is deferential to policymakers' judgments.
Some Members of Congress have maintained that requiring
voter ID is racist, yet Members of Congress voted for the
Affordable Care Act. This legislation forces every single
American to obtain health insurance. Compared to receiving free
identification from the government, the process of purchasing
medical insurance is complicated, expensive, and often
daunting. Congress also added a financial penalty for those who
did not obtain insurance, increasing that burden.
A few weeks ago, Black leaders signed a letter urging
Members of Congress to deescalate the rhetoric equating voting
integrity with Jim Crow. One signer of this letter, Lieutenant
Governor Mark Robinson, the first Black lieutenant governor of
North Carolina, testified before the House Judiciary Committee
saying: The notion that Black people must be protected from a
free ID to secure their vote is not just insane; it is
insulting.
In conclusion, the rights of American citizens to vote and
to also have their vote protected from dilution by fraudulent
votes is codified in Federal and State laws, supported by
Americans, and grounded in common sense.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
[The statement of Ms. Roman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Thank you, Ms. Roman, for your
testimony.
That concludes the testimony of the witnesses.
We will now move into member questions. And it looks like
from my list, Mr. Aguilar, you should go first. You are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to thank the
Ranking Member Steil as well for putting this panel together
and this hearing on the books for us.
First, I wanted to start with Dr. Lajevardi. As you know,
voter ID laws can take on a variety of forms, and you have
talked about this. Some States, for example, require that
voters present a photo ID, while other States request but do
not require identification.
Does your research provide any insight into whether
particular types of voter ID laws have greater or lesser impact
on turnout of minority voters?
Ms. Lajevardi. Thank you so very much for asking this
question, for allowing me to offer some of my research.
Our research has mostly looked at strict ID laws compared
to other laws. As you know, the strictest types of ID laws were
introduced in 2006 in Indiana and then in 2008 in Georgia. So
what our research has done is really looked at the effects of
these strict ID laws, for the most part, in comparison to their
counterparts.
And so the results that I spoke about in my written
testimony and also my oral testimony refer to the strictest
forms of these laws.
Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate that. And can you speak to the
harm that this question can impose on minority voters?
Ms. Lajevardi. Certainly. I can draw from my testimony. In
my first paper in 2017, we found that in general elections,
Latinos in our survey were 10 percent less likely to turn out
in States with strict identification laws than in those States
without strict IDs laws, all else equal. And these effects were
almost as large in primary elections where strict ID laws can
be expected to depress Latino turnout by 9.3 percentage points,
Black turnout by 8.6 points, and Asian-American turnout by 12.5
points.
And so given the already low turnout of most of these
groups across the country, these declines are all the more
noteworthy.
I want to say one thing, if I may, about the gaps as well.
So these laws don't only diminish minority participation in the
survey sample that we were looking at, but they also increase
the gap in the participation rate between Whites and non-
Whites. So, for instance, for Latinos, the predicted gap more
than doubled from 4.9 percentage points in States without
strict ID laws to 13.5 points in States with strict photo ID
laws in general elections. And it more than tripled, from 3.4
points to 13.2 points, in primaries. And I can go on and on
with respect to other racial groups, but I think that might
paint the picture.
Mr. Aguilar. Thanks, Dr. Lajevardi.
Ms. Senteno, research has shown that proof-of-citizenship
laws disproportionately hurt Latino and Hispanic voters who
face difficulty in obtaining documentation of citizenship, like
a passport. These documents are often costly and could require
taking time off of work to get these documents. And several
States provide proof of citizenship--or have proof-of-
citizenship laws that have been found to be preempted by the
National Voter Registration Act, yet, oftentimes, litigants--it
takes several years to obtain a judicial ruling striking down
these laws.
What can Congress do to make it easier for litigants to
obtain timely and effective relief from unlawful proof-of-
citizenship laws?
Ms. Senteno. Thank you for that question, Representative
Aguilar. So one thing that Congress can do is work on
legislation to restore the Voting Rights Act. As you have
mentioned, litigation is costly and time-consuming, and it can
take many years in some instances to get a resolution that
allows voters to be able to access the right to vote freely and
fairly. And so one thing that Congress can and should do is
work to ensure that we are doing all that we can to enact
legislation that restores the Voting Rights Act as a way to
ensure that those localities, those States that are most likely
to engage in discrimination with a history of discrimination
and that those practices that are most often used to
discriminate against voters of color can be addressed before
the election change takes place.
In addition to that, there is legislation within the H.R.
4, the Voting Rights Advancement Act, that addresses how to
also make litigation more accessible and more timely for those
private litigants who want to challenge voter laws that may not
be included or may not be covered by the [inaudible] formulas.
And so those are things like addressing preliminary injunction
standards.
Mr. Aguilar. Thanks, Ms. Senteno. I appreciate it.
Before my time is up, Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek
unanimous consent to enter into the record three reports
focusing on the harms of voter ID laws into the record: The
first by Mr. Barreto, who is on our second panel; the second by
Ms. Hajnal, Voter Identification Laws and Suppression of
Minority Voters; and the third titled, A Disproportionate
Burden: Strict Voter Identification Laws and Minority Turnout.
Chairman Butterfield. Without objection.`
Chairman Butterfield. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Aguilar.
Do you yield back, Mr. Aguilar?
Mr. Aguilar. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Butterfield. At this time, the Chair will
recognize the chairman of the--excuse me, the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, Mr. Steil.
Mr. Steil. Still the Ranking Member, but thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you having today's hearing,
unless you want to hand me the gavel, but I am guessing not.
Chairman Butterfield. Keep us alive, yes.
Mr. Steil. Let me dive in in the short time I have.
We heard a couple of folks speak in their opening remarks
regarding equal implementation. I think it is an important
topic to bring up, and I think we have actually seen in other
areas where photo ID is used, equal implementation being an
issue, but also being addressed.
In fact, every time I go through TSA, to the best of my
knowledge, every single person has to show their ID. In fact, I
grabbed a six-pack of beer at Walmart the other day. The
cashier recognized me, said, ``Hello, Bryan,'' and then asked
for my ID.
In the State of Wisconsin, every single person is asked for
their ID, I think in part to remove any sort of
disproportionate impact to any given group of individuals. It
seems like a reasonably straightforward solution to address
some of the challenges that may have been brought up in some of
those opening comments. I think the private sector has
addressed that, and I think it is maybe something other States
outside of the State of Wisconsin might want to look at.
Let me dive in to Ms. Lori Roman, if I can. Do you believe
voter ID increases confidence in the integrity of the election
process?
Ms. Roman. Yes. And I believe one of the other presenters
presented that Americans overwhelmingly agree with it of all
ethnicities. So it increases integrity, and it also ensures
that every single person's vote is not diluted by fraudulent
votes. So every person, every ethnicity should desire to not
have their vote diluted by a fraudulent vote.
Mr. Steil. Let me follow up. In your testimony, you quote
from a Yale Law and Policy Review article authored by the
former Ohio Secretary of State. In that, he said discriminatory
intent is the key determination for voter ID laws.
In your opinion, do voter ID laws have a discriminatory
intent?
Ms. Roman. No. If applied--as you indicated, if applied to
everyone and without any subcategories. The Supreme Court has
already looked at this. So in 2008, plurality of the Supreme
Court asserted that if the States' burdens on voting are merely
inconvenient and if its restrictions are not discriminatory,
those burdens are evaluated in such a way to defer to the
policymakers' judgment.
Mr. Steil. Thank you.
I am going to jump, now, over to Dr. Nazita Lajevardi, if I
can, for a moment.
Two of your studies use self-reported data about the impact
of voter ID on the propensity to vote, yet there has been other
studies using actual turnout data that have found that there
was not a difference in turnout in States based on voter ID.
Would your data, do you think, have been different if you
had used empirical data rather than self-reported information?
Ms. Lajevardi. Thank you for that question and for giving
me a chance to respond.
So our first two studies looked at survey data from a
national representative----
Mr. Steil. And I don't want to be rude, and you can add
things into the record, but I am limited for--I have got 90
seconds left. Do you think it would have been different? Yes or
no?
Ms. Lajevardi. So our third study did show the same effect,
and that was based on----
Mr. Steil. So, in your opinion, you don't think it would
have been different if self-reported to the empirical data.
Second question: So in your third study, you looked at
turnout changes between 2012 and 2016 in four States and,
according to your testimony, compared racially diverse counties
in those States against majority White counties. Your study
compared voter turnout in racially diverse counties in those
four States to racially diverse counties in States that did not
implement strict voter ID laws and how they would compare.
Question: In your analysis and in your model, did your
study take into effect variables that could affect turnout, in
particular, such as having a historically bad candidate like
Hillary Clinton?
Ms. Lajevardi. That was not a variable that we controlled
for, but we did control for other statewide covariates that
might have----
Mr. Steil. So you did not control for the difference maybe
between a Barack Obama and, in my opinion, a historically bad
candidate like Hillary Clinton, on the impact of minority voter
turnout?
Ms. Lajevardi. We simply just looked at the differences in
voter turnout in those counties in 2012 and in 2016.
Mr. Steil. I will not declare that I have a Ph.D. in
statistics, but I can tell you from an empirical data
standpoint, just walking around and talking to people in many
of these types of communities, that might very well be a
worthwhile thing to look to see if you can control for it,
because I think it is going to show up in the empirical data.
And so, with that, Mr. Chairman, looking at the time, I
appreciate you giving me the opportunity, and I will yield
back.
Chairman Butterfield. I thank the Ranking Member.
At this time, the Chair recognizes Ms. Leger Fernandez for
five minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Chairman Butterfield, for
holding this important hearing, and thank you to our witnesses
for being here to shine a light on the barriers we face today
with actual data rather than anecdote.
Mr. Campbell, I am very appreciative to you providing the
panel with a history of the repression of Native American
voters. In New Mexico, where I litigated some of these cases,
you know, it wasn't until the 1960s that Native Americans won
the last court case saying they had the right to vote wherever
they lived.
I found it interesting the way you tied historic
discrimination of Native American voters to voter ID laws today
with the example from North Dakota where, because--precisely
because of high Native American voter turnout, we then saw
these more restrictive voter ID laws, because I think that is
what we are seeing today, so I appreciated that.
Mr. Campbell, do you think you could respond a bit to the
questions that we have been hearing, as well as the idea that
this is not a problem and should not be considered a problem,
the issue of voter ID?
And then, maybe, tie that to why litigation is not the
solution, that we should try to find a solution to it
otherwise; for example, in Congress and in some of our laws?
Mr. Campbell. Yes. Thank you, Representative Fernandez.
I think absolutely we are seeing, in Indian Country, it is
a problem. With the high levels of poverty, the distance it
takes to get to the DMV, lack of access to transportation,
there absolutely is a disproportionate burden on Native voters
through the requirement of strict voter ID laws. And the
Federal district court found many facts that supported this
evidence, and, so, I think it absolutely is a problem that is--
needs to be addressed.
In terms of utilizing litigation to address the problem, it
is extremely costly and very time consuming and very
complicated to bring litigation to try and change this problem,
and require more forms of broadly accepted IDs like a utility
bill, a bank statement, or even a letter from the Tribe that
says that voters are qualified and live within the district.
So I do think it--you know, it is not the best solution to
the problem given its cost and expense, but it is certainly--
voter ID is a problem for Indian Country.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Mr. Campbell.
And I want to also turn to Dr. Atkeson with the University
of New Mexico, making us proud here today.
But I did--your research found that election officials
could administer facially nondiscriminatory election laws in a
discriminatory manner, right? As a Nueva Mexicana, I read with
concern the idea that, even in New Mexico, where we actually
have a history of higher participation by Hispano voters, that,
as you put it, the local street bureaucrats would ask Hispanos
for ID more often than non-Hispanos.
Could you describe what factors contribute to that?
Ms. Atkeson. Sure. So the--the factors that seem to
contribute to that are the very complicated laws that we have
that allow different types of voters to give different types of
IDs, and the fact that different types of voters are required
different ideas--IDs. So new voters, for example, who haven't
voted before, have to show a physical form of ID.
So some voters do have to do it. And, once you have sort of
a--you know, a setup like that, it creates more complications
for both voters, and for poll workers. What are they supposed
to do? And, when in doubt, poll workers rely on their own sense
of what they should be doing, what their own normative
judgments are about--about, you know, giving ID or not, and how
they decide to do that.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So H.R. 1 allows voters to certify
their identification under penalty of perjury. Now, would an
uniform application like this address the unequal treatment and
barriers you have identified?
Ms. Atkeson. I believe so. I think that if you had, you
know, a single criteria, that that would suggest that that
would be a way to move forward to create uniform policies
across voters.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And this could be to the panel, but,
perhaps, Mrs. Senteno. Ranking Member Steil said that higher
voter turnout in 2020 shows that voter ID laws don't deter
people from legally voting.
Do any of you have a response to this assertion? Was it--
was it that the voter turnout doesn't matter? I see I have run
out of time, but real quickly, perhaps a real quick answer, Ms.
Senteno.
Ms. Senteno. I will answer very quickly and say that, you
know, evidence has shown--more studies are coming out that
demonstrate that these voter ID laws do restrict Latino voters.
And, as we increase in the share of the electorate, the more
and more people who are prevented from voting, even if voter
turnout is not completely--if that share of the Latino
electorate is not increasing, then studies we see are showing
that that is the case.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chair, as my time has come to an end, I would like
to request unanimous consent to enter into--two documents into
the record.
The first is ``The New Barrier to Participation:
Heterogenous Application of Voter Identification Policies,'' by
Dr. Atkeson.
The second is ``Obstacles at Every Turn'' by the Native
American Rights Fund.
Chairman Butterfield. Without objection, both documents
will be received.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. I thank the gentlelady.
At this time, the Chair will recognize Mr. Davis, the
Ranking Member of the full committee, for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you again to all
the witnesses. Great to hear from many of you.
First off, Ms. Roman, there has been a lot of talk about
voter turnout. And, again, as I mentioned in my opening
statement, I think it is tragic that we don't talk about the
good things we are doing in this country that have led to
historic midterm turnout in 2018 and in 2020, across all
demographics. Instead, we talk about what divides us and what
could lead to lower turnout in the midst of historic turnout.
Now, taking a look back at history--I know you mentioned
some historical facts during your opening statements, Ms.
Roman. I want to ask you a quick question: Was voter turnout--
did we lose her? Impeccable timing.
There you go. Are you back----
Ms. Roman. I am back [continuing].
Mr. Davis. Ms. Roman.
Okay. In--with the initial Voting Rights Act that passed
with Republicans leading that in the 1960s, could you tell us
if voter turnout was used as part of maybe determining what a
covered jurisdiction would be?
I will go ahead and answer for her if she keeps losing----
Ms. Roman. Okay. There. I heard you this time.
Could you just repeat the question quickly. I am sorry
about that.
Mr. Davis. Yes. Was voter turnout utilized in the initial
Voting Rights Act to determine what covered jurisdictions would
be covered under?
Ms. Roman. I am--I am not aware of whether it was or not. I
am sorry.
Mr. Davis. It was. It was the main driver of the voter
turnout for the presidential race in 1964, or was utilized. So,
voter turnout has been part of determining what works and what
doesn't work.
Actually, let me move on to Ms. Senteno. And, Ms. Senteno,
I appreciate your work that you are doing on behalf of Latino
voters all throughout the country. And it is not just about
voter turnout. It is about having a Latino representation,
right, in Congress? Is that true?
Ms. Senteno. So that is one--sorry. In terms of voting
rights in general, representation is certainly one--one thing
that law does--works to increase through the litigation that we
bring. That may be through litigation against at-large systems
or discriminatory redistricting, or, in other instances, other
cases that, you know, deal with the ability to elect.
So representation is one aspect of that, but, when we are
talking about voter ID laws and ballot--proof of citizenship
requirements, really the focus there is the studies and
evidence that show that Latinos are hampered by their ability
to cast their ballots because of these restrictions.
Mr. Davis. Well, we have seen historic turnout, and
historic voter participation in some of these demographics, and
I certainly hope that continues. And I certainly hope that--I
certainly hope MALDEF plays a role in touting some of the
successes.
And, as you look ahead, though, redistricting is coming up.
I hope MALDEF's concern about a lack of Hispanic representation
maybe in States like Illinois--are you engaged, or is your
organization engaged to ensure that the growth of Latino voting
population in my home State of Illinois is part of a possible
new congressional seat, since Hispanics are clearly
underrepresented in the Illinois congressional delegation?
Ms. Senteno. So MALDEF does engage in redistricting public
education and, when necessary, we will engage in litigation to
address, you know, redistricting plans that are discriminatory.
And so MALDEF does have a regional office in Illinois, and we
are engaged in public education efforts to make sure that
community members are aware of the redistricting process, how
it works, and how they can be engaging in advocating for their
own community as Illinois and local jurisdictions redraw their
district lines.
And that is an activity that we engage in across the
country in many different locations, including Texas and
California, and we will be engaging with our partners on the
ground to make sure that community members are empowered with
information. But, in addition to all of that work, yes, where
necessary, MALDEF does bring litigation when redistricting
plans are discriminatory.
Mr. Davis. Would you consider it necessary to have a
lawsuit or put forth litigation if there is one Hispanic Member
of Congress from the State of Illinois with--I believe I have
heard this statistic--40 percent increase over the last decade
of voting age Latinos and only one Hispanic in the district?
Ms. Senteno. I think it would certainly be too early for us
to commit to what we might do in terms of litigation, or a
litigation strategy, with respect to a redistricting plan in
Illinois, even in the scenario that you have just described to
me. We obviously would take it under consideration and look
closely at what that districting plan looks like, and how it
included, or how it addressed the Latino community throughout
Illinois, and in those pockets where there are significant
Latino population.
Mr. Davis. Yeah. We will look very closely, too, at equal
representation of litigation in Democratic versus Republican-
led redistricting States, too.
Look, thank you again for your responses. Thanks to
everyone.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Davis.
And thank you, Rodney, for making reference to the 1965
Voting Rights Act. I remember it so very well. I had just
finished high school a few weeks before the VRA was passed.
And, as I recall, one of the most significant parts of the
VRA, as you said, was that the legislature was bipartisan.
Democrats and Republicans came together and passed the VRA. It
was supported and demanded, actually, by President Lyndon B.
Johnson at the time, right after the Selma to Montgomery
massacre.
So thank you for bringing that up. I looked it up a moment
ago. It looks like only 74 Members of the House voted against
it. 328 Members supported it on August 3rd, 1965. So thank you
for mentioning that fact. It is something we are very proud of.
At this time, the Chair will recognize the gentlelady from
the suburbs of Philadelphia, my friend, Mary Gay Scanlon, for
five minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you very much, Chairman Butterfield, for
the opportunity to examine the facts about strict voter ID
laws, or, as our colleague said, the reality of the impact of
those laws.
As a Representative from Pennsylvania, and someone who
spent decades representing voters seeking access to the ballot,
we recently lived that reality, and I saw the detrimental
impact of strict voter ID laws firsthand.
Unfortunately, voter ID requirements that may seem like
common sense to some turn out to have a serious antidemocratic
impact in practice. So, I welcome the opportunity to examine
the perception that voter ID laws are neutral or even
necessary, when, in fact, the reality is different.
In March 2012, Pennsylvania's then-Republican Governor
signed into law a bill passed by our legislature, which, at the
time, was all Republican, which mandated that voters provide
certain types of identification each time they voted. So it
imposed strict new restrictions on the types of eligible
identification.
Under this new law, the lead plaintiff in the case, which
ultimately succeeded in overturning that law, was Viviette
Applewhite, a 92-year-old African American woman who had voted
in every election since 1960. She would have been unable to
cast her ballot in 2012 despite having worked for our country
as a welder during World War II, marched with Dr. Martin Luther
King during the civil rights movement, et cetera. She did not,
at age 92, have a valid driver's license and, at the age of 92,
lacked access to her birth certificate.
Her story was the same as hundreds of thousands of
Pennsylvanians who, due to circumstance, age, or ability,
lacked the types of ID which were newly required. In fact,
expert testimony at the trial established that more than half a
million, or more than 6 percent of Pennsylvania's registered
voters, lacked the types of ID required by the new law. And,
for context, the number of voters who would have been barred
from voting in 2012 was more than six times the margin by which
President Biden beat the former President in Pennsylvania in
the 2020 election.
So, as for the statement that voter ID has no
discriminatory intent, we also saw that that wasn't true in
Pennsylvania. Republican leadership bragged on tape that the
strict voter ID law was one of the legislative victories his
caucus had chalked up in his efforts to flip the State's
electoral votes for the Republican candidate in the 2012
presidential election.
And, in fact, the data in the report offered as expert
evidence at that trial showed that three times the number of
Democratic--Democrats and Independents would have been
disenfranchised by that law as would have been Republicans.
Nationally, we know that 11 percent of Americans lack the
type of identification mandated by strict voter ID laws, or at
least of the type that were signed into law in Pennsylvania.
The time, fees, and documentation required to get these IDs are
insurmountable for many Americans, especially older Americans,
folks with disabilities, and, depending on the nature of the
ID, also students and married women.
So I saw that firsthand as I helped to organize and
participated in free legal clinics to assist thousands of
Pennsylvanians to obtain ID before that law was struck down.
And we knew that we couldn't reach tens of thousands of others.
So, as we consider proposals to protect the integrity of
our elections, it is important to weigh the facts--in other
words, the actual benefits, which remain extremely speculative,
against the very real harm of such laws, and it is also why I
suspect--I support the practice--practice-based preclearance
provisions in H.R. 1, the For the People Act.
So, Dr. Lajevardi, you have conducted several studies
analyzing the impact of strict voter ID laws on minority
voters. Can you just talk about the implicit bias of the types
of IDs that are chosen? For example, drivers' licenses when you
have populations that don't drive; birth certificates when you
have a history of a population that, perhaps, had at-home
births, hunters' licenses, as opposed to student licenses--
student IDs.
Ms. Lajevardi. Yes. Thank you so much. What I will say is
that no two States has the same voter ID law, and so, the
requirements of each of these State laws that are constantly
being introduced, passed, or are not passed, they vary from
State to State, and, so, there is a great deal of confusion
that comes along with them. There is a high cost for actually
knowing what kinds of laws--individuals need to bring to the
polls.
I, myself, have not exactly studied this, but I will point
the Subcommittee to a paper by Bernard Fraga and Michael Miller
that is forthcoming in the Journal of Politics, where the
authors look at a case study in Texas which had implemented a
strict voter ID law in 2014. But then, a last-minute Federal
court decision allowed Texans without qualifying documents to
vote in the 2016 election.
And what they found was that 16,000 Texans who would have
been disenfranchised for lack of compliant ID were able to vote
in 2016 because of this change. And, when asked why they--they
were not--they didn't have the right type of ID, the authors
found that individuals actually had--many of them had had their
licenses taken away. Many had moved and hadn't gotten proper
ID--Texas ID.
And, so, there is a number of reasons for why individuals
would not have the right kind of ID to participate in that--in
a given election.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. And I see my time has expired.
I would just seek unanimous consent to introduce into the
record the memorandum opinion of Judge McGinley in the
Pennsylvania case, Applewhite v. The Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, that outlines the judge's findings in support of
his decision that the strict voter ID law in Pennsylvania was
an unconstitutional restriction on voters' rights.
I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. Without objection, this memorandum
will be received. Thank you very much, Ms. Scanlon.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. At this time, the Chair will
recognize himself for five minutes, and I begin with Dr.
Atkeson. Again, again, again, Dr. Atkeson, thank you for your
testimony.
You know, to my satisfaction, it has been demonstrated time
and time again that voter ID laws disproportionately impact
racial minorities. It certainly may impact a lot of people, but
it disproportionately impacts racial minorities. That is a
fact.
My question to you, Dr. Atkeson, is: What can we do? What
can Congress do to reduce the risk that voter ID laws will be
administered in a discriminatory manner?
Ms. Atkeson. Well, creating uniform policies across States
would be one way to create consistency, probably the best way.
Chairman Butterfield. Is there a significant disagreement
among the nonpartisan experts that voter ID laws
disproportionately impact racial minorities?
Ms. Atkeson. I think there is some papers that show
different effects. Some papers show--so there--you know, there
are various papers that show different things depending on how
you look at it.
Chairman Butterfield. And let me move to Matthew Campbell.
Mr. Campbell, you have successfully litigated, I am told, to
protect Native Americans--almost said Native African Americans.
But you have litigated to protect Native Americans from
discriminatory voter ID laws.
What are the unique circumstances facing Native American
voters that render strict voter ID laws particularly
burdensome?
Mr. Campbell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think one of the biggest things that, we saw in North
Dakota was the requirement of a residential address where many
homes on the reservations in North Dakota just simply did not
have a residential address. So, it was a requirement that was
essentially impossible to comply with.
The other things we see are the high levels of poverty on
many reservations, the lack of access to transportation, and
the disproportionately long distances to government offices,
like the driver's license sites, or DMVs. All of these things
place a disproportionate burden on Native American voters to
obtain voter IDs.
Chairman Butterfield. And thank you for that, Mr. Campbell.
I recalled a couple years ago, when we held this hearing
out in North Dakota, there was an abundance of evidence from
that community that so many people do not have reservation
addresses and how that discriminates against them and prevents
them from having the ID that the law requires. So thank you for
including that in the record again today.
Let me go over to the professor from Michigan State
University. Some studies of voter ID laws have found that these
laws do not necessarily disproportionately decrease turnout of
minority voters. Yet, your research has found that strict voter
ID laws do appear to have different effects by race and
ethnicity.
Help me. What is the explanation for these different
results?
Ms. Lajevardi. Certainly. Thank you for asking that
question,
So, there have been a myriad of studies that have begun to
study the effects of voter ID laws beginning in the late 2000s
through the present day. In the late 2000s, the early studies
that came about looked at the influence of these ID laws before
the strictest types of laws were actually introduced into State
legislatures.
And, so, you know, scholars really did not have a chance to
actually understand the breadth of these voter ID laws. What is
different about our research is that, now, by the time that we
do our studies, 51 elections have passed--Federal elections
have passed in which we can actually assess the impact of voter
ID laws over time.
And, certainly, as more data has become available, more
scholars are studying this question. And, while each of these
data sets, or each of these scholars, or papers, are
approaching the question differently, what you can see is a
consistent negative effect on voter turnout.
Now, sometimes our estimates are small. Sometimes they are
larger. It depends on how you slice and dice your data. But I
can--my read of the summary--my read of the literature and my
summary of it is that these laws do, in fact, pose a
disproportionate, negative, strong, consistent depreciation of
minority votes.
Chairman Butterfield. Thank you. Thank you very much for
those responses. I am going to conclude at this time and yield
back the balance of my time.
Let me thank you. The member questions are now concluded,
and I want to thank each one of the members of the first panel
for your testimony today. It has been very, very enlightening
and will become a very integral and important part of this
record. So thank you very much.
We are now going to move to our second panel of witnesses.
Joining us today--and I hope they are all in place--and let me
ask the staff if they are all in place. They are.
Joining us today on our second panel are Dr. Matt Barreto
of the University of California, Los Angeles.
Terry Minnis is with the Asian Americans Advancing Justice
and today, it is AAAJC.
The next witness is Kira Romero-Craft. She is with the
LatinoJustice Organization, PRLDEF. Am I right? Okay.
And finally--I should have rehearsed this before I started,
Mr. Ranking Member, but our next witness is Harmeet Dhillon of
the Dhillon Law Group.
Dr. Barreto is Professor of political science and Chicano
and Central American studies at the University of California at
Los Angeles and founder of the Research Center Latino Policy &
Politics Initiative. His research examines the political
participation of racial and ethnic minorities in the United
States, and his work has been published in numerous leading
scholarly journals.
In addition to his research on Latino voting patterns, Dr.
Barreto has conducted extensive research on voting rights. He
has been an expert witness in numerous voting rights lawsuits.
Terry Minnis is the Senior Director of Census and Voting
Programs with the Asian Americans Advancing Justice
organization. She is a widely respected authority on voting
rights. She was one of the key leaders in the campaigns to
reauthorize the Voting Rights Act of 2006, and I have been in
Congress long enough to remember and have participated in that.
She was a key leader in the campaign to reauthorize the VRA in
2006.
And I might say to my Republican friends, it was Mr.
Sensenbrenner. Mr. Steil, you know that very well. It was Mr.
Sensenbrenner and President Bush and others who embraced the
2006 reauthorization. And so that, too, was bipartisan.
But the--also, the Supreme Court's decision in Shelby
County v. Holder, she was very much a part.
Ms. Minnis has published several articles, chapters in all
four editions of the ABA's Elections Handbook, and has been
counsel on numerous amicus briefs filed before the Supreme
Court on voting rights cases.
Kira Romero-Craft. Kira is the Managing Attorney for the
southeast office of LatinoJustice PRLDEF. I always have trouble
with that, PRLDEF. Her work focuses on immigration--immigrants'
rights, voting rights, economic justice, and criminal justice
reform.
In the area of voting rights, she successfully litigated to
compel the Florida Secretary of State and election supervisor
in 32 Florida counties to provide Spanish language voting
materials to Spanish-speaking voters educated in Puerto Rico.
Next is Harmeet Dhillon. Harmeet is the founding partner of
the Dhillon Law Group, Incorporated. Dhillon's broad experience
also encompasses securities and entertainment, employment
discrimination, and civil rights matters. Dhillon also
represents clients across California in election and campaign
law matters, ranging from general compliance and ethics
representation for partisan and nonpartisan contenders to
ballot description contests, and that is a big deal in
California for those of you who are not aware. She is regularly
retained by candidates and campaigns for advice on complex
legal issues.
Dhillon is a graduate of Dartmouth and the University of
Virginia School of Law.
I am going to recognize each of the witnesses for five
minutes, and we will begin with Dr. Barreto. You are now
recognized.

STATEMENTS OF DR. MATT BARRETO, PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES; TERRY AO MINNIS, SENIOR DIRECTOR OF
CENSUS AND VOTING PROGRAMS, ASIAN AMERICANS ADVANCING JUSTICE;
KIRA ROMERO-CRAFT, DIRECTOR, LATINOJUSTICE PRLDEF; HARMEET
DHILLON, ESQ., FOUNDING PARTNER, DHILLON LAW GROUP

STATEMENT OF DR. MATT BARRETO

Mr. Barreto. Thank you to the Committee for the invitation
to speak today. The matter of free and fair elections is the
bedrock of our democracy.
My name is Matt Barreto, and I am a tenured professor at
UCLA, where I am also the Director of the UCLA Voting Rights
Project. I have researched access to voting for more than 15
years, and provided expert reports and expert testimony in
seven different State and Federal cases related to voter
identification laws.
Across these States, my reports have been credited by both
Democratic- and Republican-appointed judges as providing clear
and accurate data on the impacts and the burdens of voter ID
laws. I have also examined the national trends on access to
voter identification and underlying documents, and I have
published numerous peer-reviewed scholarly articles and book
chapters on the topic of voter access and voter identification
laws.
Every single adult American citizen who is eligible to vote
should enjoy an equal access to the ballot. It should not be
harder for some citizens to vote. We should not erect more
barriers for just some citizens. Americans who are eligible to
vote should be able to register and cast their ballot without
undue obstacles and burdens.
And, as you have no doubt heard, there is no widespread
threat of voter fraud in our elections. This topic has been
thoroughly analyzed by political scientists, government
commissions, and independent researchers, and the conclusion
has been overwhelming, that our elections are free and fair,
and the allegations of voter fraud are a myth. In response to
this hypothetical myth of voter fraud, some States have enacted
strict voter identification requirements for voting, often
called voter ID laws.
In 2006, as the voter ID debate was being implemented and
debated, I began to study the consequences of such laws. From a
combination of analyses using official voter files; State ID
databases, such as drivers' license records; and validated
public opinion surveys, there is an unmistakable trend. Black,
Latino, and immigrant communities are statistically less likely
to have a valid ID for purposes of voting as compared to White,
non-Hispanic populations.
What is more, in many States, the ID laws have specific
rules and caveats so many people wrongly believe that they have
a valid ID and do not attempt to navigate the bureaucracy to
get a new one.
For instance, an expired ID does not count in most states.
The name on the ID must be an exact match; no nicknames or
changes due to marriage. The address listed must be an impact
exact match, and P.O. Boxes are often not allowed. And there is
a maze of which exact ID counts.
In many places, even official IDs issued by a government
agency, such as a university school ID, or Social Services IDs,
library cards, or others, do not count. So, for millions of
Americans who do have some sort of ID, they are excluded from
voting because of strict and specific rules in their specific
States.
But, then, there are millions of people who just don't have
any sort of government-issued photo ID in the first place.
According to the 2019 Census American Community Survey, 8.5
percent of all households do not have any car or vehicle
available. While drivers' licenses seem ubiquitous to those of
us who fly back and forth to the Nation's Capital, we have to
put ourselves in the shoes of millions of Americans who don't
own a car, have never been on an airplane, yet they have a
right to vote without undue burdens. And these burdens fall
disproportionately on Black, Latino, and immigrant communities.
Beyond voter ID laws, my report has also examined the
importance of bilingual voting materials. According to data
from the 2015 Census ACS, there are 10 million U.S. citizens
eligible to vote who do not speak English well, with the
largest population being U.S. citizens who are Latino, at over
5 million.
When it comes to language access, voting rights provisions
are settled law. Where language minority populations reached
thresholds, State and local jurisdictions must provide non-
English access to all voting materials that are otherwise
available in English.
Research in political science has documented with clear
evidence that access to Spanish, Asian, and Native or
indigenous language voting materials increase voter
participation rates among impacted minority groups. These
findings are consistent across all different language criteria.
But, similar to voter identification laws, the research has
demonstrated an inconsistent application with many covered
jurisdictions not aware or not providing the proper non-English
voting materials. This has a tremendously negative impact on
those communities' ability to understand and participate in our
elections.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Barreto follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. Thank you. Thank you very much.
At this time, the Chair recognizes Ms. Minnis for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRY AO MINNIS

Ms. Minnis. Good afternoon, Chairman Butterfield, Ranking
Member Steil, and members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Terry Ao Minnis, and I am the Senior Director of
Census and Voting Programs at Asian Americans Advancing
Justice, AAAJC. We are a national nonprofit, nonpartisan
organization dedicated to advancing the civil and human rights
for Asian Americans and building and promoting a fair and
equitable society for all.
One of our top priorities is the elimination of
discriminatory barriers to meaningful civic participation by
Asian Americans. I want to thank you for this opportunity to
appear before the Subcommittee today to provide comments on the
Asian American electorate, and how the language barrier and the
lack of multilingual support, impede our community's ability to
achieve full political participation.
Asian Americans have been the Nation's fastest-growing
racial group for well over a decade. We have seen a similar
increase among the Asian American electorate with over 11.5
million eligible Asian American voters in 2020, a 150 percent
growth over the last two decades. The 2020 election also showed
a 27 percent increase in registered Asian Americans, and a 36
percent increase in Asian Americans who voted, compared to the
2016 election.
At the same time, we once again saw the consistent double-
digit gap with White voters for both voter registration and
turnout that we have seen in election after election. This
persistent gap highlights systemic issues and barriers facing
Asian Americans' free and fair access to the ballot.
One of the primary barriers derives from the historical
discrimination that denied Asian Americans the rights held by
U.S. citizens for most of the country's existence as Federal
policy barred immigrants of Asian dissent from becoming U.S.
citizens, and from even being allowed entry into the country.
Because immigration from Asia was not reopened until 1965,
today, over two out of three Asian Americans are born outside
the United States, with almost three-quarters of Asian
Americans speaking a language other than English at home.
Additionally, almost a third of Asian Americans are limited
English proficient, or LEP, and have some difficulties with the
English language. As a result, a major obstacle facing Asian
American voters is the language barrier. Navigating the voting
process can be complicated and overwhelming, even for those who
are fluent in English.
When multilingual support is properly provided, civic
engagement increases. When multilingual support is withdrawn or
denied, language barriers are exacerbated, which leads to less
voters participating in our democracy.
LEP voters face threshold barriers to understanding the
election process, such as how to register, locate their polling
place, and learning about absentee and early voting options.
Some will have emigrated from a country with vastly different
democratic and voting systems. They may not be able to access
election administration websites, which serve as a primary
source of information for many voters, because most are only in
English.
Telephone multilingual support is often also not a viable
option for LEP voters. Even where there is bilingual staffing
available that could provide multilingual help, it can be
cumbersome and difficult to reach that staff person. If a voter
can navigate all of that, they must next overcome challenges in
casting a ballot. There is a higher risk of LEP voters
encountering hostility from monolingual poll workers, including
poll workers not familiar with existing laws about language
assistance, such as sections 203 and 208 of the Voting Rights
Act.
Additionally, ballots and other voting materials are often
written in high-grade-level English, making it difficult for
LEP voters to comprehend and respond. This can be compounded by
higher levels of illiteracy rates, whether in English or in the
LEP voter's original language.
If an LEP voter, who may be a first-time voter as a newly
naturalized citizen, has a bad experience when trying to vote
for the first time, it stands to reason that they will not
attempt to vote again without significant intervention and
motivation by a third party.
Ultimately, lack of multilingual support creates formidable
hurdles for LEP voters. The history of discriminatory intent in
denying language assistance shows that the lack of multilingual
support has long been understood to interfere with an LEP
voter's free and fair access to the ballot, and has been used
for just that purpose.
Thank you again for this opportunity to share our
organizational views on this topic.
[The statement of Ms. Minnis follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. And thank you, Ms. Minnis.
At this time, the Chair recognizes Ms. Romero-Craft for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF KIRA ROMERO-CRAFT

Ms. Romero-Craft. Chairman Butterfield, Ranking Member
Steil, and members of the Subcommittee on Elections, my name is
Kira Romero-Craft, and I serve as the Director of the Southeast
Region for LatinoJustice PRLDEF--that is correct, Ranking
Member--Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund.
LatinoJustice led the way in ushering bilingual voting
systems to the benefit of millions of language minority voters.
Today, we use litigation and advocacy to protect those rights
to stop discriminatory purges of eligible voters and to stem
the dilution of the Latino voting strength.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you about
ongoing discrimination and challenges faced by language
minority voters in Georgia and in Florida, when they attempt to
exercise their fundamental right to vote. It is of critical
importance to ensure that language minority voters enjoy the
full protections of the Voting Rights Act, and any changes to
improve those.
I have been working litigating cases brought under the
Voting Rights Act as well as leading our Cada Voto Cuenta
nonpartisan election protection voter education and poll-
monitoring activities since I joined LatinoJustice at the
southeast office located in Orlando, Florida, in 2017. As a
result, I have experienced firsthand the complaints of voters
suffering discrimination, and also the pushback and outright
opposition from certain election officials providing full
compliance with the language assistance requirements of the
Voting Rights Act.
In Georgia, we have seen Spanish-language-dominant voters
who have not even been able to register to vote because there
are no voter registration applications available in Spanish, or
assistance available, as well as not receiving updated
information related to changes being made to the administration
of elections in their preferred language. We have seen that in
the 2020 elections as well as during the runoff elections.
In addition, I would be remiss to not include the fact that
Puerto Rican U.S. citizens were denied the opportunity to
exchange their Puerto Rican driver's license, or identity
document in Georgia for many, many years, and it wasn't until
recent settlement, based on our litigation in the State of
Georgia, that allowed Puerto Ricans to enjoy the full
privileges of all U.S. citizens.
In Florida, we have fielded many complaints from voters, in
addition to a voter in Lake County who wasn't provided Spanish-
language services in order to register to vote; voters in
Osceola County who have had the police called on them because
they were wearing a Spanish-language T-shirt and called--they
called the police to have them removed from the line when they
were trying to exercise their right to vote; as well as an
elderly voter in Miami-Dade County who was not allowed to bring
the assister of her choice into the voting booth to help her
with her ballot.
I am here to testify specifically about how language access
provisions are still vitally important to achieve full equality
and access to the ballot in America.
An example of a recent case involving language assistance
is our lawsuit brought against 32 Florida counties for failure
to provide required language assistance to Puerto Rican voters
with limited English proficiency in 2018 as required by Section
4(e) of the Voting Rights Act. Our advocacy of course began in
the spring of 2018, where we called election officials to
address their obligations to provide Spanish language
assistance and materials under Section 4(e), which went
unanswered.
LatinoJustice and our partner organization, Demos, filed a
lawsuit against the Florida Secretary of State and the 32
Florida counties, which would have forced them to provide the
materials and assistance in Spanish.
Because of our election protection activities, we also
learned that polling places in these counties named in the
lawsuit were failing to provide the materials and the
assistance despite a court order requiring to do so.
As a result of our litigation, the Governor of Florida
initiated a rulemaking process to require Spanish-language
ballots across the State. Yet, despite the court order and the
Governor's mandates, we have still been met with objections.
Fortunately, the rules were passed last year. And, earlier
this year, we did enter into a settlement agreement with 31 of
the 32 counties that now agree to provide Spanish-language-
dominant voters materials and assistance so that they can cast
their ballot.
Not surprisingly, one of the supervisors of elections,
Charlotte County's supervisor, declined to settle, advising
that, in his county, the number of voters eligible to receive
these services was too small and did not justify the cost.
It is also important to note that there are many instances
of discrimination inside of the polls that we hear about, but,
because we cannot be in the polls, we cannot report on those
issues of discrimination.
In closing, we support the passage of voting rights laws
that enforce the language minority assistance provision
currently provided by the Voting Rights Act and make those
stronger.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today in
support of these changes.
[The statement of Ms. Romero-Craft follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. And thank you for your testimony.
At this time, the Chair is pleased to recognize Ms.
Dhillon. She will be recognized for five minutes.
And, Ms. Dhillon, in reading your bio this morning, it
appears that you have some connection to the adjoining county
to my home county of Wilson, North Carolina. It looks like you
may have resided at one point in Johnston County, which is to
our south.
But thank you for coming today, and thank you for your
distinguished career. You are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HARMEET DHILLON

Ms. Dhillon. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Butterfield, Ranking Subcommittee Member Steil,
and members of the Committee, I think we can all agree that we
strongly support election integrity, including safe, fair, and
free elections.
I am a Republican civil rights lawyer living in San
Francisco, and I have litigated civil rights and election
issues across the country for over a decade.
As a young immigrant, born in India, growing up in rural
Smithfield, North Carolina in the 1970s, I cherish the fact
that I live in the greatest country in the world, and where
voter participation and access is admired around the world.
But declining voter confidence is a real issue in the
United States today. In a post-election poll by the California
Institute of Technology, 39 percent of respondents nationwide
did not have confidence in the 2020 election results--39
percent. One can accept the outcome of the 2020 election while
recognizing that many voters correctly recognize several States
ran roughshod over traditional voter integrity safeguards.
Thirty-nine percent is a significant number of worried voters
that should concern all Americans. This is clearly not a
partisan issue.
Outside Washington, where I and most Americans reside,
there are practical solutions to this problem that the last two
national, bipartisan commissions on elections have endorsed. I
would like to discuss two of those solutions today.
The first is requiring voter ID. While it is not popular
among elected Democrat officials and activists, it is widely
popular amongst the--both parties' electorates. Every poll I am
aware of, taken both before and after the recent election
regarding voter ID, has shown overwhelming support amongst
Democrat, Independent, and Republican voters.
Most recently, 69 percent of African American and 82
percent of other minority voters express support for voter ID
laws nationwide, yet Democrats think these voters are utterly
incapable of obtaining an ID to vote. As an American and an
immigrant and a woman of color, I find that assumption
offensive.
For example, Georgia voters overwhelming favored requiring
voter ID when voting absentee. That is 74 percent of Georgia
voters in favor of voter ID compared to a mere 22 percent who
are opposed.
One of the reasons for the overwhelming support for voter
ID was put forth by the 2005 Carter-Baker Commission on Voting
in a report called ``Building Confidence in U.S. Elections.''
That commission predicted our current national mood, and I
quote. ``Americans are losing confidence in the fairness of
elections. And while we do not face a crisis today, we need to
address the problem of our electoral system.''
That crisis is now upon us. The commission offered a simple
solution, and I quote. ``The electoral system cannot inspire
public confidence if no safeguards exist to deter and detect
fraud or to confirm the identity of voters. Photo IDs currently
are needed to board a plane, to enter Federal buildings, and to
cash a check. Voting is equally important.''
Despite this bipartisan wisdom, including from our former
President Jimmy Carter, who I think no one on this panel would
call a racist, Democrats are refusing to embrace the solutions
of the Carter-Baker Commission, such as voter ID. Recent bills
in Congress, including H.R. 1 and S. 1, would do the opposite
of the commission's recommendations by upending voter ID
requirements across the Nation.
When an election administration proposal that endures broad
bipartisan support, as opposed to elected Democrats, is it any
wonder why H.R. 1 and S. 1 have partisan opposition, but no
Republican support?
Also of note, most voter ID laws today provide free IDs to
those who do not have them, so that they may vote and enjoy
other freedoms important in today's society, such as to buy
antihistamines, to board a plane, to get a vaccination--another
important issue in today's society. Such identification is
necessary for practically every social service, including
benefits--including welfare benefits for most in need. Why
would we not want to help citizens obtain them?
The argument against free voter ID is that it poses a
barrier to voting. However, the evidence does not support this.
A sweeping study by the Knight Foundation that sampled 1,200
voters was recently released last year exploring why people did
not vote, and the truth is painfully clear, and I quote,
``Structural issues, such as voter ID laws, didn't come up
enough to even be marked in the Knight survey results.'' But,
beyond ID, there is a second way to increase voter confidence,
and that is by maintaining accurate voter lists.
In D.C., for instance, voters this last election cycle
reported receiving five or more ballots intended for former
residents of their apartments.
This issue also has bipartisan support. In 2014, another
bipartisan presidential election commission, the Obama
Presidential Election Commission, had this to say: ``Accurate
voter lists are essential to the management of elections. The
quality of the list can affect the ability of people to vote,
of election offices to detect problems, and of courts and
others monitoring elections to detect election fraud or
irregularities. A list with many incorrect records can slow
down the processing of voters at polling places, resulting in
longer lines, and this has been a huge problem in recent
elections.
``Election officials across the political spectrum
recognize the value of accurate and manageable election
rolls.'' Yet, virtually every State--every time State election
officials seek to clean up the voter rolls, Democrats sue to
fight and stop such efforts.
In conclusion, the unspoken truth is that all voters know
that voter ID and voter list maintenance are important tools to
maintain voter confidence in election administration and the
results they produce. Democrat politicians and radical
activists undermine that valuable confidence when they fail to
support these commonsense, bipartisan, and widely supported
tools.
Thank you for your time today, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Ms. Dhillon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Butterfield. And we thank you for your testimony.
We will now proceed to member questions.
Ms. Leger Fernandez, looks like you are first on the list.
You are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Chairman, and to
this panel of witnesses.
I think I am going to begin with Dr. Barreto. You have
conducted a number of studies and published several articles
regarding language access for Latino and Hispanic voters. We
also heard today about that importance for Asian American
voters, and I would say, in my experience, for Native American
voters, where we have several cases in New Mexico where they
are required to make sure there are Navajo speakers, Jicarilla
speakers.
But, sticking to the Spanish-language voting, why is that
so key for Latino and Hispano voters, the Spanish-language
voting materials?
Mr. Barreto. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
I think you have identified that it is important for any
non English-speaking-citizen eligible voters, but Hispanic and
Latino are the largest segment of U.S. citizen adult non
English speakers, numbering over 5.5 million. So it is an
incredibly large group, folks who are either born in the U.S.,
perhaps born in Puerto Rico, where Spanish is the official
language, and then come to the United States to vote in
elections here. Those voting materials need to be available in
the language that the voter is comfortable with so that they
can properly understand all the rules, the procedures, as well
as who the candidates are and how to mark their ballot.
Numerous political science studies have documented about a
10-point increase in voter participation for Spanish speakers
if they have an access to bilingual voting materials. So there
is no question that, empirically, it has proven to help boost
voter turnout rates to those who are otherwise eligible, but
perhaps are not fluent in reading and speaking English.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And your testimony and answer to this
question as well as others really brings us back to the fact
that there is also an impact on returning voters, right? That,
if you are harassed, if you are treated in a way that is
different than others when you go to vote the first time, that
you might not come back, and, so, that there is a very
dangerous possibility of future suppression.
So the Voting Rights Act language access provisions, what
kind of impact have they had on Latino and Spanish-language
voting?
Mr. Barreto. Where they have been implemented fairly and
fully, which is important to note that it is not always
implemented fully--there needs to be better oversight of
implementation of language access provisions of both Section
203 and Section 208.
But, where they have been implemented fully, we have seen a
higher voter participation rate, both first-time voters as well
as, you note, of returning voters, where the most difficult
things can be for a voter which has language challenges to
navigate the system, and if they don't feel that they can do
that, if they don't feel welcome, if the language materials are
not available, as you note, they may just leave and not come
back. They may feel excluded from the system.
Where Section 203 is implemented, there have been very
robust increases in Spanish-speaking Latino voter
participation.
Ms.  Leger Fernandez. Thank you. And, based on your
research, what do you think are the reasons that Americans, as
has been--one of the witnesses stated today, might not have
faith in our elections? What----
Mr. Barreto. Well, faith in our elections is very good, and
I would agree with that sentiment. But it is important that
those voters who show up to vote don't feel that they are being
discriminated against for any reason, whether it is for
language, for lack of ID, or being challenged at the polls.
When those sorts of instances happen, where voters have a
negative experience at the polls and are challenged or are not
able to navigate the polling place, that leads to a rejection
and withdrawal. And so that is an important part of confidence
as having an accessible and confident experience at the polls.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. And the numbers are vast in
terms of one court has called an infinitesimally small number
of evidence of fraud versus the very high percentage of Latino
and other language speakers who are turned away.
Ms. Romero-Craft, so existing law, as Dr. Barreto just
pointed out, requires that there be Spanish-speaking
assistance. What do you believe are the principal reasons that
States and localities do not comply with the statutory
obligation?
Ms. Romero-Craft. I think there are a number of reasons,
but I think one of the ones that is really a barrier for
Spanish-language-dominant or other voters who speak another
language other than English is that, when they even go to ask,
they are turned away. And, just as you have rightfully stated,
if they are turned away and they don't know where to go, they
don't know who to ask to receive assistance, then we may never
hear of their complaint. We may never hear of their experience.
And I think sometimes these issues are couched by elections
officials as being cost prohibitive. What we have found in
jurisdictions all over the country is that there are practical
ways that election officials administer their votes, and are
able to meet those challenges of providing language assistance
to voters in very--ways that are extremely reasonable.
For example, in the State of Florida, the Secretary is
required to provide information in Spanish across the entire
State. So the election officials rely on that--on those
recommendations in order to do their job.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Ms. Romero.
Mr. Chair, I would like to enter two documents into the
record. I seek unanimous consent to enter ``Translating Into
Votes: The Electoral Impacts of Spanish-Language Ballots,'' and
``Voting Rights for Whom: Examining the Effects of the Voting
Rights Act and Latino Political Incorporation.''
Chairman Butterfield. Certainly. Without objection, both
documents will be received.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. Gentlelady yields back.
At this time, the chair will recognize the Ranking Member,
Mr. Steil, for five minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would seek unanimous consent to enter into the record
three polls, the Marquette University Law School poll, the
YouGov Economist poll, and a Gallup poll that shows support for
voter ID.
Chairman Butterfield. Without objection, each of these
polls will be received into the record.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much.
Question for Ms. Harmeet Dhillon, if I can. Aside from
Federal law, can you share why you think it is important for
States and local governments to keep voter registration lists
up to date?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, I think voter confidence is a
significant problem that the Carter-Baker Commission recognized
as far back as 2005, and I think we have seen the results of
that. For example, you saw a drop-off in participation between
the Georgia 2020 November election and the runoff election. And
certainly, anecdotal evidence supports that voters expressed
decreased confidence in the integrity of the election as a
reason for not voting.
And so, while it is true that documented instances of fraud
are low, the bigger problem, as I think everybody here on this
Committee and speakers here would agree that we want every
American to vote and feel confident in voting. And voter rolls
being cleaned and maintained regularly is an important part of
that.
And, dating back to that 2005 commission, there were
recommendations regarding the sharing of data amongst the
States. Certainly States are under a mandate to keep their
voter rolls updated. But, in my beautiful State of California,
as recently as 3 or 4 years ago, litigation was required in Los
Angeles County that demonstrated by Judicial Watch that over 1
million people were registered on the ballots of one county in
the United States alone who did not have an entitlement to be
on that. That is duplicates. That is people who have moved,
people who have died, people who are otherwise ineligible to
vote.
Other States have similarly showed similar problems.
Pennsylvania has had problems with immigrants--legal immigrants
being registered inaccurately on the voter rolls, which can
have devastating consequences for new immigrants who may not be
aware that voting before you are a citizen is a crime. That is
a tragic outcome of government incompetence.
So these are some of the reasons why it is important to
have clean and accurate voting rolls.
Mr. Steil. I say--I think you actually bring up a really
good point, in particular, the impact that some of these
automatic voter registration requirements, in particular, that
is drafted in the H.R. 1 that passed the House, I think could
have a really detrimental impact on some of our communities who
are here who are not citizens in United States who would find
themselves on voter lists. If any of them accidentally voted,
there would be significant consequences for them as a result of
the State putting them on automatic voter registration. We have
seen that play out in Illinois.
Can you speak a little further in particular about how some
States that really haven't been maintaining their list, the
impact that that is having on voter confidence? Have you
studied the impact that voter confidence has on improving
turnout?
I mean, I think you and I agree on this. We want to make
sure that everyone is able to exercise their constitutional
right to be able to vote. We want to make it easy to vote, hard
to cheat. And, in one aspect of this, improving voter
confidence in the election system, I would think, would enhance
and encourage further people to go and exercise their
constitutional right to vote.
Have you studied and analyzed the impact that that has, or
could you add a little color to that?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, I am just a country lawyer, as they
would say. I do not perform studies like many of the learned
scholars here on this panel and speakers. However, I am a trial
lawyer and I introduce evidence, and, you know, the evidence I
have seen in this matter has shown me that the problems
regarding voter confidence and the declining nature of the
voter confidence in some circumstances is very real. I think it
was a different Knight study that showed that people are
confident in their own vote--and I would put myself in that
category--being accurate. But as you ask them about the
confidence in the county level and the State level and the
national level, that confidence decreases significantly.
And so I think a principle of uniformity is important, and
that is one thing that we did not see in the recent election.
We saw certain counties, for example, in certain States where
significant money was provided by nonprofits, by Mark
Zuckerberg's nonprofit, where the signature matching in some
counties was radically different than the signature matching
settings in other counties, depending on who was paying for
that election monitoring. That decreases confidence in voters
of uniformity and equality. And so I think that is a very
important principle that we need to have.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much. We saw the impact firsthand
in Wisconsin of the funding that, ultimately, Mark Zuckerberg
put in on making sure--the impact that it had on municipalities
maybe not operating in a similar manner across our State.
Appreciate your testimony today.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. The gentleman yields back. Thank you.
At this time, the Chair recognizes Mr. Aguilar for five
minutes.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I was a little confused about the entrance of polling data
into the official record, but, you know, if that is the
precedent that we are going to have, that is fine. Very popular
ideas like universal background checks, protecting a woman's
right to choose, and passing comprehensive immigration reform
also poll very popular.
Ms. Romero-Craft, you had successfully brought legal
actions to compel States and localities to comply with the
Voting Rights Act's language, access provision specifically. Do
you think this litigation is a sufficient tool to ensure that
States and local governments provide multilingual voting
support? And, if not, why isn't it?
Ms. Romero-Craft. It is a tool, and it is a tool that
should be available to all Americans if they feel that they
were not able to exercise their full voting rights. However, I
will say it is a deficient tool because frequently it is after
the fact, and so it is a protracted process. Our litigation
that we filed in 2018 took 2 years, and by that time, a lot of
harm can happen to communities that are looking to exercise
their rights to vote.
So I would say oversight by the government; oversight is
absolutely necessary. We also understand that, for example, in
Pinellas County, where they had to comply with section 203 of
the Voting Rights Act to provide Spanish-language dominant
voters their access to materials and assistance, they had an
election when they were designated after the Census that
happened 2 months after their designation, and DOJ oversight
made it so that they were complying with Section 203.
So I think it is critically important that we pass laws to
strengthen the Voting Rights Act and to make sure that minority
language voters are able to exercise their full rights as
provided by Federal law.
Mr. Aguilar. When you have challenged State and local
governments for their failure to comply with their obligation,
how long does it take for clients to obtain that relief?
Ms. Romero-Craft. It can be--you know, it depends. If you
are going in on emergency litigation, sometimes you can have
sort of a--you can have a court intervene very quickly. Other
times, if you wait too late, you can have the courts toss out
the case. I mean, there are all these different examples. But
in the example that I have shared with everyone today, it took
2 years. And it is a settlement agreement, but I think what
folks really have to remember is that this is a process. It is
not something that happens overnight. Outreach has to happen to
communities that are impacted. Outreach has to happen to the
voters. There has to be a certain amount of education to
election officials, and poll workers change, so that has to be
a constant process that is updated.
And in a State like Florida where you have elections year
around, you know, and election laws change frequently, you
know, you have to be vigilant, and you have to make sure that
you are reaching the impacted voters. I think that is probably
one of the most important things that we can, you know, take
away from these changes.
Mr. Aguilar. Thanks, Ms. Romero-Craft.
Ms. Minnis, unlike the Latino voting population, which
primarily includes voters that speak English and Spanish, the
AAPI community consists of voters that speak a variety of
different languages. Why is access to multilingual voting
information and support particularly important for Asian-
American voters?
Ms. Minnis. Thank you very much. I think that one of the
reasons harkens back to what I discussed about the issue of
discrimination, particularly with respect to the immigration
laws and how that means that our population is much more highly
immigrant or more likely to come from other countries, from
other voting systems, other democratic or perhaps not so
democratic systems. And so that is a lot of new information
that needs to be assessed and synthesized in order to be able
to vote.
We know that the voting process can be very complex even
for folks born in this country and speak only English. And so
in-language material is not just the ballots, not just the
bilingual, you know, poll workers at the polling site, but
really the purpose of section 203 in making all voting
materials accessible in the covered language, whether that is
registration forms or, you know, sample ballots and the like,
is so critical, particularly for a community like Asian
Americans that have such high levels of English--you know,
languages other than English being spoken at home, high levels
of limited English proficiency, and high levels of being born
outside of the country.
Mr. Aguilar. Well, and we know in recent years Asian
Americans have been among the fastest growing blocks of voters
in the United States, so this is something that obviously needs
to--we need to pay attention to, and we need to ensure that it
keeps up with the--that our changes keep up with the rapid
growth of Asian-American voting population.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. And I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, the chair recognizes Mr. Davis--is that
right?--Mr. Davis for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate again the
witnesses being here.
Harmeet, it is great to see you again, and thanks for being
a part of this panel.
Ms. Dhillon. Thank you, Ranking Member Davis.
Mr. Davis. You are a constitutional attorney, right,
Harmeet?
Ms. Dhillon. That is correct.
Mr. Davis. You know, part of our Constitution, you know,
specifically relays that our elections should be run at the
State and local level. Another very important part of our
Constitution is the right of every American to be able to
petition their government. Right?
Ms. Dhillon. That is correct, first part of the First
Amendment.
Mr. Davis. So it is part of the First Amendment. And here
we are today, we are having another hearing about voter ID, and
at the same time, at the same time, Speaker Pelosi is requiring
anyone who visits the United States Capitol to come petition
their government to show an ID. So is Speaker Pelosi racist?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, she is my representative, and so I won't
go so far as to say that. However, I would say that it is very
unfortunate that Speaker Pelosi has limited the right of
petition. In fact, I have a lawsuit pending against Speaker
Pelosi and, you know, the United States Congress concerning the
right of people to be able to pray on the Capitol Grounds. So,
certainly, some constitutional rights are more equal than
others today.
But I think that right of access to the polls is incredibly
important. As an immigrant, my mother was a poll worker in
Johnston County, North Carolina--a poll observer, rather. And,
you know, in the 1970s, the access to voting for minorities in
this country in the South was very different than it is today,
and I think we need to recognize the great strides we have made
in this country and make laws that are relevant today, not laws
that harken to years, decades gone by.
Mr. Davis. I certainly couldn't agree more, Ms. Dhillon.
As my good friend, Mr. Aguilar, mentioned, there was some
polling data that was discussed by Ranking Member Steil. You
know, I see even higher numbers in those polls than I see in
polls related to the issues that my good friend, Mr. Aguilar,
brought up. But why do you think many of today's panelists are
imposing the will of this large majority of voters who support
pragmatic voter ID laws?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, I wouldn't want to speculate. And, you
know, certainly I think some of the speakers here have cited
studies, but self-reported studies of survey participants is
very similar to a poll, in my opinion, and so you can take
those or leave those.
We simply don't have accurate data, even around the world
if you look at studies around the world, of why people don't
vote. You know, there are many different theories. Certainly,
one of them is this confidence issue, and it has been discussed
in a bipartisan basis for many years.
I think it is incumbent upon elected officials to increase
voter confidence and try to get that participation up. The
participation is higher in some developed countries around the
world than it is in the United States.
And so if barriers include the cost of ID--and I accept
that as true--the government should work to eliminate those
barriers as opposed to eliminating the safeguard. That seems to
be very commonsense. And where you see government officials
pushing required vaccination to enjoy basic civil rights,
another issue that I am litigating, you question why they don't
want to solve that problem of identification that is required
to access so many fundamental rights today.
Mr. Davis. You mentioned some very good points there. And
as we look ahead, I too agree that if there is going to be
voter ID requirement, why not offer them for free? Throughout
the entire last Congress, before the pandemic hit, we were
traveling the country, going place to place talking about some
of these issues, and each and every time a voter ID was
required, there was a way to identify somebody at the lowest
cost and in the most convenient way possible.
Now, you bring up another interesting aspect. It is the
COVID-19 vaccine. We saw election authorities put in emergency
procedures in the 2020 election cycle throughout this country,
your home State of California, my home State of Illinois. And
at the same time, now it seems many of our colleagues would be
okay requiring a COVID vaccination to go into a polling place
but not a voter ID. Wouldn't that be a form of an ID?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, of course. And it is very intrusive and
violates numerous civil rights. It is not what I was called
here to testify about today; but if that becomes a requirement,
there will be litigation certainly over that and maybe even
bipartisan litigation over that.
Mr. Davis. I knew you weren't here to testify, but I
thought it was an interesting question. I know you can react to
the questions well. I know you--I have met you and have seen
you in action before.
One real quick question. California, your home State,
please give me an idea of what happened with the voter rolls
and also how it seemed that many voters received multiple
ballots in the last election.
Ms. Dhillon. This is a problem throughout the United States
that is compounded by the lack of clean voter rolls in our
country, and there have been current senator--United States
Senator Alex Padilla was responsible for that election
administration. And many people who are not citizens, through
no fault of their own, have been automatically registered to
vote. People have experienced multiple registrations. The fact
that the State settled a case involving over 1 million
registrations in Los Angeles County should have led to the
cleanup of those voter rolls and cleanups throughout the State
of 58 counties. That has not happened, and more litigation is
likely eminent, because the lack of integrity and consistency
among our voter rolls does decrease voter participation and
voter confidence.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my apologies, I did go over, but I appreciate
your consideration allowing me to continue. I yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. The gentleman yields back. I saw you
winking your eye, Rodney, so I knew you were winding down, so
we can be flexible sometimes, especially with the Ranking
Member. Thank you very much.
At this time, the Chair recognizes Ms. Scanlon for five
minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Barreto, your testimony indicates that proponents of
voter ID laws seek to justify them on the grounds that election
fraud by ineligible voters is rampant. Could you comment on
whether research, evidence or, if you know, judicial decisions
support the claim that widespread voter fraud by ineligible
voters has the possibility or probability of impacting election
results?
Mr. Barreto. Thank you for that question, Congresswoman.
There has been no such study to document voter fraud in
elections by persons attempting to pass them off as someone
else, something that voter ID would supposedly catch, impacting
election results.
The most recent one that comes to mind for me is the case
in North Carolina of someone taking ballots and re-marking
them. This is not something that voter identification laws
would have blocked, and there is no research study or
government commission which has looked into this extensively.
There is no study that finds that theoretical hypothetical myth
of voter fraud is actually happening in our elections. And so
it has been thoroughly debunked by social scientists and has
not impacted election results.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. And, certainly, there were no court
cases in the most recent round that were able to establish any
such thing.
I would also submit that the corrosive impact of these
unjustified claims has actually increased attempts by
individuals to commit voter fraud. We have certainly seen that
in Pennsylvania, where numerous supporters of the former
President were arrested in the most recent election and charged
with voter fraud because, having been told it was so easy to
do, they attempted to vote for dead relatives or vote multiple
times, and, in fact, they were caught and charged.
Ms. Romero-Craft, in Pennsylvania, we have a substantial
population of Puerto Rican-born residents, and I discussed the
problems with strict voter ID laws with the previous panel. I
mentioned that I participated in efforts to help low-income
residents obtain IDs so they could vote. One of the issues that
we encountered was that in 2010, Puerto Rico had invalidated
all birth certificates issued before that date in order to
increase the security of those documents, and that really
increased the degree of difficulty for anyone born before 2010
in Puerto Rico to get the voter ID that they needed.
Can you comment on the impact of that law and what you have
seen around the country as American citizens born in Puerto
Rico try to register in other States?
Ms. Romero-Craft. Absolutely. I thank you for bringing that
up, because that is--one of the things that folks don't
recognize is that U.S. citizens of all walks of life can have
difficulties in obtaining their birth certificate. In Puerto
Rico, in particular, sometimes folks have to travel to the
island, which can be a prohibitive cost for folks, to obtain
their updated birth certificate.
You know, I can speak to my sister was born in New York
City, and she had a misspelling in her name and had to go and
get her birth certificate. She called me complaining. And I
said, you know, as someone who practices under immigration law,
I said, you know, get in line. These are problems that people
have. And a lot of these challenges, you know, are borne by
folks who don't have the resources to do what they need to do
in order to get their updated materials.
And I would say, for Puerto Rican U.S. citizens in
particular, we see--you know, take the case of Puerto Rican
citizens in Georgia, and it has happened across the country,
where they were being discriminated against. We had our lead
plaintiff in our litigation, he was arrested, charged with two
counts of felony fraud for presenting his Puerto Rican identity
documents, when all he was trying to do was simply get a driver
license.
And you can imagine that our investigation found that folks
as early as the nineties have been undergoing the same kind of
discriminatory treatment in the State of Georgia and were not
able to obtain identity cards or a driver license. Their
documents were confiscated, if you can imagine, and it was
happening. And so you found communities that were terrified
that did not want to go and get identity cards. And these
issues, they raise serious concerns on behalf of community
members, but not only that, they impact things like voting in a
very significant way.
It takes a lot of time to bring the community back, to make
them feel that sense of belonging, but also that sense of
trust, and those are the issues that we confront day in and day
out in our work.
Ms. Scanlon. Yes. We certainly saw the same thing in
Pennsylvania, were trying to get them and, in fact, my law firm
sent a paralegal to Puerto Rico to try to obtain birth
certificates for numerous clients who were attempting to
assist. So thank you for that testimony.
Chairman Butterfield, I will yield back.
Chairman Butterfield. The gentlelady yields back.
All right. It looks like I may be next. The Chair will
recognize himself for I suppose five minutes or less.
Ms. Romero-Craft, you mentioned that even after you
obtained the settlement in the Florida-language access
litigation, you still had difficulty with the subject
jurisdictions complying with their obligation to provide
Spanish-language materials. Could you further explain why
litigation is not sufficient, it is insufficient, to ensure
that States and local governments comply with their obligations
to provide multilingual voting materials?
Ms. Romero-Craft. I think one of the ways, the most
significant way that it is insufficient is because,
unfortunately, you know, we don't have the resources, despite
the fact of being part of a large election protection
coalition, to monitor all of the places where these issues have
impact on voters, and so oversight is necessary.
You know, I have to say that, you know, folks are not
afraid of us. In some cases, they either don't think we will
file litigation or they think that voters that aren't impacted
by this. And so one of the ways I think would be very impactful
for our voting rights laws to be updated is to make sure that
they enforce the provisions that allow for Federal oversight.
When settlement agreements like ours are entered into to
make sure that the election officials know that they have the
full force of the government, then, coming in to review the
changes that are necessary to be made to comply with this and,
again, the harm can be done if these election officials don't
comply, like we saw in our case that we filed in 2018, where we
had a supervisor of elections who refused to provide these
materials that day, then go ahead and they comply with what the
law requires or what the court order requires. So just
litigation simply is not enough. It has to be a multifaceted
approach that we take to make sure----
Chairman Butterfield. Moving forward to Dr. Barreto.
Dr. Barreto, you have conducted extensive research into the
burden imposed by voter ID laws on minority voters. The
Republican witness, Ms. Roman, on the last panel emphasized
during her testimony that several studies have not found a
significant decline in turnout associated with voter ID laws.
Help me with this. Please explain why voter ID laws impose
a discriminatory burden on minority voters, even assuming those
studies are correct, that any adverse effect on turnout is not
substantial.
Mr. Barreto. Well, I think, first of all, the literature is
quite clear on turnout, as Dr. Lajevardi told us earlier. There
is a decrease in actual turnout in areas with strict voter ID.
But I think it is important to remember that those turnout
studies are often the turnout of Americans with ID, you know,
and this is in reference to the discussion of the polling
points as well.
About 85 percent of eligible voters do have an ID. So when
increase in an election goes up, about 85 percent of Americans
are able to still vote under strict ID cases. But we need to be
looking at those 15 percent. This is our job, to protect the
rights of those 15 percent who do not have an ID.
And in the case of strict voter identification laws, they
are not even eligible to participate in the first place. So
while other people might vote at higher rates who do have a
driver's license, there is no question that validated studies,
which match the voter rolls to the DMV databases, show that for
existing registrants and existing voters, when voter ID laws go
into effect, they greatly limit Black, Latino, and other
immigrant community voter participation.
Chairman Butterfield. Thank you.
This is my final question, and it goes to Ms. Minnis.
Ms. Minnis, what changes to the Federal law governing
access to multilingual voting support are particularly
important to protect the interests of Asian-American voters?
Ms. Minnis. Thank you very much for that, Chairman. I think
it is very important that anytime we are looking at legislation
that would improve access to the ballot for eligible Americans,
that we are looking at ways to increase language access. So,
for example, you could have legislation that includes, you
know, incentives to hire bilingual poll workers. You can also
include provisions that would, you know, require cultural
competency training, as well as linguistic, you know, access
training for poll workers. That is certainly something that we
have seen throughout the years to be problematic, where
sometimes it can be a hostile poll worker and sometimes it
could be simply a poll worker who is not particularly aware
about the best way to engage with an LEP voter and/or how to
properly provide language access and assistance.
So I think that looking at the provision of--voting rights
provision of ballots and just the entire voting process, you
know, seeing that as a community service model is one to
address the needs of the voters themselves. I think that is a
way that different pieces of legislation can help improve that.
And, of course, continued enforcement of the Voting Rights Act,
Sections 203 and 208, as have been previously mentioned by
other panelists, also remain very critical. And to the idea of,
you know, making sure that we have proper engagement and an
active Department of Justice helping to defend and enforce
those rights, in addition to groups on the ground, I think are
ways that we can make sure that the language rights and the
voting rights of our Asian Americans, of other eligible
Americans are best protected.
Chairman Butterfield. Thank you very much for your
testimony.
This will conclude the portion of this hearing dealing with
member questions. I not only thank the witnesses but thank my
colleagues for your patience. It has been a 2.5 hour hearing,
and you have hung in there and just thank you very much. It is
1:30 p.m. on the East Coast, and so I think we need to go ahead
and complete the hearing.
And just thank you to the witnesses. I thank each one of
you for your valuable, valuable testimony, and the members,
your questions on both sides of the aisle have been very, very
enlightening and helped complete this record.
The members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses. And if so, we will ask you to
respond to those questions in writing; that is, to ask the
witnesses to respond to those questions in writing. The hearing
record will be open for those responses and it will be held
open for a period of time.
Thank you again to all of our witnesses for your testimony
today.
Is there any other business to come before the Subcommittee
before we adjourn?
Hearing none, I am going to get an opportunity to use my
gavel, which I have not used today. I will say the hearing,
without objection, is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:27 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
