- H.R. 2021, ``ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE FOR ALL ACT''

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 2021, ``ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE FOR ALL ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, February 15, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-866 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Chair
JESUS G. ``CHUY'' GARCIA, IL, Vice Chair
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, CNMI, Vice Chair, Insular Affairs
BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Ranking Member

Grace F. Napolitano, CA              Don Young, AK
Jim Costa, CA                        Louie Gohmert, TX
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Doug Lamborn, CO
CNMI                             Robert J. Wittman, VA
Jared Huffman, CA                    Tom McClintock, CA
Alan S. Lowenthal, CA                Garret Graves, LA
Ruben Gallego, AZ                    Jody B. Hice, GA
Joe Neguse, CO                       Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Mike Levin, CA                       Daniel Webster, FL
Katie Porter, CA                     Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR
Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM           Russ Fulcher, ID
Melanie A. Stansbury, NM             Pete Stauber, MN
Nydia M. Velazquez, NY               Thomas P. Tiffany, WI
Diana DeGette, CO                    Jerry L. Carl, AL
Julia Brownley, CA                   Matthew M. Rosendale, Sr., MT
Debbie Dingell, MI                   Blake D. Moore, UT
A. Donald McEachin, VA               Yvette Herrell, NM
Darren Soto, FL                      Lauren Boebert, CO
Michael F. Q. San Nicolas, GU        Jay Obernolte, CA
Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, IL         Cliff Bentz, OR
Ed Case, HI                          Vacancy
Betty McCollum, MN
Steve Cohen, TN
Paul Tonko, NY
Rashida Tlaib, MI
Lori Trahan, MA

David Watkins, Staff Director
Luis Urbina, Chief Counsel
Vivian Moeglein, Republican Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, February 15, 2022.......................     1

Statement of Members:
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:
Brower, Hon. Harry K., Jr., Mayor, North Slope Borough,
Utqiagvik, Alaska..........................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Cahn, Amy Laura, Director, Environmental Justice Clinic,
Vermont Law School, South Royalton, Vermont................    24
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Questions submitted for the record.......................    33
Cortez, Laura, Co-Executive Director, East Yard Communities
for Environmental Justice, Commerce, California............     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Questions submitted for the record.......................    11
Sheats, Nicky, Director, Center for the Urban Environment,
John S. Watson Institute for Urban Policy and Research,
Kean University, Hamilton, New Jersey......................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Chair Grijalva

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments, Letter of
Support, dated February 14, 2022.......................    91
Anna Julia Cooper Center, Letter of Support, dated
February 14, 2022......................................    92
Center for Earth Energy & Democracy, Letter of Support,
dated February 14, 2022................................    94
Center for Food Safety, Letter of Support, dated February
14, 2022...............................................    95
Children's Environmental Health Network, Letter of
Support, dated February 10, 2022.......................    96
CleanAirNow KC, Letter of Support, dated February 8, 2022    97
Clean Water Action, Letter of Support, dated February 14,
2022...................................................    98
Coalition for the Delaware River Watershed, Letter of
Support, dated February 11, 2022.......................    99
Equitable and Just National Climate Platform Co-authors,
Statement for the Record...............................   100
Friends Committee on National Legislation, Statement for
the Record, dated March 1, 2022........................   101
GreenLatinos, Letter of Support, dated February 14, 2022.   103
Healthy Gulf, Statement for the Record...................   104
Inclusive Louisiana, Statement for the Record............   105
Interfaith Power & Light-New Mexico, Letter of Support,
dated February 14, 2022................................   106
Letter of Support from 27 Organizations, dated February
14, 2022...............................................   107
Letter of Support from 165+ Organizations, dated February
15, 2022...............................................   110
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), Letter of
Support, dated February 14, 2022.......................   116
Our Future West Virginia, Letter of Support, dated
February 14, 2022......................................   117
Outdoors Alliance for Kids, Letter of Support, dated
February 14, 2022......................................   118
People Organized in Defense of Earth and her Resources,
Letter of Support, dated February 8, 2022..............   120
River Network, Letter of Support, dated February 14, 2022   121
Silent Spring Institute, Letter of Support, dated
February 14, 2022......................................   122
The Alliance for Appalachia, Statement for the Record....   124
The Descendants Project, Statement for the Record........   126
The Wilderness Society, Letter of Support, dated February
14, 2022...............................................   127
Toxic Free North Carolina, Letter of Support, dated
February 14, 2022......................................   129
Virginia Interfaith Power & Light, Statement for the
Record.................................................   130
Women's Voices for the Earth, Letter of Support, dated
February 8, 2022.......................................   132

Submissions for the Record by Representative Porter

Marketwatch article, ``Oil is the hottest sector, and
Wall Street analysts see upside of up to 48% for
favored stocks,'' February 15, 2022....................   135

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tlaib

Detroit Free Press article, ``$175M tax break for
Marathon refinery buys Detroiters only 15 jobs,'' March
14, 2014...............................................    76

Submissions for the Record by Representative Maloney

Supporter List for the Justice in Power Plant Permitting
Act....................................................   141

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stauber

Op-Ed, ``Goldman Sachs to Native Alaskans: Drop Dead,''
Harry Brower Jr., January 24, 2020.....................    89

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2021, TO RESTORE, REAFFIRM, AND RECONCILE
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND CIVIL RIGHTS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES,
``ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE FOR ALL ACT''

----------

Tuesday, February 15, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., via
Webex, the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva [Chairman of the Committee],
presiding.
Present: Representatives Grijalva, Napolitano, Costa,
Sablan, Huffman, Lowenthal, Neguse, Porter, Leger Fernandez,
Stansbury, Velazquez, DeGette, Brownley, Dingell, McEachin,
Soto, San Nicolas, Garcia, McCollum, Cohen, Tonko, Tlaib,
Trahan; Stauber, Young, McClintock, Graves, Radewagen, Fulcher,
Tiffany, Rosendale, Boebert, Obernolte, and Bentz.
Also present: Representative Maloney.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Heather, and thank you
to the Committee members for being here.
The Natural Resources Committee will now come to order.
The Committee is meeting here today to hear testimony on
H.R. 2021, the ``Environmental Justice For All Act.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
the hearing are limited to the Chair and the Ranking Minority
Member or their designee. This will allow us to hear from our
witnesses sooner and help Members keep to their schedule.
Therefore, I ask unanimous consent that all other Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record if they
have been submitted to the Clerk by 5 p.m. today, or at the
close of the hearing, whichever comes first.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I would also ask unanimous consent that Representative
Carolyn Maloney join the hearing to ask questions of the
witnesses.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Without objection, the Chair may also declare a recess
subject to the call of the Chair.
As described in the notice, statements, documents, or
motions must be submitted to the electronic repository at

[email protected]
.
Additionally, please note that as always, Members are
responsible for their own microphones. And as with our in-
person meetings, Members can be muted by staff only to avoid
inadvertent background noise.
Finally, Members or witnesses experiencing technical
problems should inform the Committee immediately.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for my opening
statement and then turn to the Ranking Member.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

The Chairman. Again, I want to welcome everyone to this
hearing and thank our witnesses for testifying about one of the
most stark and quantifiable inequities under our current laws:
the lack of environmental justice for all.
We are here today to discuss H.R. 2021, the ``Environmental
Justice For All Act.'' This legislation was developed and
shaped directly by environmental justice communities during an
extensive public engagement process.
The bill on today's agenda has many components, but it is
based on a very simple principle and premise--all people have
the right to clean air, clean water, and an environment that
enriches their lives. For far too many across our country,
these rights are not realized or, in fact, acknowledged.
Today, environmental justice communities, including
communities of color, tribal and Indigenous communities, and
poor and working-class communities continue to be
disproportionately burdened by pollution and harmful climate
effects. This includes significantly greater exposure to
polluted air, water, and landscapes, all this in EJ
communities.
A major factor has been the fossil fuel industry and the
other polluting industries having a long and troubled history
of intentionally building projects that pollute surrounding
neighborhoods within communities of color and poor communities.
The numbers and statistics are clear and quantifiable and
evident, which we will hear more about today in the testimony
from our witnesses.
In my hometown and where I now live and grew up, all
permitted emissions and discharges, and the groundwater
contamination that followed, detached and created a Superfund
site that is still an ongoing cleanup here in this community.
We see this clear environmental injustice through less
equitable access to environmental amenities like parks, green
spaces, public recreation opportunities, and less Federal
investment in clean energy and clean drinking water projects
that serve EJ communities. Addressing these disparities also
demands our attention and our action.
Over the last few years, I have been proud to work with
Representative McEachin on a comprehensive piece of legislation
to address environmental injustice, racism, and discrimination.
The legislation before us furthers environmental justice
objectives in a variety of ways.
The bill includes several provisions to ensure more
equitable access to parks and outdoor recreation opportunities
for underserved and poor communities. The bill requires Federal
agencies to provide early and meaningful community involvement
opportunities under NEPA when proposing an action affecting an
environmental justice community and strengthens the role and
input that tribal communities can have in their consultations
and their opportunity to be heard under NEPA.
The bill strengthens and restores civil rights protections
for communities facing greater environmental hazards on the
basis of race, color, or national origin, including through
programs administered by the Interior Department and other
Federal agencies under the Committee's jurisdiction.
The bill also increases transparency, coordination, and
accountability for Federal agencies when they are carrying out
activities affecting the environmental justice communities.
Today, we will hear from several witnesses who are experts
in their fields and also experts in their lived experiences
working with and living in environmental justice communities.
I hope the testimony today will inform our Committee about
the urgent need to empower communities to protect their local
environment and realize their right to clean air, clean water,
and healthy outdoor spaces.
These rights are not being met for far too many
communities, and doing something about it is what today's
hearing is all about.
Before I turn to Ranking Member Westerman for his opening
statement, let me just ask my colleagues to take a moment and
picture landfills, waste disposal sites, gas-fired power
plants, sewage treatment plants, emissions, and discharges that
have to be permitted by law because they fall under the
requirements for air quality and water quality, decrepit
infrastructure that brings heat, water, and energy to these
communities, transportation, and the lack of recreation and
green space for those communities to enjoy.
I ask you to look at that, to just picture that. And now
picture where all that is in your community, in the district
you represent, in the state that you are from. Picture that.
And then you will see why this piece of legislation that we
are having a hearing about today is needed. It is real, and
this is, I think, the comprehensive approach to addressing
that.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chair, Committee on
Natural Resources
I want to welcome everyone to this hearing, and thank our witnesses
for testifying about one of the most egregious inequities under our
current laws: the lack of environmental justice for all.
We're here today to discuss H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice
For All Act. This legislation was developed and shaped directly by
environmental justice communities during an extensive public engagement
process.
The bill on today's agenda has many components, but it's based on a
simple principle: All people have the right to clean air, clean water,
and an environment that enriches their lives. For far too many across
our country, these rights are still unrealized.
Today, environmental justice communities--including communities of
color, tribal and Indigenous communities, and low-income communities--
continue to be disproportionately burdened by pollution and harmful
climate effects. This includes significantly greater exposure to
polluted air, water, and landscapes in EJ communities.
A major factor has been the fossil-fuel industry and other
polluting industries having a long and troubled history of
intentionally building projects that pollute surrounding neighborhoods
within communities of color and low-income communities. The numbers and
statistics on this are clear, which we'll hear more about in testimony
later today.
We also see clear environmental injustice through less equitable
access to environmental amenities like parks, green spaces, public
recreation opportunities, and less Federal investment in clean energy
and clean drinking water projects that serve EJ communities. Addressing
these disparities also demands our attention and action.
I've been proud to work over the past few years with Representative
McEachin on comprehensive legislation to address environmental
injustice, racism, and discrimination. The legislation before us
furthers environmental justice objectives in a variety of ways.
The bill includes several provisions to ensure more equitable
access to parks and outdoor recreational opportunities for underserved
communities.
The bill requires Federal agencies to provide early and meaningful
community involvement opportunities under NEPA when proposing an action
affecting an environmental justice community and strengthens tribal
input opportunities.
The bill strengthens and restores civil rights protections for
communities facing greater environmental hazards on the basis of race,
color, or national origin--including through programs administered by
the Interior Department and other Federal agencies under this
Committee's jurisdiction.
The bill also increases transparency, coordination, and
accountability from Federal agencies when they are carrying out
activities affecting environmental justice communities.
Today, we'll hear from several witnesses who are experts in their
fields, and also experts in their lived experiences working with and
living in environmental justice communities.
We hope their testimony today will inform our Committee about the
urgent need to empower communities to protect their local environment
and realize their right to clean water, clean air, and healthy outdoor
spaces.
These rights are not being met for far too many communities and
doing something about that is what today's hearing is all about.

______

The Chairman. With that, I yield now to the Ranking Member,
Mr. Westerman, for his opening statement.
Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Stauber. Chair Grijalva, this is Stauber. I will be the
Ranker today. Mr. Westerman could not join us.
The Chairman. My apologies. I just noticed that. With that,
let me turn to you for your opening statement, sir.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Chairman Grijalva.
And thank you to the witnesses for taking the time to join
us today.
H.R. 2021, titled the ``Environmental Justice For All
Act,'' as sponsored by the Chairman, truthfully is a
legislative vehicle for more of the same from this Majority.
When Americans want to get back to work, it creates more
red tape. When Americans are getting gouged at the pump, it
doubles down on their pain by increasing the cost of
production. And when it claims to speak to so-called
environmental justice, it plainly misses the mark. For
starters, it creates more opportunities for radical special
interest groups to do what they do best, that is, to file
lawsuits and get their lawyers paid while keeping workers on
the benches.
Specifically, the bill requires Federal agencies to develop
more reports, more studies, and more comment periods, as if the
National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean
Water Act, the Endangered Species Act, and every other possible
Act created does not already exist.
Renewable energy, broadband, affordable housing, and almost
any new infrastructure will have to clear new studies that will
be made into 90-day studies, which inevitably will turn into 6-
month studies because every environmental group in DC is
licking its chops at more statutes to tie up in court, billing
by the hour.
Meanwhile, the at-risk communities we seek to help are
missing out on important opportunities to modernize their
infrastructure, create jobs, and attract investment.
This bill also creates new fees on oil, gas, and coal
industries and creates another government payout scheme. When
levying these new fees, it will lead to job loss and eliminate
production on Federal lands. Therefore, even the bill's new
revenue scheme will dry up, once again leaving communities
reliant on affordable energy and high-wage jobs high and dry
once again.
And when we lose these jobs, we lose revenue to schools. We
lose revenue and funding for law enforcement and other
essential services, all while driving up the cost of gas.
According to AAA, right now the average price of gas for an
Arizonan is $3.66 a gallon, hovering above the national
average. Instead of addressing this problem, the Majority is
proposing to push this cost up even more.
Meanwhile, looking abroad we have Russia empowered by
President Biden's Nord Stream 2 gift, knocking on Ukraine's
door.
Mr. Chair, energy security is national security. Proposals
like this make us less secure and hand another tool to Russia,
who is leveraging their corner of the oil and gas market to
push its goals.
The Majority has also failed to invite witnesses from the
Federal agencies that would implement this bill. So, we will
not receive the Administration's input on this legislation or
their analysis on whether the provisions in this bill can be
effectively carried out.
My guess is these agencies lack the personnel and capacity,
but I suppose we will leave that up to our imagination.
Last Congress, the Majority held a hearing on previous
versions of this bill, and Republicans invited Derrick Hollie,
the president of Reaching America, to testify. Mr. Hollie
keenly noted that energy poverty is a huge issue for minority
communities across our country, and he urged our Committee to
focus on increasing access to affordable energy by making
Federal energy projects easier to build, not more difficult.
Since that hearing in 2020, Democrats chose to ignore his
voice, energy prices are through the roof, saddling middle-
class American families with new questions around the dinner
table about how they will afford everyday life.
One of the witnesses we will hear from today is from the
North Slope of Alaska, where President Biden continues his
assault against American energy and recently announced plans to
revert management of the NPR-A to the Obama administration's
2013 Integrated Activity Plan.
Even with the stated goal of increasing consultation, the--
--
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Stauber [continuing]. Running counter to his Executive
Order 13175. So, then I ask which communities qualify for
consultation under 13175, because it certainly is not Mr.
Hollie or the Inupiat.
Oil and gas production on the North Slope is critical to
these communities. One project in particular, the Willow
Project within NPR-A, would provide thousands of good paying
jobs and crucial funding to address the needs of North Slope
communities.
Taxes levied on oil and gas development have enabled the
North Slope communities to invest in public infrastructure,
utilities, investing in education, law enforcement, fire
fighters, emergency response and other services.
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Stauber [continuing]. So, if the Majority were serious
about environmental justice, today's hearing would be about
permitting reform and reliable, affordable energy.
But instead, it is about the same topic the Majority has
focused on in every hearing--more lawsuits, more red tape, and
more inflation.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stauber follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Pete Stauber, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Minnesota
H.R. 2021, titled the Environment Justice For All Act and sponsored
by Chairman Grijalva, truthfully is a legislative vehicle for more of
the same from this Majority.
When Americans want to get back to work, it creates more red tape.
When Americans are getting gouged at the pump, it doubles down on
their pain by increasing the cost of production.
And when it claims to speak to so-called environmental justice, it
plainly misses the mark.
For starters, it creates more opportunities for radical special
interest groups to do what they do best: file lawsuits and get their
lawyers paid while keeping workers on the benches.
Specifically, the bill requires Federal agencies to develop more
reports, more studies, and more comment periods, as if the National
Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the
Endangered Species Act, and every other possible Act created does not
already exist.
Renewable energy, broadband, affordable housing, and almost any new
infrastructure will have to clear new studies that will be made into
90-day studies, which inevitably will turn into 6-month studies,
because every environmental group in DC is licking its chops at more
statutes to tie up in Court, billing by the hour.
Meanwhile, the at-risk communities we seek to help are missing out
on important opportunities to modernize their infrastructure, create
jobs, and attract investment.
The bill also creates new fees on oil, gas, and coal industries,
and creates another government payout scheme.
When levying these new fees, it will lead to job loss and eliminate
production on Federal lands. And therefore, even the bill's new revenue
scheme will dry up, once again leaving communities reliant on
affordable energy and high-wage jobs high and dry once again.
And when we lose those jobs, we lose revenue to schools, and
funding for law enforcement, and other essential services, while
driving up the cost of gas.
According to Triple A, right now the average price of gas for an
Arizonan is $3.66 a gallon, hovering above the national average.
Instead of addressing this problem, the Majority is proposing to push
this cost up more.
Meanwhile, looking abroad, we have Russia empowered by President
Biden's Nord Stream 2 gift, knocking on Ukraine's door.
Mr. Chair, energy security is national security. Proposals like
this make us less secure and hand another tool to Russia, who is
leveraging their corner of the oil and gas market to push its goals.
The Majority has also failed to invite witnesses from the Federal
agencies that would implement this bill, so we will not receive the
Administration's input on this legislation or their analysis on whether
the provisions in this bill can be effectively carried out.
My guess is these agencies lack the personnel and capacity, but I
suppose we will leave that up to the imagination.
Last Congress, the Majority held a hearing on a previous version of
this bill and Republicans invited Derrick Hollie, the President of
Reaching America, to testify.
Mr. Hollie keenly noted that energy poverty is a huge issue for
minority communities across the country and he urged our Committee to
focus on increasing access to affordable energy by making Federal
energy projects easier to build, not more difficult.
Since that hearing in 2020 and Democrats chose to ignore his voice,
energy prices are through the roof, saddling American families with new
questions around the dinner table about how they will afford every day
life.
One of the witnesses we will hear from today is from the North
Slope of Alaska, where President Biden continued his campaign against
American energy and recently announced plans to revert management of
the NPR-A to the Obama administration's 2013 Integrated Activity Plan.
Even with the stated goal of increasing consultation, the Biden
administration once again ignored minority voices in opposition, and
especially the North Slope Inupiat, running counter to his very own
Executive Order 13175.
So then I ask, which communities qualify for consultation under
13175? Because it certainly is not Mr. Hollie, or the Inupiat.
Oil and gas production on the North Slope is critical to these
communities. One project in particular, the Willow project within NPR-
A, would provide thousands of jobs and crucial funding to address the
needs of North Slope communities.
Taxes levied on oil and gas development have enabled North Slope
communities to invest in public infrastructure, utilities, education,
law enforcement, fire fighters, emergency response and other services.
The Trump administration understood this and worked hand in hand with
these communities on the 2020 IAP.
If the Majority were serious about environmental justice, today's
hearing would be about permitting reform and reliable, affordable
energy.
But instead, it's about the same topic the Majority has focused on
in every hearing: more lawsuits, more red tape, and more inflation.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Stauber.
The gentleman yields.
As I turn to the witnesses for their testimony, let me just
remind the witnesses that under our Committee Rules they must
limit their oral statements to 5 minutes.
Their entire written statement will be part of the hearing
record.
When we begin with the witnesses, the time will start. It
will turn orange when you have 1 minute remaining and red when
your time has expired.
I recommend that Members and witnesses joining remotely use
grid view so that they can lock in the timer on their screen.
After your testimony is complete, please remember to mute
yourself to avoid any background noise.
I will allow the entire panel to testify before the Members
can begin to question the witnesses.
I will begin with the testimony from Ms. Laura Cortez, Co-
Executive Director with East Yard Communities for Environmental
Justice.
Ms. Cortez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LAURA CORTEZ, CO-EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, EAST YARD
COMMUNITIES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE, COMMERCE, CALIFORNIA

Ms. Cortez. Good morning, Chair Grijalva and House
Committee on Natural Resources. My name is Laura Jazmin Cortez.
I live on Unceded Tongva land in southeast Los Angeles. I am a
member, organizer, and Co-Executive Director with East Yard
Communities for Environmental Justice.
East Yard works in communities that are overburdened with
direct and indirect sources of pollution from Long Beach to the
east side of Los Angeles, and as a community we work to address
soil, air, and water quality.
At the intersection of these types of pollution is
environmental racism. The Environmental Justice For All Act is
both a concrete commitment to the communities that have been
harmed and a symbolic sign of respect to communities on the
ground doing the work and the Committee that put this language
together.
I will next highlight some of the work our communities are
doing in relation to the EJ For All Act, that passing this
policy would uplift and support.
In relation to cumulative impacts, there is no single evil
villain polluter in EJ communities. What I see as one of the
largest issues is that municipalities and agencies currently
treat polluters on a case-by-case basis, without assessing
cumulative impacts.
I grew up next to railroad tracks with trains passing at
3:00 a.m. I have always lived within 5 minutes of a refinery
and a block away from warehouses. I attended elementary school
next to the 710 freeway which sees 40,000 to 60,000 truck trips
daily. My high school track is immediately next to train
tracks. My reality is not an exception, and honestly, community
is exposed to so much more, at the same time, all the time.
These issues in land use and health impacts can be reduced
through the creation of effective permitting processes. In
relation to outdoor access for all, in a high-density area such
as California and Los Angeles specifically, the only spaces
that are undeveloped are brownfields. This is why we do work
nationally with the Moving Forward Network and locally through
the Brownfields to Healthfields work.
There is opportunity for policy to create green spaces
through investment in the clean up of these contaminated sites
and through community-based processes. One example of that is
Maywood Riverfront Park here in southeast Los Angeles, a former
brownfield that was cleaned and developed as a community open
space and is now a thriving social hub.
In relation to Environmental Justice grants programs,
Federal funding for research in our communities is needed. We
have seen research in our communities lead to discoveries that
challenge agencies and health thresholds through East Yard's
Marina Pando Social Justice Research Collaborative.
We have studied through this program lead soil
contamination, toxic runoff into the LA River, and more. These
studies are done by community members using academic
methodology to study the environmental justice issues that our
community lacks responses to.
The outcomes of these studies are then shared through
community events that make sure research is done by our hoods,
for our hoods.
In relation to NEPA, NEPA as it has been interpreted in my
home of California through CEQA, allows for public
participation through an environmental impact report process.
In our communities, EIRs are often waived through negative
declarations. When EIRs are completed because of many community
requests, they do not accurately account for traffic
bottlenecks, idling, housing in proximity to polluters, housing
affordability, and green space.
In fair and just transition, labor in my community looks
like folks working at the ports as truck drivers, in
refineries, waste facilities, and rendering plants, then coming
home to more contaminated soil, air, and water.
Therefore, environmental justice will always be linked to
labor and a need to protect the health of workers, who are also
our parents, uncles, sisters, and children, while ensuring that
they have stable careers.
EJ For All proposes a Federal Energy Transition Economic
Development Assistance Fund that is needed to ensure a just
transition in which workers suffering the health impacts of the
oil and gas industry can develop the skills to work in
healthier systems that we are working toward.
Currently, workers feel like they have to choose between
their health and income, but that should not be the case.
Finally, we are full of solutions. We have the answers. We
have been doing this work. Being an EJ community carries a
heavy burden and responsibility to fight for ourselves and each
other or die slowly. That is not an exaggeration.
Passing EJ For All is that serious. Passing any policy that
protects human health without giving loopholes to industry is
that important. It is life and death, and we must acknowledge
that countless EJ community leaders have worked on these types
of solutions, and many of them are no longer with us.
And now we have this policy as an opportunity to take EJ
seriously. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Cortez follows:]
Prepared Statement of Laura J. Cortez, East Yard Communities for
Environmental Justice
My name is Laura Jazmin Cortez. I live on Unceded Tongva land in
Southeast Los Angeles. I am a member, organizer, and co-director with
East Yard Communities for Environmental Justice (East Yard), an
organization created by community in Southeast and East Los Angeles to
address pollution through self-advocacy for a dignified quality of
life. East Yard works in communities that are overburdened with direct
and indirect sources of pollution from Long Beach to the Eastside of
Los Angeles. As a community we work to address air, soil, and water
quality. At the intersection of these types of pollution is
environmental racism. Our communities are under-resourced, and though
our organization does great work in our community, we will continue to
fall short of the dignity we deserve for our health if the Federal
government does not lead the way in protecting EVERYONES health. The
Environmental Justice for All Act is both a concrete commitment to the
communities that have been harmed and a symbolic sign of respect to
communities on the ground doing the work and the committee that put
this language together. The next section highlights the work our
communities continue to do in relation to the EJ4A Act that passing
this policy will uplift and support.
Health Equity

Community & scholarly institutions have developed healthy
relationships locally, regionally and nationally to create
community based research, such as our water contamination
program, H2Ours.\1\ H2Ours focuses on community-based
research to study public drinking water and learn about
water contaminants and water agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://h2Ours.org/

Because there are so many types of industries producing
toxins in our communities, there is a huge need for
continued and ongoing research. One such industry is
rendering plants, of which we have five in close proximity
to each other and smell the odor of decomposing animal
carcasses daily.\2\ The foul stench of this process to
create cosmetics and food products can cause harm to human
health as well as severely limit our access to the outside
world, as we are forced to close our doors and windows to
stop the smell from permeating our homes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.aqmd.gov/home/news-events/community-investigations/
rendering-plants#

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cumulative Impacts

There is no single ``evil villain'' polluter in EJ
communities. What I see as one of the largest issues is
that municipalities and agencies currently treat polluters
on a case by case basis without assessing cumulative
impacts. I grew up next to railroad tracks with trains
passing at 3 am; I have always lived within 5 minutes of
refinery and within a block of warehouses; I attended
elementary school next to the 710 freeway that sees 40,000-
60,000 daily truck trips; My high school's track was
immediately next to train tracks. My reality is not an
exception, and honestly, community is exposed to so much
more . . . at the same time . . . all the time.

EJ4A has the opportunity to address our realities: that we
experience cumulative impacts, and municipalities,
agencies, states and the federal government must consider
the totality of toxic exposures in our communities in the
permitting process.

Outdoor Access for All

Because our communities are oversaturated with numerous
polluters, there are few parks and recreational spaces in
our community. The recreational spaces that do exist are a
risk to community health since they are along freeways,
railyards and polluters. I have the privilege to live near
a park where I run along the Rio Hondo Riverbed. On my run
I pass along a train crossing, a metal plating facility, a
truck refrigerated unit (TRU) facility, a refuse station, a
refinery, and two freeways. Many more community members are
in close proximity to these types of polluters, without the
park access. We need more parks because we are deserving of
having safe spaces to enjoy life.

In a high density area such as California & LA
specifically, the only spaces that are undeveloped are
brownfields. This is why we do work nationally with the
Moving Forward Network and locally through brownfields to
healthfields. There is opportunity for the policy to create
green spaces through investment in the clean up of these
contaminated sites and community based processes. One such
example is Maywood Riverfront Park, a former brownfield
that was cleaned and developed as a community open space,
which is now a thriving social hub.

Environmental Justice Grants Programs

Federal funding for research in our communities is needed.
We have seen research in our communities lead to
discoveries that challenge agencies and health thresholds
through our Marina Pando Social Justice Research
Collaborative (MPSJRC).\3\ We have studied lead soil
contamination, toxic runoff into the LA River, and more.
These studies are done by community members using academic
methodology to study the environmental justice issues that
our community lacks responses to. The outcomes of these
studies are then shared through community events to make
sure research is done by our hood, for our hood.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ http://eycej.org/programs/httpseycej-nationbuilder-
comthe_marina_pando_social_justice_ research_collaborative_mpsjrc2016/

The federal government has an important role in developing
& implementing EJ projects. What we see on the ground is
that state, regional, and local agencies hesitate to invest
and implement EJ projects because they are waiting on
another entity to lead. EJ4A could shift how other
institutions invest in polluted communities, which would
also uplift community leadership. One such example is the
collaboration between LA County and East Yard to create a
Green Zones policy; \4\ the policy consisted of community
led groundtruthing and consistent communication between LA
County and East Yard as the policy was created. The now
adopted policy will stabilize land use in the area and
create buffers between community and polluters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://planning.lacounty.gov/greenzones

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEPA

NEPA, as it has been interpreted in my home of California
through CEQA, has the potential to protect our communities
from polluters. Unfortunately, that is far from the case
now. The policy allows for the creation of studies so we
can understand the harms in our communities through an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR). In our communities EIRs
are often waived through Negative Declarations. When EIRs
are completed due to community requests, they do not
reflect our lived realities: traffic bottlenecks & idling
are unreported, housing in proximity to polluters is
unaccounted for, housing affordability is not discussed,
local jobs cannot be implemented on federally funded
projects, green space is not considered.

The CEQA/NEPA process does not consider grassroots
community engagement: we are expected to read 5000 page
reports and make comments on technical documents with no
assistance to understand the language and with 30 days
cited as sufficient time. I will highlight here that these
barriers do not stop the community. At East Yard we have
created community based committees to look at project EIRs
and write comment letters. However, this policy needs to be
amended to make community-inclusive changes.

Tribal representation in the NEPA process must be
strengthened. In the dozens of EIRs we have reviewed,
tribal representation consists of a letter being sent to
the tribal institution, placing the burden of a response on
a few tribal representatives. We must acknowledge that we
are all on Native land and the burden is on us (non-Native
folks) to ensure due diligence and respect to the land and
its historic uses.

Fair and Just Transition

EJ communities consist of a mostly working class whose
employment is related to toxic exposure. In my community
this looks like working at the ports, as truck drivers, in
refineries, waste facilities, and rendering plants; then
coming home to more contaminated soil, air, and water.
Therefore environmental justice will always be linked to
labor and a need to protect the health of workers, who are
also our parents, uncles, sisters, and children, while
ensuring we have stable careers.

EJ4A proposes a Federal Energy Transition Economic
Development Assistance Fund that is needed to ensure a just
transition in which workers suffering the health impacts of
the oil & gas industry can develop the skills to work in
the healthier systems that we are working toward. We stand
firmly that we do not have to sacrifice our lives for
labor, and we deserve zero emissions jobs and the
respective improved health that comes with it.

I absolutely love our EJ communities. We are full of solutions, we
have the answers, we have been doing this work. Being an EJ community
is not fun, it is not prideful; It carries a heavy burden and
responsibility to fight for ourselves and each other or die slowly.
This is not an exaggeration. Passing Environmental Justice for All is
that serious. Passing any policy that protects human health without
giving loopholes to industry is that important, it is life and death.
We must acknowledge that countless EJ community leaders have worked on
these types of solutions, many of them are no longer with us. And we
now have this policy as an opportunity to take environmental justice
seriously.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Laura Cortez, East Yard
Communities for Environmental Justice
Questions Submitted by Representative McCollum
Question 1. What challenges have EJ communities typically faced in
accessing Federal funding to improve their environmental conditions and
build green infrastructure?

Answer. EJ communities do not have the resources to create an
infrastructure to access federal funding. Beginning with applying for
and receiving funds, there are not enough EJ non-profits in our
communities, and municipalities are also underresourced and
understaffed. When communities are able to learn about and have
capacity to apply to funds, federal funding is attached to very
detailed accounting and financial processes. Non-profits manage many
projects and grants, thereby making it difficult to ensure the adequate
reporting requested by federal funds.
Additionally, the scope of federal grants frequently do not align
to the comprehensive, holistic approach taken by community.

Question 2. Will the Environmental Justice For All Act make a
substantial difference in overcoming those challenges?

Answer. EJ for All Act would create a well-rounded approach in
their grants by including uses of research, education, outreach,
development, and implementation of projects to address environmental
and public health from a community lens. By creating a more robust
scope of work for federal grants, community-based organizations find
more benefits in applying to them and completing community based work
that is relevant to on-the-ground issues.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Cortez.
We are going to hear next from Dr. Nicky Sheats, Director
of the Center for the Urban Environment of the John S. Watson
Institute for Urban Policy and Research at Kean University.
Dr. Sheats, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. NICKY SHEATS, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR THE URBAN
ENVIRONMENT, JOHN S. WATSON INSTITUTE FOR URBAN POLICY AND
RESEARCH, KEAN UNIVERSITY, HAMILTON, NEW JERSEY

Dr. Sheats. Thank you, Chair Grijalva, and thank you for
inviting me here to speak. Thank you to all the members of the
Committee for allowing me to speak to you today.
I am going to focus on one aspect of the EJ For All Act
that my colleague, Ms. Cortez, talked about, and that is on
Section 7 of the EJ For All Act that addresses what is perhaps
the pre-eminent EJ issue in our country today, and that is
cumulative impacts.
Let me start by giving you a definition for cumulative
impacts. You can think of it informally as the total amount of
pollution in the neighborhood.
More formally, a definition we have been using here in New
Jersey is the cumulative impacts consist of the risks and
impacts caused by multiple pollutants, by these pollutants both
individually and when they interact with each other and any
social vulnerabilities that exist in the neighborhood.
It is such a critical issue to address cumulative impacts
because unfortunately numerous reports have found that there
are more unwanted land uses in EJ communities, Indigenous
communities, communities of color, and low-income communities.
There are more unwanted land uses, including polluting
facilities, in these communities than in other communities.
Thus, there is more exposure to pollution by residents of these
communities.
And, unfortunately, in these communities there are also
social vulnerabilities, as mentioned in the formal definition
of cumulative impacts.
Think of higher rates of disease, less access to health
care, and all forms of racial discrimination. And when you put
this together, higher exposure to pollution and social
vulnerabilities, you get a combustible mix that results in
increased death and illness in these communities.
And cumulative impacts are almost certainly one reason why
there are persistent and recalcitrant health disparities that
exist in our country that are rooted in race and income.
More unfortunate news about cumulative impacts is that it
is a tough issue to address, again, for several reasons. My
colleague mentioned one of them. One reason it is difficult to
address is because in our country we try to address pollution
by setting individual standards for pollutants. We go pollutant
by pollutant. We set a standard.
Unfortunately, one of the big problems with this is that
the total amount of pollution in the neighborhood is not
accounted for, so there can be detriment of health impacts to
community residents even if no individual standard is violated.
Another problem with cumulative impacts that has been so
difficult to address is because of its association with race
and income. Unfortunately, race and income are the two most
important factors that go into deciding where unwanted land
uses are sited, race often coming out ahead of income in
importance in siting decisions.
And we all know how difficult it has been for our country
to address racial issues of any kind, and when you erase an
integral part of an issue, like it is with cumulative impacts,
it just makes the issue that much harder to address.
Let me give you some good news. The EJ community has been
successful in moving issues like cumulative impacts from the
margins to the mainstream of environmental policy-making
discussions.
But we have not been successful in obtaining significant
policy victories, and that is where the EJ For All Act comes
in. The Act says that under certain circumstances, applications
for pollution permits should be denied based on cumulative
impacts, and this gives hope to EJ communities across the
country that the elevated levels of pollution that many of
these communities suffer, it gives them hope that there will be
a policy that will actually reduce the pollution in their
community.
I want to end, Chair Grijalva, by saying I am personally
grateful, and I cannot speak for all of my EJ colleagues, but I
think they are grateful to you and your colleagues on the
Natural Resources Committee for strongly considering and
recommending adoption of a policy that is a cumulative impacts
policy in the center of the EJ For All Act that, if adopted,
will result in measurable reductions in pollution in
environmental justice communities and, therefore, will also
result in reducing illness and death in of-color communities
and low-income communities all across the country.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to talk to you this
morning. I think I look forward to questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Sheats follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nicky Sheats, Ph.D., Esq., Director, Center for
the Urban Environment, John S. Watson Institute for Urban Policy and
Research at Kean University and Member of the New Jersey Environmental
Justice Alliance
My name is Dr. Nicky Sheats, Esq., and I am the Director of the
Center for the Urban Environment of the John. S. Watson Institute for
Urban Policy and Research at Kean University.\1\ I also work closely
with and am a member and Chair of the Board of Trustees of the New
Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance.\2\ In these comments I focus on
the portion of the Environmental Justice Act For All Act that
incorporates a cumulative impacts policy into the legislation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The mission of the Center for the Urban Environment is to
support the environmental justice community on both a local and
national level on substantive issues and on building organizational
capacity.
\2\ The NJEJA mission statement reads as follows: ``The New Jersey
Environmental Justice Alliance is an alliance of New Jersey-based
organizations and individuals working together to identify, prevent,
and reduce and/or eliminate environmental injustices that exist in
communities of color and low-income communities. NJEJA will support
community efforts to remediate and rebuild impacted neighborhoods,
using the community's vision of improvement, through education,
advocacy, the review and promulgation of public policies, training, and
through organizing and technical assistance.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 7 of the Environmental Justice For All Act \3\ addresses
what is arguably the most important issue in the field of environmental
justice (EJ): cumulative impacts. Informally, cumulative impacts can be
thought of as the total amount of pollution in a community or how to
address multiple sources of pollution in a community. More formally, in
New Jersey the EJ community has frequently used the following
definition for cumulative impacts:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Environmental Justice For All Act, H.R. 2021, 117th Cong., 2nd
Sess. Section 7 (2021).

``The risks and impacts caused by multiple pollutants, both
individually and when they interact with each other and any
social vulnerabilities that exist in a community. The
pollutants are usually emitted by multiple sources that are
sited within a community.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ For similar formal definitions of cumulative impacts see
Cumulative Impacts: Building a Scientific Foundation, California
Environmental Protection Agency, at 3 (2010); Ensuring Risk Reduction
In Communities With Multiple Stressors: Environmental Justice and
Cumulative, Risks/Impacts, National Environmental Justice Advisory
Council, at 5 (2004).

Cumulative impacts has been a difficult problem to resolve for at
least two reasons. One reason is that our country attempts to regulate
pollution by setting standards for individual pollutants.\5\ The
problem with this pollutant-by-pollutant approach is that it does not
take into account the total amount of pollution in a community and
therefore detrimental health impacts can occur in a community's
population even if no individual standard is violated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See National Environmental Justice Advisory Council, supra note
4, at 11; Framework for Cumulative Risk Assessment, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, at 1-2 (2003).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another reason cumulative impacts has been such a difficult problem
to resolve is its association with race and income. Here, an example
from New Jersey is instructive. In 2009 the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) produced two figures that demonstrated
a relationship between cumulative impacts, race and income in the
state.\6\ Using nine indicators,\7\ NJDEP assigned a cumulative impacts
score to every census block group \8\ in New Jersey. In this context,
cumulative impacts can be thought of as a very rough estimate of the
total amount of pollution in a community. NJDEP then graphed the
cumulative impacts scores against the number of people Of Color living
in these communities (the census block groups) and the number of
impoverished residents in each community. Separate graphs were produced
for each of these two demographic categories, but results were similar.
As the number of either Of Color or low-income residents increased in a
block group, the level of cumulative impacts also increased. These very
troubling figures provide evidence that the amount of pollution in New
Jersey communities is connected to the residents' skin color and income
and violates all norms of equity and fairness that the state and our
country very proudly promote. Race has always been a particularly
difficult issue in our society to solve and the fact that it is
integral to cumulative impacts is one reason this EJ issue is
particularly difficult to solve.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The figures are contained in a technical report and power point
which are both entitled ``A Preliminary Screening Method to Estimate
Cumulative Environmental Impacts.'' The figures can be found at page 3
of the report and slide 5 of the power point, which can be accessed at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/ej/docs/ejc_screeningmethods_pp20091222.pdf
and http://www.state.nj. us/dep/ej/docs/
ejc_screeningmethods20091222.pdf, respectively.
\7\ The indicators were (National Air Toxics Assessment (NATA))
cancer risk, NATA diesel, NJDEP Benzene estimate, Traffic All, Traffic
trucks, Density of Major Regulated sites, Density of Known
Contaminated, Density of Dry Cleaners and Density of Junkyards.
\8\ A census block group is a portion of a census tract that is
typically constructed to contain between 600 and 300 people. See Census
Glossary at https://www.census.gov/programs_surveys/geography/about/
glossary.html#par_textimage_4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is important to note that New Jersey is not the only area of the
country where there is evidence of a disproportionate amount of
pollution in communities Of Color and low-income communities, i.e., EJ
communities. In fact, several investigations that found evidence of
more unwanted land uses in EJ communities than in other communities
helped start the grassroots EJ movement.\9\ Since then, other studies
have confirmed the finding of disproportionate siting \10\ and also
produced evidence of an elevated exposure to pollution in EJ
communities. This is perhaps especially true for air pollution \11\
where vehicular traffic \12\ also contributes to the pollution from
stationary sources. The association between race, income and pollution
sources, and pollution exposure, that exists in our country is one
reason why cumulative impacts is such a critical EJ issue.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The two reports were: Toxic Wastes and Race in the United
States: A National Report on the Racial and Socioeconomic
Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous Waste Sites, United
Church of Christ (1987); and ``Siting Of Hazardous Waste Landfills And
Their Correlation With Racial And Economic Status Of Surrounding
Communities'', General Accounting Office (1983); Another influential
report that focused on unequal enforcement of environmental violations
and unequal clean-up times of polluted sites was M. Lavelle & M. Coyle,
Unequal protection: the racial divide on environmental law, National
Law Journal (September 21, 1993).
\10\ For example, see Robert D. Bullard et al., Toxic Wastes and
Race at Twenty 1987-2007: Grassroots Struggles to Dismantle
Environmental Racism in the United States, United Church of Christ
(2007); and Paul Mohai & Robin Saha, Racial Inequality in the
Distribution of Hazardous Waste: A National-Level Reassessment, 54
Social Problems 343 (2007).
\11\ See C.W. Tessum et al., PM
2.5
polluters
disproportionately and systemically affect people of color in the
United States, Science Advances, Vol. 27 (no. 18)(2021); C.W. Tessum et
al., Inequity in consumption of goods and services adds to racial-
ethnic disparities in air pollution exposure, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the U.S. (2019); Michael Ash et al.,
Justice in the Air: Tracking Toxic Pollution from America's Industries
and Companies to Our States, Cities, and Neighborhoods, Political
Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts Amherst (2009);
Manuel Pastor et al., The air is always cleaner on the other side:
Race, space, and ambient air toxics exposures in California, 27 Journal
of Urban Affairs 127 (No. 2)(2005); Douglas Houston et al., Structural
disparities of urban traffic in Southern California: implications for
vehicle related air pollution exposure in minority and high poverty
neighborhoods, 26 Journal of Urban Affairs 565 (No. 5)(2004); Manuel
Pastor et al., Waiting to Inhale: The Demographics of Toxic Air Release
Facilities in 21st-Century California, 85 Social Science Quarterly 420
(No. 2)(2004); Michael Jarrett et al., A GIS-environmental justice
analysis of particulate air pollution in Hamilton, Canada, 33
Environment and Planning A 955 (No. 6)(2001); D.R. Wernette and L.A.
Nieves, Breathing Polluted Air, 18 EPA Journal 16 (1992).
\12\ David Reichmuth, Air Pollution from Cars, Trucks, and Buses in
the US: Everyone is Exposed, But the Burdens are not Equally Shared,
Union of Concerned Scientists (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ultimate concern with the disproportionate siting of polluting
facilities and disproportionate exposure to pollution in EJ communities
is that they have contributed to health disparities in our nation which
are rooted in race and income.\13\ Therefore, if the country at least
begins to address these very problematic issues it is reasonable to
hope for a decline in these disparities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ For information on health disparities see Health, United
States, 2012: With Special Feature on Emergency Care, National Center
for Health Statistics (2013); Rachel Morello Frosch et al.,
Understanding the Cumulative Impacts of Inequalities In Environmental
Health: Implications for Policy 30 Health Affairs 879, 880-881 (2011);
N. Adler & D. Rehkopf, US disparities in health: descriptions, causes,
and mechanisms, 29 Annu Rev Public Health 235 (2008); William Dressler,
Race and Ethnicity in Public Health Research: Models to Explain Health
Disparities, 34 Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 231 (2005); Roberta Spalter-Roth,
Race, Ethnicity, and the Health of Americans, American Sociological
Association Series on How Race and Ethnicity Matter, Sydney S. Spivack
Program in Applied Social Research and Social Policy (2005); George
Mensah, State of disparities in cardiovascular health in the United
States, 111 Circulation 1233 (No. 10)(2005).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One of the successes of the EJ grassroots movement has been moving
EJ issues from the margins to the mainstream of environmental
policymaking discussions. However, even though at times extensive
support for EJ has been expressed by environmental policymakers,\14\
significant policy victories have been slow in coming. Adoption of the
cumulative impacts policy contained in the Environmental Justice For
All Act would be one such victory. The Act addresses cumulative impacts
by requiring that any pollution permit requested pursuant to the Clean
Air or Clean Water Act should be denied if there is not a reasonable
certainly of no harm to the relevant community due to cumulative
impacts.\15\ The relevant community is the one that would be affected
if the pollution permit would be granted.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ For example, see the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's EJ
program that is involved in a number of activities. Their website can
be accessed at https://www.epa.gov/environmental justice/factsheet-
epas-office-environmental-justice.
\15\ Environmental Justice For All Act, H.R. 2021, 117th Cong., 2nd
Sess. Section 7 (2021).
\16\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It should also be observed that the Act would positively impact
another federal law, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA),\17\
that is important to cumulative impacts. The previous Administration
removed a portion of the NEPA regulations which required cumulative
impacts analyses be included in environmental reviews performed
pursuant to the legislation.\18\ The EJ community is hopeful that the
current Administration will restore this requirement to the NEPA
regulations.\19\ Among other things, the Environmental Justice Act For
All would place additional community involvement requirements into
NEPA.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4321 et seq.
\18\ See CEQ, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Update to the
Regulations Implementing the Procedural Provisions of the National
Environmental Policy Act, 85 Fed. Reg. 1684, 1699, 1707-1708, 1728
(Sec. 1508.1(g)(2))(Jan. 10, 2020). Also see comments submitted by the
New Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance on the topic: New Jersey
Environmental Justice Alliance, Comments on CEQ's Proposed Changes to
the Regulations That Implement Procedural Provisions of the National
Environmental Policy Act, Docket ID No. CEQ-2019-0003, Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, 40 CFR Parts 1500, 1501, 1502, 1503, 1504, 1505,
1506, 1507, and 1508, prepared by Nicky Sheats (March 10, 2020).
\19\ See New Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance, Comments on
National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Regulations Revisions,
Docket No. CEQ-2021-002, prepared by Nicky Sheats (November 22, 2021).
\20\ See Environmental Justice For All Act, H.R. 2021, 117th Cong.,
2nd Sess. Section 14 (2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I applaud the Environmental Justice For All Act for converting
words into action by including a cumulative impacts policy, that if
adopted, would reduce pollution, decrease illness and save lives in
communities, particularly communities Of Color and low-income
communities. This Act would significantly benefit EJ communities in the
United States and move us closer to a just society for all of our
nation's residents.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. Nicky Sheats, Director of the
Center for the Urban Environment at the John S. Watson Institute for
Urban Policy and Research, Kean University
Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva
Question 1. Dr. Sheats, I wanted to ask you about cumulative
impacts in the context of the National Environmental Policy Act, or
NEPA. While NEPA has long required cumulative impact analysis for
proposed actions, it does not require a Federal agency to choose a
course of action that avoids harmful cumulative impacts for an EJ
community. On top of that, many polluting projects permitted under
other Federal laws are actually exempt from NEPA review and its
procedures for analyzing cumulative impacts.

(1a). Do you think EJ communities might benefit if Federal agencies
did NEPA reviews for federally permitted or funded projects that are
currently exempt from NEPA review?

Answer. Yes, I do believe that communities would benefit if
projects which are now exempt from the procedural requirements of NEPA
would be subject to NEPA review because it would provide valuable input
from communities affected by these projects. This community input could
be critical for at least two reasons. First, in a number of cases it
would undoubtedly yield changes in the projects that all stakeholders,
including the project proponents, would consider to be improvements.
Second, and perhaps more importantly, it would also produce changes in
the projects that would make them more protective to the health of the
communities in which they would be located. It must be kept in mind
that many of these projects can produce detrimental impacts on
communities and the projects will be in existence for decades, if not
longer. Given these two facts communities should be involved in project
development as much as possible and in as many projects as possible.

(1b). And do you think EJ communities might also benefit if Federal
agencies were directed to choose a course of action under NEPA that
avoids further harm to overburdened EJ communities?

Answer. Requiring federal agencies to choose a course of action
under NEPA that would avoid harming communities would put more
``teeth'' into NEPA and be more protective of communities. Currently
NEPA is mostly procedural and does not mandate that particular actions
be implemented. Directing the avoidance of harm to communities would
potentially require some actions that would be protective of community
health.
An existing course of action that should more often be given
serious consideration is the take no action alternative.\1\ It appears
to the environmental justice advocacy community that this alternative
is rarely considered and there could be situations in which a project
could cause harm to the affected community and where the no action
alternative would be the best option.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 40 CFR Sec. 1501.9(e)(2); See also Final Guidance For
Incorporating Environmental Justice Concerns in EPA's NEPA Compliance
Analyses, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, at 42 (April 1998).

Questions Submitted by Representative Dingell
Question 1. How have NEPA protections successfully been used to
protect vulnerable communities from some of the worst impacts of
industrial and extractive activity?

Answer. NEPA has ensured public participation in projects that
could have detrimental impacts on communities and remain in these
communities for decades and possibly longer. At hearings and in
comments conducted and accepted due to NEPA regulations,\2\ community
voices have been heard and provided input into the design and
implementation of projects that would have the potential to impact the
lives of community residents. Without NEPA these projects would proceed
with little or no community participation or input.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See A Citizen's Guide to the NEPA--Having Your Voice Heard,
Council On Environmental Quality (December 2007).

Question 2. How would strengthening NEPA and community input
opportunities under the Environmental Justice For All Act impact
ordinary Americans' ability to have a voice in major projects like
pipelines or extractive activity that directly impacts their
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
communities?

Answer. The EJ For All act contains several new requirements that
would result in community members having more information and a better
understanding of the impact of federal action on their communities. One
such requirement would be a community impact report that would provide
some detail on the effects of a federal action on a community. It would
also mandate additional requirements though NEPA regarding hearings,
the length of comment periods, notice and translation of documents
pertaining to federal actions.\3\ These additional procedural
protections should put communities in a better position to participate
in NEPA reviews of all types of projects including pipelines and other
projects that could be harmful to EJ communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See The Environmental Justice For All Act, H.R. 2021, 117th
Congress, 1st Session, Section 14 (March 18, 2021).

Question 3. How would comprehensive legislation like the
Environmental Justice For All Act address some of the shortcomings of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
current Federal protections for at-risk communities?

Answer. During my oral testimony to the Natural Resources
Committee, I concentrated on the cumulative impacts portion of the EJ
For All Act \4\ and I do so again in this document. The EJ For All Act
would for the first time on a federal level require that, under certain
circumstances, an application for a pollution permit under the Clean
Air Act or Clean Water Act be denied. This would provide significant
protection from additional polluting facilities in overburdened EJ
communities, i.e., communities Of Color and communities with low-
income, that has long been sought by these communities. By providing
this type of protection the EJ For All Act would become a frontline
protection against creating, perpetuating, or exacerbating
disproportionate pollution burdens in EJ communities. However, the EJ
For All Act would not be a silver bullet for elevated pollution levels
in EJ communities and the federal government should still develop and
adopt more laws and regulations to protect these communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id. at Section 7.

Questions Submitted by Representative McCollum
Question 1. As someone working to implement the Justice40
Initiative, how will the Environmental Justice For All Act help ensure
equitable access to Federal opportunities to restore, conserve, and
build resilience to support environmental and public health in all
communities?
Answer. At the risk of being accused of acting in a way that is
excessively single-minded, let me return to the section of the EJ For
All Act that incorporates cumulative impacts into the legislation.\5\
For decades the EJ grassroots movement has insisted that at some point
our society must begin denying applications for pollution permits in
communities that already have more than their fair share of polluting
facilities and other unwanted land uses. The EJ advocacy community, and
EJ residential communities, have become extremely frustrated at what
seems to be a refusal to actively prevent an inequitable geographic
distribution of unwanted and detrimental land uses in communities. The
cumulative impacts section of the EJ for All Act could be the beginning
of changing this disturbing situation on a federal level. If it is
eventually adopted, the bill would be a significant step toward
addressing EJ concerns over the dipropionate siting of polluting
facilities in EJ communities and toward supporting ``environmental and
public health in all communities.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Id.

Question 2. Your testimony notes that cumulative impacts of
pollutants has been a difficult problem to resolve due to its
association with race and income. What are some of the key findings
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
from the research you've done to highlight this issue?

Answer. My ``research'' type of work typically involves helping the
EJ advocacy community develop the best possible public policy from an
EJ perspective. Much of this policy addresses issues that directly
involve race and income. For example, one policy recommendation on
which I've spent a significant amount of time is what has come to
become known as ``mandatory emissions reductions.'' This recommendation
advocates that climate change mitigation policy should not only be used
to fight climate change but to also reduce the disproportionate amount
of toxic pollution in EJ communities.\6\ The most important elements of
the policy would require power plants located in EJ communities, or
whose toxic air pollution emissions significantly impacts an EJ
community, to reduce their emissions. These mandatory reductions would
occur no matter what type of mitigation policy the plants are subject
to. The most likely definition of an EJ community under this type of
policy would be based on race and income. Even if the communities being
protected by this policy would be ``overburdened'' communities instead
of EJ communities, race and income would most likely still be an
important criterion used to identify the safeguarded communities. Thus,
this policy directly ``highlights'' race and income as crucial issues
to be addressed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Nicky Sheats, Achieving Emissions Reductions For
Environmental Justice Communities Through Climate Change Mitigation
Policy, 41(2) William and Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review 377
(winter 2017); New Jersey Environmental Justice Climate Change and
Energy Policy Platform, New Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance
(2017).

Question 3. What can we be doing at the Federal level to help
combat the disproportionate exposure to multiple types of pollution
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
found in low-income communities and communities of color?

Answer. There are two types of policies that would address
cumulative impacts and disproportionate pollution loads in EJ
communities. One type would use the concept of cumulative impacts
directly to address this issue. An example of this is the cumulative
impacts policy contained in section seven of the EJ For All Act.\7\ It
explicitly uses the concept of cumulative impacts to tackle the issue
itself. The other type of policy that will be needed to address
cumulative impacts are strategies that will reduce the different types
of pollution that compose the disproportionate pollution loads
connected with this issue. An example of this is discussed in the
question immediately above: climate change mitigation policy from an EJ
perspective. Power plants release air pollution which is often part of
the elevated pollution loads that negatively impact EJ communities.\8\
The mandatory emissions reduction policy explained above, which would
force plants located in EJ communities to reduce their emissions, would
address the air pollution from these facilities that is affecting
community residents. Congress should adopt the EJ For All Act that
includes the cumulative impacts policy and develop additional
legislation that would address the varying types of pollution that
impact EJ communities. It could begin the work on additional
legislation by adopting the mandatory emissions reductions
recommendation. But, of course, Congress shouldn't stop there, it
should also create policy and legislation that specifically addresses
water pollution and solid waste hazards in EJ communities. These
different polices, when combined with the cumulative impacts policy in
the EJ For All Act, would go a long way in creating a coherent EJ
cumulative impacts policy on the federal level and reducing
dipropionate pollution loads in communities Of Color and communities
with low-income across the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Environmental Justice For All Act, supra note 15, at Section 7.
\8\ See Sheats, supra note 18.

Questions Submitted by Representative Cohen
Question 1. Could you describe how the screening tool that you are
working on with the White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council
to identify communities that need help due to risks and impacts caused
by pollution will be helpful to policymakers?

Answer. The Economic and Climate Justice Screening Tool that the
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) is developing is part of the
Biden's Administration Justice40 Initiative.\9\ This Initiative
requires that 40% of the benefits produced by federal investments in
the environment and other areas go to ``disadvantaged''
communities.\10\ The screening tool will be used to identify
disadvantaged communities that will be eligible to receive Justice40
benefits. An initial version of the screening tool has been released to
the public and is being beta tested.\11\ Input gathered from the public
will be incorporated into the tool in an effort to refine and improve
its performance. CEQ intends for improvement of the tool to be an
ongoing and iterative process.\12\ (145)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See Executive Order 14008: Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home
and Abroad, Sec. 223(a) (January 27, 2021).
\10\ Ibid.
\11\ See The Economic and Climate Justice Screening Tool website
located at: https://screeningtool.geoplatform.gov/en/about#3/33.47/-
97.5.
\12\ See The Economic and Climate Justice Screening Tool website at
https://screeningtool.geoplatform.gov/en/public-engagement regarding
public input into the construction and operation of the screening tool,
and the author of these comments has attended several meetings with CEQ
during which the Council stated its intention to make input into the
tool an iterative process.

Question 2. Are there any current tools or technology available
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
that can be used to measure the cumulative impact of a future project?

Answer. There are several states and scholars that have developed
cumulative impacts and other types of EJ screening tools.\13\ But
perhaps the tool that has faced the most examination and vetting is the
one developed by the state of California, which is called
CalEnviroscreen.\14\ This screening tool develops an overall cumulative
impacts score for California census tracts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ For example, the states of Minnesota and Michigan have
developed, are developing, or it has been recommended that they develop
a cumulative impacts tool and, of course, EPA has EJ screen, which
provides demographic and pollution-related information to communities.
For a good discussion of these tools and activities around cumulative
impacts in these jurisdictions see Laura Grier et al., Assessing the
State of Environmental Justice in Michigan, A report submitted in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Science, School for Environment and Sustainability, University of
Michigan (May 2019). Faber and Krieg also developed an EJ screening
tool they applied to communities in Massachusetts. See D. Faber and E.
Krieg, Unequal Exposure to Ecological Hazards: Environmental Injustices
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 110 Environmental Health
Perspectives 277 (supplement 2) (April 2002).
\14\ See CalEnviroScreen website which can be accessed at https://
oehha.ca.gov/calenviroscreen.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Jersey adopted a groundbreaking cumulative impacts and EJ law
in 2020 \15\ and proposed regulations \16\ to implement the law were
issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in
early June of this year. The regulations detail how to conduct an EJ
analysis mandated by the law that takes into account cumulative
impacts. It is likely that this analysis developed by New Jersey will
be highly scrutinized for possible utilization in other states and
perhaps even on the federal level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ N.J.S.A. 13:1D-157, et. seq.
\16\ The proposed regulations were published in the New Jersey
Register on June 6, 2022, and a courtesy copy can be accessed on the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection website at https://
www.nj.gov/dep/rules/proposals/proposal-20220606a.pdf.

Question 3. Could you elaborate on any effect that considering a
project's cumulative impact would have on its design and implementation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)?

Answer. Because the concept of cumulative impacts takes into
consideration the contribution of multiple sources to the total amount
of pollution in a community, a cumulative impacts analysis identifies
sources of pollution, including relatively small ones, that might be
ignored by more traditional types of analyses that examine the impacts
of individual sources in isolation.\17\ A cumulative impacts analysis
would also look at the combined impact that multiple sources and
pollutants would have on a community as opposed to isolated individual
impacts.\18\ Additionally, a cumulative impacts analysis would also
incorporate social vulnerabilities that exist in Of Color communities
and communities with low-income.\19\ These social vulnerabilities could
make the impacts of pollution more harmful in EJ communities than in
other communities that suffer from fewer social and economic
issues.\20\ Again, more traditional types of pollution and
environmental analyses would most likely ignore these vulnerabilities.
Since a cumulative impacts analysis should address the impact of the
total amount of pollution in a community, as well as relatively small
sources of pollution and social vulnerabilities that could intensify
the impact of combined pollution sources, mechanisms to eliminate or at
least mitigate these problematic aspects of a project could be
incorporated into the project design and implementation. Therefore,
consideration of cumulative impacts should result in a project that is
less harmful to a community than a project that is designed and
implemented using more traditional analyses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ A definition for cumulative impacts that is often used by the
New Jersey EJ community is: The risks and impacts caused by multiple
pollutants, both individually and when they interact with each other
and any social vulnerabilities that exist in a community. The
pollutants are usually emitted by multiple sources that are sited
within a community. For other formal definitions see Cumulative
Impacts: Building a Scientific Foundation, California Environmental
Protection Agency, at 3 (2010); Ensuring Risk Reduction In Communities
With Multiple Stressors: Environmental Justice and Cumulative, Risks/
Impacts, National Environmental Justice Advisory Council, at 5 (2004).
\18\ Id.
\19\ Id.
\20\ See Rachel Morello Frosch et al., Understanding the Cumulative
Impacts of Inequalities In Environmental Health: Implications for
Policy 30 Health Affairs 879, 880-881 (2011).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

The Chairman. Thank you, Doctor.
The Chair now recognizes Mayor Harry K. Brower, the Mayor
of North Slope Borough in Alaska.
Mr. Mayor, welcome. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Is the Mayor connected? Mr. Mayor, you probably need to
unmute.
I can hear you, sir. Mayor Brower, welcome and you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRY K. BROWER, JR., MAYOR, NORTH SLOPE
BOROUGH, UTQIAGVIK, ALASKA

Mr. Brower. Thank you, Chairman Grijalva and members of the
Committee. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you about the
Environmental Justice For All Act.
This legislation contains many good ideas that are worth
pursuing, but parts of this legislation could have serious
negative consequences for the people it is intended to protect.
My name is Harry Brower, Jr. I live in Utqiagvik, Alaska,
and I serve as the Mayor of the North Slope Borough. I am a
whaling captain and a former Chairman of Alaska Eskimo Whaling
Commission.
The Borough is a county-level government. It covers the
entire northern region of Alaska, an area about the size of
Wyoming. Nearly 80 percent of the Borough's 10,000 residents
are Alaska Natives.
The Borough is a unique example of Native people creating a
municipal government to advance the self-determination of an
entire Native group, the Inupiat people of our region. In 1971,
when the Alaska Native land claims were settled by Congress, we
were denied the ability to select areas of our traditional
lands that had oil and gas potential.
The Federal Government and the state of Alaska had already
claimed that land. Our Inupiat leaders countered this injustice
by establishing the North Slope Borough, giving our people the
ability to tax oil and gas infrastructure in our region and to
use that tax revenue to provide benefits to our communities.
Today, 95 percent of the tax revenue that supports the
Borough comes from taxes on oil and gas property in our region.
These oil and gas tax revenues support our health clinics,
schools, tribal college, water and sewer infrastructure, fire
departments, search and rescue services, and other essential
services in all our communities.
We understand that many Federal decisions have had
disproportionate negative impacts on disadvantaged communities.
We have had firsthand experience with this on the North Slope.
The impulse to right this historic wrong is good. But I am
concerned that well-intended legislation, like this bill, could
empower outside special interest groups to use Federal courts
to defeat the interests of communities and elected leaders.
Many non-government organizations claim to represent the
interests of disadvantaged communities. In reality, it is the
elected leaders of disadvantaged communities that represent
disadvantaged communities.
Unfortunately, when our decisions and our perspectives do
not match up with what some people want us to say, our voices
are suddenly silenced, or perhaps worse, other groups claim to
speak for us. This is not the proper way to promote
environmental justice for our communities.
We faced this reality again recently. For years, the
Borough worked closely with the Bureau of Land Management as a
cooperating agency to develop a new National Petroleum Reserve-
Alaska Integrated Activity Plan. They developed the IAP in part
due to the requests from the Borough for BLM to reconsider its
management of the NPR-A.
The Borough's participation on behalf of four Alaska Native
communities within the NPR-A was substantial. For example, we
cooperated with BLM in the development of various management
alternatives and reviewed and commented on the adequacy of the
environmental analysis. The final management plan was released
in 2020. It reflected our input and had our support.
At least 10 environmental organizations wrote to the new
Administration last year asking BLM to reject the new plan.
They claimed environmental justice demanded this result because
Alaska Native communities who live within the region rely on
its resources. But none of our communities signed that letter.
None of our tribal governments signed that letter. None of our
elected leaders signed that letter.
With no notice to the Borough, in January, BLM announced
that it was selecting a new preferred alternative for
management of the NPR-A. By adopting the ``no action''
alternative, BLM ignores the input and desires of the Borough,
our communities, and the people who most directly rely on the
resources of the NPR-A.
We are talking today about legislation that would allow
organizations to use environmental justice to defeat Federal
decisions in court. While well intended, I feel that there will
be negative unintended consequences.
The Chairman. Mr. Mayor.
Mr. Brower. Yes.
The Chairman. Mr. Mayor, if I may, I have let people go
somewhat over, the witnesses, but we are approaching 2 minutes,
sir, and I hate to insist, but I think we would like you to
wrap it up as soon as possible, sir.
Mr. Brower. Well, let me just say, Chairman Grijalva, I am
grateful for you to making environmental justice a priority. I
have some concerns with this legislation, but I hope that we
can work with you, Congressman Young, and with the members of
the Committee to advance these important goals in a way that
will be beneficial to our Alaska Native communities.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Brower follows:]
Prepared Statement of Harry Brower, Jr., Mayor, North Slope Borough,
Alaska
Chairman Grijalva and Members of the Committee: Thank you for
inviting me to speak to you about the Environmental Justice For All
Act. This legislation contains many good ideas that are worth pursuing.
But it is my view that parts of this legislation could have serious
negative consequences for the people it is intended to protect.
My name is Harry Brower, Jr. I live in Utqiagvik, Alaska, and I
serve as the Mayor of the North Slope Borough.
I have served as Mayor of the Borough since 2016. I previously
served as Deputy Director of the Borough's Department of Wildlife
Management. I am a whaling captain and the former Chairman of the
Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission.
The North Slope Borough is a county-level government. It covers the
entire northern region of Alaska, an area about the size of Wyoming.
Nearly 80% of the Borough's 10,000 residents are Alaska Native, and
our communities are the Inupiat villages of Anaktuvuk Pass, Atqasuk,
Kaktovik, Nuiqsut, Point Hope, Point Lay, Utqiagvik, and Wainwright.
The Borough is a unique example of Native people creating a
municipal government to advance the self-determination of an entire
Native group, the Inupiaq people of our region. In 1971, when the
Alaska Native land claims were settled by Congress, we were denied the
ability to select areas of our traditional land that had oil and gas
potential. The federal government and the State of Alaska had already
claimed that land. Our Inupiat leaders countered this injustice by
establishing the North Slope Borough, giving our people the ability to
tax oil and gas infrastructure in our region and to use that tax
revenue to provide benefits to our communities.
In a speech he gave in 1976, Eben Hopson--the first Mayor of the
Borough and the founder of the Inuit Circumpolar Council--talked about
the discovery by the U.S. Navy of natural gas near Utqiagvik, which was
called Barrow at that time. The federal government had created the
Naval Petroleum Reserve in 1923 and, within the Reserve, the Navy
established a research facility near Point Barrow. The Navy's drilling
led to the discovery of natural gas in 1949, and a gas field was
developed near Barrow. Natural gas was used to heat federal buildings
like the hospital, the Bureau of Indian Affairs school, and the Naval
Arctic Research Laboratory. But the Navy did not allow the community of
Barrow to use the gas from the federal lands to heat their homes.
In his speech, Eben Hopson spoke about the long, frustrating
struggle to get permission to hook our homes in Barrow to gas mains
that crisscrossed Barrow. The federal government refused to let our
people use the natural gas that came from our own backyard to heat our
homes. It took an act of Congress in 1963 to allow the Native people of
Barrow to buy their own natural gas back from the federal government.
Today, 95% of the tax revenue that supports the North Slope Borough
comes from taxes on oil and gas property in our region.
These oil and gas tax revenues support our health clinics, schools,
tribal college, water and sewer infrastructure, fire departments,
search-and-rescue services, and other essential services in all of our
villages.
We understand that many federal decisions have had disproportionate
negative impacts on disadvantaged communities. We have had first-hand
experience with this on the North Slope.
The impulse to right these historic wrongs is good. But I am
concerned that well-intended legislation, like this bill, could empower
outside special interest groups to use the federal courts to defeat the
interests of communities and elected leaders.
Many NGOs claim to represent the interests of disadvantaged
communities. In reality, it is the elected leaders of disadvantaged
communities that represent disadvantaged communities.
To be clear, I support the general objectives of this legislation.
We should empower disadvantaged communities. We should review federal
policy through the lens of environmental justice. But I am concerned
that some sections of this legislation will unintentionally give power
to special interest groups that often wrongly attempt to wear the
mantle of environmental justice.
It seems like every ``Arctic'' oil and gas project--even if it has
had 10 years of environmental review--ends up in court. As the Mayor of
the North Slope Borough, I have to use community resources to defend
the decisions of the federal government--decisions that we support--to
allow responsible resource development in our region of the country. I
urge the Committee to be careful about creating new layers of review
and new opportunities for litigation. For example, the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) already requires an extensive analysis
of the impacts of federal decisions on our communities, including
impacts on community health, the environment, and our cultural
resources.
Our people have always debated where and how to develop oil and gas
in a responsible way in our region. These are not easy decisions. We
take our role as stewards of our ancestral lands very seriously. We
work closely with project developers and with the federal government to
ensure that the evaluation of proposed development projects
incorporates our knowledge and perspectives to minimize and mitigate
potential negative impact on our resources. We have challenged resource
development in court when it was the right thing to do for our
communities.
Unfortunately, when our decisions and our perspectives do not match
up with what some people want us to do or say, our voices are suddenly
silenced. Or perhaps worse, other groups claim to speak for us. This is
not the proper way to promote environmental justice for our
communities.
We faced this reality again recently. For several years, the
Borough worked closely with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) as a
cooperating agency to develop a new National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska
(NPR-A) Integrated Activity Plan (IAP). BLM developed the IAP in part
due to a request from the Borough for BLM to reconsider its management
of the NPR-A.
The Borough's participation on behalf of four Alaska Native
communities within the NPR-A was substantial. For example, we
cooperated with BLM in the development of various management
alternatives and reviewed and commented on the adequacy of the
environmental analysis. The final management plan that was released in
2020 reflected our input and had our support.
At least ten environmental organizations wrote to the new
Administration last year asking BLM to reject the new NPR-A management
plan. They claimed ``environmental justice'' demanded this result
because ``Alaska Native communities who live within the region rely on
its resources.'' But, none of our communities signed that letter. None
of our tribal governments signed that letter. None of our elected
leaders signed that letter.
With no notice to the North Slope Borough, in January, BLM
announced that it was selecting a new ``preferred alternative'' for
management of the NPR-A. By adopting the ``No Action'' alternative, BLM
ignores the input and desires of the Borough, our communities, and the
people who most directly rely on the resources of the NPR-A.
After we dedicated years of work on the NPR-A IAP, the federal
government reached this decision without consulting with us first. For
the first time ever, the Borough--a cooperating agency that represents
a community whose population is 80 percent indigenous--had to formally
request consultation with the BLM on a project. This is not a problem
that will be solved with more litigation. It is a problem that can be
solved through more meaningful consultation between the federal
government and the impacted local communities.
We are talking today about legislation that will allow
organizations to use ``environmental justice'' to defeat federal
decisions in court. While well intentioned, I fear that there will be
negative, unintended consequences. I have just watched outside special
interest groups successfully use their power and influence to convince
federal decision makers to overturn a decision that had the support of,
and would benefit, our local communities. This is not ``environmental
justice.'' It is a self-serving effort to use our communities to
support someone else's agenda.
When we look at federal policy today--federal policy that governs
oil and gas development on our traditional lands--I, as an elected
leader, must ask this question on behalf of my community: When Congress
prohibits oil and gas development in our region, even when all of our
local elected leaders support that development, are the actions of the
federal government today, executed in the name of environmental
justice, really any different than they were in the 1940s or 1950s when
the government didn't allow us to access the natural gas under our own
feet to heat our homes?
The federal government often says it wants to work with our
communities, but the reality is that it often does so when it is
convenient for the government and when our perspectives amplify the
views of the day. This is not a partisan view. It is a reality that has
been a reality for a very long time.
I am concerned that this legislation could give more power to
people who are not from our communities, who are not elected to
represent our communities, and who don't have to find a way to survive
in our communities. Instead, environmental justice should be promoted
by listening to and respecting the desires of those who are actually
living in impacted communities.
Chairman Grijalva, I am grateful to you for making environmental
justice a priority. I have some concerns with this legislation, but I
hope that I can work with you, with Congressman Young, and with the
Members of the Committee to advance these important goals in a way that
will be beneficial to our Alaska Native communities.
Quyanaqpak for the opportunity to speak with you today.

______

The Chairman. Thank you for your comments, sir, and we
appreciate the time and your service.
Let me now--our final witness is Ms. Amy Laura Cahn,
Director of the Environmental Justice Clinic at the Vermont Law
School.
Ms. Cahn, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMY LAURA CAHN, DIRECTOR, ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
CLINIC, VERMONT LAW SCHOOL, SOUTH ROYALTON, VERMONT

Ms. Cahn. Thank you and good morning, Chair Grijalva,
Ranking Member, members of the Committee, and my fellow
witnesses.
My name is Amy Laura Cahn, and I am the Director of the
Environmental Justice Clinic at the Vermont Law School. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today.
For too long, this nation has denied people of color,
Indigenous communities and Tribal Nations, and low-income
communities the right to a healthy environment. Our nation has
saddled the environmental justice communities with the burden
of proving harm and neglect and discrimination with little
redress in the face of a mountain of evidence.
Environmental racism is segregation imprinted on our
landscape. Racially discriminatory housing, land use, and
transportation policies mean that environmental justice
communities breathe disproportionately more air pollution.
Black Americans, in particular, are exposed to more pollution
from all major emission sources, including waste, energy,
industrial agriculture, transportation, and construction.
Race remains the strongest predictor of hazardous waste
siting across the United States. Residents of historically
Black communities contend with degraded air and water quality
from landfills, such as Arrowhead, a 974-acre site adjacent to
Uniontown, Alabama, permitted to receive up to 15,000 tons of
commercial and industrial waste per day from 33 states.
And the ever-expanding Stone's Throw Landfill, which
continues to displace Tallassee, Alabama residents and
threatens to turn this community into yet another example of
Black land loss.
Oil and gas and petrochemical production also
disproportionately harm environmental justice communities at
every stage of their life cycle.
The racial disparities of the COVID-19 pandemic have laid
bare just how profoundly the energy and environmental policy
decisions of the past have failed communities of color creating
sacrifice zones with climate change now a threat multiplier.
And environmental justice communities bear the burden of
proof. For years residents of Uniontown and Tallassee have
collected pollution data, documented health impacts, filed open
record requests, marshalled turnout, filed public comments and
civil rights complaints, and advanced solutions that respond to
community needs, with too little response and too few available
resources or remedies.
Environmental protections that respond to environmental
racism are scant, underenforced, and as the last administration
has shown us, easy to roll back and even easier to ignore. And
environmental justice communities have not been able to depend
on civil rights enforcement to fill this gap.
We, and Members of this Congress in particular, have the
power to shift this burden. H.R. 2021 fills a long-standing gap
in protection for air and water quality. Neither the Clean Air
Act nor the Clean Water Act account for cumulative impacts of
multiple sources or types of pollution on individual bodies and
whole communities.
As the EPA's Office of Inspector General stated in 2020, it
is often easier for a community that has seven facilities to
get an eighth approved than for a community that has no
existing facilities to get one.
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals recently reversed a
decision by the Commonwealth of Virginia to permit the
construction of a compressor station associated with the
Atlantic Coast Pipeline, stating that environmental justice is
not merely a box to be checked.
That decision relied on state law and policy mandating
analysis of disproportionate health impacts on the
predominantly Black community of Union Hill.
The Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, and the National
Environmental Policy Act all fall short of such substantive
remedies currently.
H.R. 2021 would shift the burden onto regulators and
polluters, requiring a hard look at the distribution of
polluting facilities and action to prevent harm to already
overburdened communities.
And H.R. 2021 restores communities the right to challenge
environmental discrimination.
In 2001, residents of Camden, New Jersey showed the power
of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In a briefly
successful challenge to a permitting process that failed to
consider the impacts of a cement processing facility in an
already overburdened community of color, the U.S. Supreme
Court's decision in Alexander v. Sandoval stopped that case in
its tracks, barring non-Federal parties from bringing disparate
impact lawsuits and placing enforcement solely in the hands of
Federal agencies.
Still, Title VI should be one of the most salient tools to
remedy the harms created by environmental racism and prevent
future injustice.
Yet, in the absence of a private right of action, long-
standing deficiencies in civil rights enforcement and oversight
enable recipients of Federal funding to permit facilities that
exacerbate racially disproportionate pollution burdens.
Approved transportation projects that split communities of
color in half and deny equitable participation of people of
color and people with limited English proficiency in siting and
permitting decisions. H.R. 2021 would restore to communities
and the courts the power to ensure that discrimination does not
occur without consequences.
So doing, H.R. 2021 would begin to shift the burden of
proof and transform how we address environmental racism and
prepare for the climate crisis.
Thank you so very much for the opportunity to testify.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Cahn follows:]
Prepared Statement of Amy Laura Cahn, Visiting Professor and Director,
Environmental Justice Clinic Vermont Law School, South Royalton,
Vermont
I am a Visiting Professor and Director of the Environmental Justice
Clinic at Vermont Law School. We practice a community-based lawyering
approach to advance civil rights and environmental and climate justice.

On January 20, 2021, in issuing Executive Order 13985, President
Biden called out the ``unbearable human costs of systemic racism.'' \1\
Among those costs is a pattern of sacrifice zones throughout this
nation where Communities of Color, Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, and
low-income communities bear disproportionate environmental and climate
harms, while being denied access to environmental benefits and climate
solutions.\2\ I will speak today on the impacts of that unjust
distribution of burdens and benefits--created and perpetuated by gaps
in our legal system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Exec. Order No. 13985, 86 FR 7009 (Jan. 20, 2021).
\2\ See e.g. Dorceta E. Taylor, Toxic Exposure: Landmark Cases in
the South and the Rise of Environmental Justice Activism, in Toxic
Communities: Environmental-Racism, Industrial Pollution, and
Residential Mobility 6 (New York University Press 2014) (highlighting
major environmental racism cases in the South).

Section 2 of the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021
or the Act) finds that ``[a]ll people have the right to breathe
clean air, drink clean water, live free of dangerous levels of
toxic pollution, and share the benefits of a prosperous and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
vibrant pollution-free economy.''

The bill further finds that ``[t]he burden of proof that a
proposed action will not harm communities, including through
cumulative exposure effects, should fall on polluting
industries and on the Federal Government in its regulatory
role, not the communities themselves.''

For far too long, this nation has denied People of Color,
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, and low-income communities--
environmental justice communities--the right to a healthy environment.
Our nation has saddled environmental justice communities with the
burden of proving harm, neglect, and discrimination--with little
redress in the face of a mountain of evidence. H.R. 2021 would fill
those gaps and transform how we address environmental racism and
prepare for a just transition in the face of the climate crisis.
Environmental racism is segregation imprinted onto our landscapes.

The legacies of de jure and de facto segregation are imprinted on
our landscapes. Racially discriminatory housing, land use, and
transportation policies have resulted in environmental justice
communities breathing higher concentrations of harmful air
pollutants,\3\ including from transportation \4\ and chronically
substandard housing where multiple asthma triggers and lead hazards in
paint, dust, soil, and water endanger residents of all ages.\5\ Black
Americans, in particular, are exposed to more pollution from all major
emission sources, including waste, energy, industrial agriculture,
vehicles, and construction.\6\ These disparities exist nationally and
across states, urban and rural areas, and all income levels.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, e.g., Lara P. Clark et al., National Patterns in
Environmental Injustice and Inequality: Outdoor NO2 Air Pollution in
the United States, 9 PLOS One e94431, 2 (2014), www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC3988057/pdf/; Marie Lynn Miranda et al., Making the
Environmental Justice Grade: The Relative Burden of Air Pollution
Exposure in the United States, 8 Int'l J. Envtl. Res. Pub. Health 1755,
1768-69 (2011), www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3137995/pdf/
ijerph-08-01755.pdf; Ihab Mikati, et al., Disparities in Distribution
of Particulate Matter Emission Sources by Race and Poverty Status,
American Journal of Public Health 108, 480-485 (2018), https://doi.org/
10.2105/AJPH.2017.304297.
\4\ See e.g. Union of Concerned Scientists, Inequitable Exposure to
Air Pollution in California: Fact Sheet (February 2019), https://
www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2019/02/cv-air-pollution-CA-
web.pdf; Inequitable Exposure to Air Pollution from Vehicles in the
Northeast and Mid-Atlantic: Fact Sheet, 1 (June 2019), https://
www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2019/06/Inequitable-Exposure-
to-Vehicle-Pollution-Northeast-Mid-Atlantic-Region.pdf.
\5\ See, e.g., Jeremy L. Mennis & Lisa Jordan, The Distribution of
Environmental Equity: Exploring Spatial Nonstationarity in Multivariate
Models of Air Toxic Releases, 95 Annals Soc'y Am. Geog'rs 249 (2005);
Russ Lopez, Segregation and Black/White Differences in Exposure to Air
Toxics in 1990, 110 Envtl. Health Persp. 289 (2002); see also Jayajit
Chakraborty & Paul A. Zandbergen, Children at Risk: Measuring Racial/
Ethnic Disparities in Potential Exposure to Air Pollution at School and
Home, 61 J. Epidem. Cmty. Health 1074, 1074 (2007). 16 See e.g. Robert
Bullard, Addressing Urban Transportation Equity in the United States,
31 Fordham U.L.J. 1183 (2004); Stephanie Pollack et al., The Toll of
Transportation, Northeastern University Dukakis Center for Urban &
Regional Policy (2013); Brian S. McKenzie, Neighborhood Access to
Transit by Race, Ethnicity, and Poverty in Portland, OR, 12 City & Cmty
134-155 (2013).
\6\ Christopher W. Tessum, et al., PM2.5 polluters
disproportionately and systemically affect people of color in the
United States, Science Advances, Vol. 27, no. 18, (Apr. 28, 2021); see
also Tabuchi & Popovich, People of Color Breathe More Hazardous Air.
The Sources Are Everywhere, NYTimes, Apr. 28, 2021.
\7\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Race remains the strongest predictor of hazardous waste siting
across the United States.\8\ Eighty percent of the nation's
incinerators are in low-income communities and/or communities of color
like Saugus, Massachusetts; Hartford, Connecticut; and Trenton, New
Jersey. Residents of historically Black communities like Uniontown and
Tallassee, Alabama, contend with the degraded air and water quality
from Arrowhead Landfill, a 974-acre site permitted to receive up to
15,000 tons of commercial and industrial waste per day from 33 states,
and the ever-expanding Stone's Throw Landfill, which continues to
displace Tallassee community members and threatens to turn this
historical community into yet another example of black land loss. In
the words of Perry County (Alabama) Commissioner Benjamin Eaton, ``if
the air smells bad, you know it's bad.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Robert D. Bullard, Ph.D.; Paul Mohai, Ph.D.; Robin Saha, Ph.D.;
Beverly Wright, Ph.D., Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty: 1987-2007, xii
(2007).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impacts of the fossil fuel industry are also particularly
stark. At every stage of its life cycle, oil and gas production
disproportionately harms environmental justice communities.\9\ More
than 1 million Black people live within a one half-mile radius of
natural gas facilities \10\ and Black and Latino/a people make up
nearly two-thirds of those living within three miles of the dirtiest
refineries.\11\ The proliferation of toxic facilities, mines, and
fossil-fuel infrastructure has taken an irreparable toll on Indigenous
land, cultural resources, and the health and well-being of Indigenous
and Tribal communities.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ NAACP, Fumes Across the Fence-Line, 1, 6 (Nov. 2017) https://
naacp.org/resources/fumes-across-fence-line-health-impacts-air-
pollution-oil-gas-facilities-african-american.
\10\ Id.
\11\ Ben Kunstman et al., Envtl. Integrity Project, Environmental
Injustice and Refinery Pollution: Benzene Monitoring Around Oil
Refineries Showed More Communities at Risk in 2020, 14-16 (Apr. 28,
2021), https://environmentalintegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/
Benzene-report-4.28.21.pdf.
\12\ Renee McVay, Envtl. Def. Fund, Natural Gas Waste on the Navajo
Nation: Updated analysis of oil and gas methane emissions shows growing
problem (2021), https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/content/
NavajoEmissionsReport2021.pdf.; Kyle Whyte, The Dakota Access Pipeline,
Environmental Injustice, and U.S. colonialism, Red Ink: Int'l J.
Indigenous Literature, Arts, & Humanities (Apr. 2017), https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2925513; R. Emanuel & D.
Wilkins, Breaching Barriers: The Fight for Indigenous Participation in
Water Governance, Water (2020), https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/12/8/
2113/htm; U.N. Special Rapporteur, End of Mission Statement by the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples,
Victoria Tauli-Corpuz of her visit to the United States of America
(Mar. 3, 2017), https://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/
DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21274 &LangID=E.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sources of pollution come to environmental justice communities,
rather than the other way around \13\ and residential zip code remains
the strongest predictor of life expectancy overall.\14\ As communities
of color breathe air pollution caused by white peoples'
consumption,\15\ segregated housing and land use patterns now put
environmental justice communities most at risk from extreme
temperatures,\16\ flooding,\17\ and other extreme weather impacts of
climate change, while inequitable resource distribution obstructs
recovery from extreme weather.\18\ Environmental and climate impacts
dovetail--heat increases the impacts of degraded air quality in
historically redlined neighborhoods \19\ and flooding compounds the
``toxic threat'' of unremediated and uncontained Superfund sites.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Paul Mohai & Robin K. Saha, Which Came First, People or
Pollution? Assessing the Disparate Siting and Post-Siting Demographic
Change Hypotheses of Environmental Injustice, 10 Envtl. Res. Letters
15-16 (Nov. 2015).
\14\ Laura Dwyer-Lindgren, Amelia Bertozzi-Villa, Rebecca W.
Stubbs, Chloe Morozoff, Johan P. Mackenbach, Frank J. van Lenthe, Ali
H. Mokdad, Christopher J. L. Murray, Inequalities in Life Expectancy
Among US Counties, 1980 to 2014: Temporal Trends and Key Drivers, JAMA
Intern. Med. (Jul. 1, 2017).
\15\ Christopher W. Tessum, et al., Inequity in Consumption of
Goods and Services Adds to Racial-Ethnic Disparities in Air Pollution
Exposure, PNAS (Mar. 11, 2019).
\16\ See e.g. Marilyn Montgomery and Jayajit Chakraborty, Assessing
the Environmental Justice Consequences of Flood Risk: A Case Study in
Miami, Florida, 10 Environmental Research Letters (2015); Stacy
Seicshnaydre et al., Rigging the Real Estate Market: Segregation,
Inequality, and Disaster Risk, The Data Center (2018).
\17\ See e.g. Bill M. Jesdale, Rachel Morello-Frosch and Lara
Cushing, The Racial/Ethnic Distribution of Heat Risk-Related Land Cover
in Relation to Residential Segregation, 121 Environmental Health
Perspectives 811-817 (2013); Jackson Voelkel et al., Assessing
Vulnerability to Urban Heat: A Study of Disproportionate Heat Exposure
and Access to Refuge by Socio-Demographic Status in Portland, Oregon,
15 Int J Environ Res Public Health (2018).
\18\ See generally, Robert D. Bullard and Beverly Wright, Race,
Place, and Environmental Justice After Hurricane Katrina: Struggles to
Reclaim, Rebuild, and Revitalize New Orleans and the Gulf Coast (2009);
Rachel Morello Frosch, Manuel Pastor, Jim Sadd, and Seth Shonkoff, The
Climate Gap: Inequalities in How Climate Change Hurts Americans & How
to Close the Gap (2009); Gustavo A. Garcia-Lopez, The Multiple Layers
of Environmental Injustice in Contexts of (Un)natural Disasters: The
Case of Puerto Rico Post-Hurricane Maria, 11 Environmental Justice 101-
108 (2018); USGCRP, Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United
States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II (2018) available
at https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_2018_FullReport.pdf.
\19\ Daniel Cusick, Past Racist ``Redlining'' Practices Increased
Climate Burden on Minority Neighborhoods, E&E News (Jan. 21, 2020).
\20\ David Hasemyer and Lisa Olsen, A growing toxic threat--made
worse by climate change, Inside Climate News (Sept. 24, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impacts of environmental racism are dire and deadly.

This legacy of environmental racism has led to disparities in
illness and death based on race, ethnicity, and income, including
disproportionate levels of lead poisoning, asthma, diabetes, heart
disease, respiratory illness, cancer, and now COVID-19.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See, e.g., Jyotsna S. Jagai et al., The Association Between
Environmental Quality and Diabetes in the U.S., Journal of Diabetes
Investigation (Oct. 2019) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC7078099/, Olga Khazan, A Frightening New Reason to Worry About Air
Pollution, The Atlantic (July 5, 2018) https://www.theatlantic.com/
health/archive/2018/07/a-frightening-new-reason-to-worry-about-air-
pollution/564428; Anthony Nardone et al., Associations between
historical residential redlining and current age-adjusted rates of
emergency department visits due to asthma across eight cities in
California: an ecological study, Lancet Planet Health (Jan. 4, 2020);
New Research Links Air Pollution to Higher Coronavirus Death Rates,
N.Y. Times (Apr. 7, 2020) https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/07/climate/
air-pollution-coronavirus-covid.html; Claudia Persico & Kathryn
Johnson, The effects of increased pollution on COVID-19 cases and
deaths, J. Envtl. Econ. Mgmt. (Feb. 2021), https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0095069621000140.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The COVID-19 pandemic has laid bare just ``how profoundly the
energy and environmental policy decisions of the past have failed
communities of color.'' \22\ Racial disparities of COVID-19 infection,
hospitalization, and deaths emerged early in the pandemic, and
voluminous research now links air pollution exposure to those
outcomes.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ The Biden Plan to Secure Environmental Justice And Equitable
Economic Opportunity (n.d.) https://joebiden.com/environmental-justice-
plan.
\23\ See e.g. Wu, X. et al., Air pollution and COVID-19 mortality
in the United States: Strengths and limitations of an ecological
regression analysis, Sci. Advances (2020), https://
projects.iq.harvard.edu/covid-pm. See also Pallavi Pant, COVID-19 and
Air Pollution: A summary of analyses, resources, funding opportunities,
call for papers & more, https://docs.google.com/document/d/
1UTQvW_OytC37IatMNR5qJK7qKfSylNpI2fT3pdteVZA/edit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That environmental injustices impact the same communities most
harmed by COVID-19 is not a coincidence. It is the cumulative--and
often catastrophic--impacts of discriminatory decision-making, poverty,
and industrial pollution that disproportionately and adversely impact
health in environmental justice communities,\24\ with climate change
functioning as a threat multiplier.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Rachel Morello-Frosch et al., Understanding the cumulative
impacts of inequalities in environmental health: implications for
policy, Health Aff (Millwood) 30(5):879-87 (May 2011) https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21555471/.
\25\ H. Orru et al., The Interplay of Climate Change and Air
Pollution on Health, 4 Current Envtl. Health Report 504, 504 (2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inequitable distribution of resources compounds harms and stymies
community-driven solutions.

Over decades, historic disinvestment has also pulled resources from
communities of color to more affluent white communities.\26\ Such
inequities persist in the distribution of Federal investments into
improved water quality and air quality, clean and renewable energy, and
climate-resilient infrastructure. As a result, environmental justice
communities are far less likely to benefit from environmental and
social determinants of health that mitigate environmental burdens,
including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Danielle M. Purifoy & Louise Seamster, Creative extractions:
Black towns in White Space, Sage Journals (2020).

1.  Access green and open spaces \27\ and other resources for
recreation and healthy, active living; \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Jenny Rowland-Shea et al., The Nature Gap: Confronting Racial
and Economic Disparities in the Destruction and Protection of Nature in
America, Ctr. for Am. Progress (July 21, 2020), https://
www.americanprogress.org/article/the-nature-gap/; Robert Garcia & Erica
Flores Baltodano, Free the Beach! Public Access, Equal Justice, and the
California Coast, 2 Stan. J. C.R. & C.L. 143 (2005); Chona Sister et
al., Got Green? Addressing Environmental Justice in Park Provision, 75
GeoJournal 229 (2010); Jennifer Wolch et al., Parks and Park Funding in
Los Angeles: An Equity-Mapping Analysis, 26 Urb. Geography 4 (2005);
Ming Wen et al., Spatial Disparities in the Distribution of Parks and
Green Spaces in the USA, 45 Supp. 1 Annals Behav. Med. 18 (2013);
Dustin T. Duncan et al., The Geography of Recreational Open Space:
Influence of Neighborhood Racial Composition and Neighborhood Poverty,
90 J. Urb. Health 618 (2013).
\28\ Penny Gordon-Larsen et al., Inequality in the Built
Environment Underlies Key Health Disparities in Physical Activity and
Obesity, 117 Pediatrics 417 (2006); Lisa M. Powell et al., Availability
of Physical Activity-Related Facilities and Neighborhood Demographic
and Socioeconomic Characteristics: A National Study, 96 Am. J. Pub.
Health 1676 (2006); Lisa M. Powell et al., The Relationship Between
Community Physical Activity Settings and Race, Ethnicity, and
Socioeconomic Status, 1 Evidence-Based Preventive Med. 135 (2004).

2.  Access to clean drinking water and sanitation; \29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ (Leila M. Harris et al., Revisiting the Human Right to Water
From an Environmental Justice Lens, 3 Pol., Grps., & Identities 660
(2015)).

3.  Access to affordable and clean transportation; \30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ See e.g. Robert Bullard, Addressing Urban Transportation
Equity in the United States, 31 Fordham U.L.J. 1183 (2004); Stephanie
Pollack et al., The Toll of Transportation, Northeastern University
Dukakis Center for Urban & Regional Policy (2013); Brian S. McKenzie
Neighborhood Access to Transit by Race, Ethnicity, and Poverty in
Portland, OR, 12 City & Cmty 134-155 (2013).

4.  Access to healthy, affordable, and culturally appropriate
food,\31\ including the land to securely grow one's own
food;
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ See e.g. Kimberly Morland et al., Neighborhood characteristics
associated with the location of food stores and food service places, 22
Preventative Med. 23-29 (Jan. 2002); L. Powell L et al., Food Store
Availability and Neighborhood Characteristics in the United States, 44
Preventive Med. 189-195 (2007); Thomas A. LaVeist, Segregated Spaces,
Risky Places: The Effects of Racial Segregation on Health Inequalities,
Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies (2011). See also Alison
Hope Alkon & Julian Agyeman eds., Cultivating Food Justice: Race,
Class, and Sustainability 89, 93 (2011).

5.  Access to healthy and resilient homes and schools; \32\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Paul Mohai et al., Air Pollution Around Schools Is Linked to
Poorer Student Health and Academic Performance, 30 Health Affs. 852
(2011).

6.  Access to energy security,\33\ clean energy and energy efficiency
resources,\34\ and the benefits of energy transition
opportunities and a just transition for fossil-fuel
dependent communities.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Diana Hernandez, Understanding `energy insecurity' and why it
matters to health, Social Science & Medicine, 167 (2016) https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.08.029.
\34\ Tony G. Reames, Targeting Energy Justice: Exploring Spatial,
Racial/Ethnic and Socioeconomic Disparities in Urban Residential
Heating Energy Efficiency, 97 Energy Pol'y 549 (2016).
\35\ Sanya Carley and David M. Konisky, The justice and equity
implications of the clean energy transition, Nat Energy 5, 569-577
(2020).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Environmental justice communities bear the burden of proof.

In the absence of comprehensive environmental justice laws,
environmental justice communities must rely on a patchwork of statutes,
regulations, and executive orders insufficient to address structural
inequality. Environmental protections that respond directly to the
impact of environmental racism are scant,\36\ underenforced, and, as
the last Administration has shown us, easy to roll back and even easier
to ignore.\37\ Nor can environmental justice communities depend on
civil rights enforcement to fill this gap.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Brenda Mallory and David Neal, Practicing on Uneven Ground:
Raising Environmental Justice Claims under Race Neutral Laws, 45
Harvard Env't L. R. 295, 299 (2021).
\37\ See e.g., Jose Toscano Bravo, Amy Laura Cahn, Jeannie
Economos, and Rachel Stevens, Federal Dereliction of Duty:
Environmental Racism Under Covid-19 (Sept. 2021) https://
www.vermontlaw.edu/sites/default/files/2021-08/Federal-Dereliction-of-
Duty-Full-Report.pdf.
\38\ See, e.g., Deloitte Consulting LLP, Final Report: Evaluation
of the EPA Office of Civil Rights (Order # EP10H002058) 1-2 (noting
EPA's failure to ``adequately adjudicate[] Title VI complaints . . . .
has exposed EPA's Civil Rights programs to significant consequences
which have damaged its reputation internally and externally.'');
Kristen Lombardi et al., Environmental Justice Denied: Environmental
Racism Persists, and the EPA is One Reason Why, Ctr. for Pub.
Integrity, (2015) (noting EPA ``the civil-rights office rarely closes
investigations with formal sanctions or remedies,'' so EPA's Office of
Civil Rights ``appeared more ceremonial than meaningful, with
communities left in the lurch.''); U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights,
Environmental Justice: Examining the Environmental Protection Agency's
Compliance and Enforcement of Title VI and Executive Order 12,898, at 2
(2016) (``U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights Environmental Justice Report'')
(``The [United States Commission on Civil Rights], academics,
environmental justice organizations, and news outlets have extensively
criticized EPA's management and handling of its Title VI external
compliance program.''); see also Marianne Engelman Lado, No More
Excuses: Building A New Vision of Civil Rights Enforcement in the
Context of Environmental Justice, 22 U. Pa. J.L. & Soc. Change 281,
295-300 (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For years, residents in environmental justice communities like
Uniontown and Tallassee have collected pollution data, documented
health impacts, filed open records requests, disseminated know your
rights information, marshaled turnout for public meetings, filed public
comments and civil rights complaints, and advanced just and equitable
solutions that respond to community needs--with too little response and
too few available resources or remedies from the federal government.
We--and members of this Congress, in particular--have the power to
shift this burden.
H.R. 2021 strengthens NEPA and the voice of environmental justice
communities on major federal projects.

The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) has been essential in
the fight against environmental racism, requiring Federal agencies to
involve potentially affected parties in deliberations about projects
with significant environmental effects and consider potential
environmental, economic, and public health impacts on environmental
justice communities.\39\ NEPA ensures that the public's input is
evaluated and considered prior to expenditures of public resources--
including whether no action is the best option. Though often requiring
litigation to enforce,\40\ NEPA operates from the principle that, when
those most affected are consulted at every stage, better decisions are
made.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ The White House, Memorandum for the Heads of All Departments
and Agencies, Re: Executive Order on Federal Actions to Address
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income
Populations (Feb. 11, 1994).
\40\ See e.g. Ellen M. Gilmer, Dakota Access Pipeline Loses Appeal,
Fueling Shutdown Fight, Bloomberg Law (Jan. 26, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 2020 Trump Rule eviscerated key environmental justice
provisions while prohibiting the climate impacts of a project from
consideration in a NEPA analysis. The White House Council on
Environmental Quality has embarked on a phased rulemaking intended to
course correct. However we get there, now is the time for a stronger
NEPA.
The Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) \41\ directs over a trillion
dollars toward major projects involving highways and bridges, railways,
and energy and water infrastructure projects, including funding for
climate resilience, workforce development, and Superfund remediation.
Many of these projects could benefit environmental justice communities;
all will require robust input from surrounding residents and
stakeholders. Yet, the IIJA also weakened NEPA by increasing state
authority to exclude projects from NEPA review and making permanent the
FAST Act, which imposes unnecessarily tight timelines for project
review and authorization.\42\ These provisions undercut CEQ's efforts
to restore NEPA and the Administration's commitments to prioritize
environmental justice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ H.R. 3684, 117th Cong. Sec. 11312(a) (2021).
\42\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4370m.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 14 of H.R. 2021 requires federal agencies to provide early
and more robust community involvement opportunities under NEPA when
proposing an action that can affect a defined environmental justice
community. In this critical moment, H.R. 2021 re-centers environmental
justice in the NEPA process, bolstering agencies' responsibilities to
assess harmful impacts, engage environmental justice communities, and
consult with Indigenous and Tribal leadership in a manner intended to
better honor Indigenous sovereignty, land, and sacred sites.
H.R. 2021 fills a long-standing gap in protections for air and water
quality.

As the EPA's Office of Inspector General stated in 2020, ``[t]here
is no precise threshold to determine when a community is overburdened[,
which] means that it is often easier for a community that has seven
facilities to get an eighth facility approved than for a community that
has no existing facilities to get one approved.'' \43\ Limited as they
are to establishing standards for and regulating individual pollutants,
neither the Clean Air Act \44\ nor the Clean Water Act \45\ provide a
mechanism to account for the cumulative impacts of multiple sources and
uses of pollution on individual bodies and whole communities. Thus,
environmental permits are routinely issued that allow regulated
entities to increase levels of pollution without evaluating or
accommodating adverse, cumulative, or disparate impacts on the
surrounding community.\46\ The lack of air and water quality monitoring
to understand baseline pollution levels in environmental justice
communities compounds this problem.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Office of Inspector Gen., U.S. Envtl. Prot. Agency, Fiscal
Year 2022 at 28 (Nov. 12, 2021) https://www.epa.gov/system/files/
documents/2021-11/certified_epaoig_20211112-22-n-0004.pdf.
\44\ Marie L. Miranda et al., Making the Environmental Justice
Grade: The Relative Burden of Air Pollution Exposure in the United
States, 8 Int. J. Env't. Rsch. and Public Health, 1755, 1755 (2011).
\45\ Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Sec. 1251(a).
\46\ Id. at Sec. 1251(e).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals recently opined that
``[e]nvironmental justice is not merely a box to be checked,'' \47\
reversing a decision by the Commonwealth of Virginia to permit the
construction of a compressor station associated with the Atlantic Coast
Pipeline project. That decision relied on state environmental justice
and energy law and policy that mandated analysis of the potential for
disproportionate health impacts on the predominantly Black community of
Union Hill. Even with a robust environmental justice analysis that
considers direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts, NEPA still only
offers a procedural framework, falling short of such substantive
remedies.\48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Friends of Buckingham v. State Air Pollution Control Bd., 947
F.3d 68, 93 (4th Cir. 2020).
\48\ Id. at 310.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 7 of H.R. 2021 requires the consideration of cumulative
environmental impacts in permitting decisions under the Clean Air Act
and the Clean Water Act and provides that permits not be issued if
projects are unable to demonstrate a reasonable certainty of no harm to
human health after consideration of cumulative impacts. This bill would
finally shift the burden onto regulators and polluters, requiring a
hard look at the distribution of polluting facilities and action to
protect already-overburdened environmental justice communities.
H.R. 2021 restores to communities the right to challenge environmental
discrimination.

Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 \49\ prohibits recipients
of federal funding from discrimination based on race, color, or
national origin, either through intentional discrimination or through
actions that, while neutral on their face, have a disproportionate and
adverse impact. Title VI applies broadly to recipients of funding from
the family of environmental, agricultural, natural resource, land
management, energy, and disaster recovery agencies. As such, Title VI
should be one of the most salient tools to remedy the harms created by
racial segregation and prevent future injustice as we respond to the
impacts of the climate crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ 42 U.S.C. 2000d (1964) et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2001, residents of the Waterfront South community in Camden, New
Jersey, showed the power of Title VI in a briefly successful challenge
to a permitting process that failed to consider the cumulative health
and environmental impacts of siting a cement processing facility in an
already-overburdened community of color.\50\ The U.S. Supreme Court's
decision in Alexander v. Sandoval \51\ stopped the Waterfront South
case in its tracks, barring any non-federal parties from bringing
disparate impact lawsuits and placing enforcement against disparate
impact discrimination solely in the hands of federal agencies.\52\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\50\ S. Camden Citizens in Action v. New Jersey Dep't of Env't
Prot., 145 F. Supp. 2d 446, 503 (D.N.J.), opinion modified and
supplemented, 145 F. Supp. 2d 505 (D.N.J. 2001), rev'd, 274 F.3d 771
(3d Cir. 2001).
\51\ Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 292 (2001).
\52\ Id. at 293.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title VI mandates that every federal agency ensure compliance by
its funding recipients and investigate complaints of discrimination,
authorizing agencies to effectuate compliance by terminating or
refusing grant funding or ``any other means authorized by law.'' In the
absence of a private right of action, severe and long-standing
deficiencies in civil rights enforcement and oversight have enabled
funding recipients to permit waste and fossil fuel facilities and
infrastructure that exacerbate racially disproportionate pollution
burdens, approve transportation projects that split communities of
color, and deny equitable participation of people with limited English
proficiency in siting and permitting decisions.
Federal agency response to and resolution of complaints have
historically been subject to delay, requiring litigation to enforce
agency deadlines. Agencies, funding recipients, and the communities
they are mandated to protect from discrimination lack comprehensive
guidance on civil rights compliance. Complainants with firsthand
knowledge have been systematically sidelined from the investigation and
resolution of civil rights complaints. Agencies have refused to assert
jurisdiction over complaints or make findings of discrimination, much
less wield their power to withhold or delay funding, sending a message
to funding recipients that compliance is optional.\53\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ See supra n. 38.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The unjust distribution of environmental, health, and climate
burdens and benefits constitutes a massive failure of our nation's
civil rights enforcement infrastructure. $1.2 trillion in
infrastructure investments is now heading out the door, potentially
outpacing a clear directive on how the Justice40 Initiative should
shape the equitable distribution of expenditures \54\ and with
insufficient mechanisms to ensure accountability in recipient decision-
making and implementation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ Jean Chemnick, How states could topple Biden's Justice40
goals, E&E News (Feb. 4, 2022) https://www.eenews.net/articles/how-
states-could-topple-bidens-justice40-goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sections 4, 5, and 6 of H.R. 2021 would restore the right of
individuals to legally challenge discrimination--including
environmental discrimination--prohibited under Title VI. This would
restore to communities--and the courts--the power to ensure that
discrimination does not occur without consequence.
H.R. 2021 directs critical resources to address environmental racism
and facilitate a just transition.

Stronger legal tools will create greater accountability and more
equitable outcomes by addressing policy, planning, permitting, and
enforcement decisions that perpetuate harm to environmental justice
communities. These systemic changes are necessary, but not sufficient.
H.R. 2021 directs critical resources for capacity building, training,
research, programming, and tangible environmental benefits and puts
structures in place so that environmental justice communities and
fossil-fuel-dependent communities can be in the lead to proactively
address conditions on the ground.
The Principles of Environmental Justice, drafted at the First
People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit in 1991, responded
directly to the conditions of environmental racism. These principles
are rooted in holistic vision, self-determination, repair and redress,
and a core belief that all people have the right to a healthy
environment that enriches life. The Principles reflect the need to
center in policymaking decisions the communities most impacted by
environmental risks and harms and too long marginalized from the
decisions that have shaped their health, welfare, and well-being.
The Environmental Justice for All Act responds to that call--
through an inclusive, transparent, and community-driven process and
with substantive protections that respond to community needs, fill gaps
in our laws, and shift resources to where they are most needed.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Amy Laura Cahn, Visiting
Professor and Director, Environmental Justice Clinic, Vermont Law
School, South Royalton, Vermont
Questions Submitted by Representative Cohen
Question 1. We sometimes hear that new policies to address
environmental injustice of the type you described in your opening
statement are not needed because we have NEPA, the Clean Water Act,
Clean Air Act, and other laws. Can you respond to that point of view?

Answer. As stated in written testimony submitted for the February
15, 2022, hearing of the House Committee on Natural Resources regarding
H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act, in the absence of
comprehensive environmental justice laws, environmental justice
communities currently rely on a patchwork of statutes, regulations, and
executive orders insufficient to address structural inequality.
Environmental protections that respond directly to the impact of
environmental racism are scant \1\ as ``the major environmental
statutes do not address the prospect that their benefits and burdens
might turn out to be unequally distributed in ways that add to
cumulative disadvantage[,] nor [do they] provide measures to avert
disparate impact[.]'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Brenda Mallory & David Neal, Practicing on Uneven Ground:
Raising Environmental Justice Claims under Race Neutral Laws, 45
Harvard Env't L.R. 295, 299 (2021).
\2\ Jedediah Purdy, The Long Environmental Justice Movement, 44
Ecology L.Q. 809, 825 (2018).

The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) \3\ remains essential
in the fight against environmental racism, requiring federal agencies
to involve potentially affected parties in deliberations about projects
with significant environmental effects and to consider potential
environmental, economic, and public health impacts on environmental
justice communities.\4\ NEPA requires that all federal agencies ``study
and disclose'' the environmental impact of any major federal action
that significantly affects the environment.\5\ The NEPA assessment
process requires public engagement with ``affected communities
submitting comments during the NEPA process and seeking judicial review
if the agency fails to complete the process correctly[.]'' \6\ NEPA
additionally mandates consultation with Indigenous Peoples and Tribal
Nations--a requirement also subject to judicial review.\7\ Moreover, in
implementing NEPA and pursuant to Executive Order 12898, Federal Action
to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income
Populations (E.O. 129898), federal agencies conduct environmental
justice analyses ``to determine whether a project will have a
disproportionately adverse effect on minority or low income
populations.'' \8\ In essence, NEPA ensures that the input of affected
communities is evaluated and considered prior to expenditures of public
resources--including when no action is the best option. Though often
requiring litigation to enforce,\9\ NEPA operates from the principle
that, when those most affected are consulted at every stage, better
decisions are made.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Pub. L. No. 91-190, 83 Stat. 852 (codified as amended at 42
U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 4321-4347).
\4\ The White House, Memorandum for the Heads of all Departments
and Agencies, Re: Executive Order on Federal Actions to Address
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income
Populations (Feb. 11, 1994).
\5\ Wyatt G. Sassman, Community Empowerment in Decarbonization:
NEPA's Role, 96 Wash. L. Rev. 1511, 1516 (2021).
\6\ Id. at 1517.
\7\ NEPA Evaluation of Cultural Resources, Tribal Values, and
Environmental Justice: Lessons from Standing Rock Indian Tribe, et al.
v. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Dakota Access Pipeline
Controversy, 2017 No. 5 RMMLF-INST 13A, 13A-12, 13A-13 (Nov. 2, 2017).
\8\ Id. at 13A-25.
\9\ See e.g. Ellen M. Gilmer, Dakota Access Pipeline Loses Appeal,
Fueling Shutdown Fight, Bloomberg Law (Jan. 26, 2021).

However, while the requirements of public participation,
government-to-government Tribal consultation, and analysis of potential
impacts on environmental justice communities may serve a preventative
function by elevating key concerns and enhancing analysis, enforcement
of NEPA remains limited in scope to procedural violations. Even legal
challenges seeking more searching environmental justice analysis have
fallen short,\10\ much less providing environmental justice communities
a tool to address environmental racism head-on. As stated in a recent
article co-authored by Brenda Mallory, now chair of the White House
Council on Environmental Quality Chair, and David Neal, a senior
attorney at the Southern Environmental Law Center
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Mallory and Neal, supra n. 1 at 307.

any judicial victory under NEPA would at most require
additional analyses or the consideration of alternatives, which
can only indirectly lead to substantive relief. Environmental
justice claims under NEPA, a race-neutral environmental law,
are inherently process-oriented and are not a substitute for
claims for substantive protections for communities of color
that are threatened with new sources of industrial pollution or
who have experienced disproportionate, cumulative pollution
from existing sources.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Id.

The Clean Water and Clean Air Acts do not fill the substantive gap
left by NEPA. As the EPA's Office of Inspector General stated in 2020,
``[t]here is no precise threshold to determine when a community is
overburdened[, which] means that it is often easier for a community
that has seven facilities to get an eighth facility approved than for a
community that has no existing facilities to get one approved.'' \12\
Limited as they are to establishing standards for and regulating
individual pollutants, neither the Clean Air Act \13\ nor the Clean
Water Act \14\ provide a mechanism to account for the cumulative
impacts of multiple sources and uses of pollution on individual bodies
and whole communities. These environmental statutes, along with the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act \15\ and others, operate under a
``cooperative federalism framework'' \16\ with implementation delegated
to states--as with the Clean Air Act, through which federal agencies
set ``health-based standards, and the states determin[e] how to meet
those standards[.]'' \17\ However, federal delegation to states has not
been paired with mechanisms to ``compel or even strongly encourage
state agencies'' to proactively address environmental justice--as
evidenced by the implementation of the Safe Drinking Water Act relative
to ``the circumstances that resulted in the contamination of Flint's
drinking water supply with lead.'' \18\ Thus, environmental permits are
routinely issued that allow regulated entities to increase levels of
pollution without evaluating or accommodating adverse, cumulative, or
disparate impacts on the surrounding community. Without federal
statutory mandates designed to address these inequities, residents of
environmental justice communities cannot even rely on citizen suit
provisions provided for in many environmental statutes. The lack of air
and water quality monitoring to understand baseline pollution levels in
environmental justice communities only compounds the problem.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Office of Inspector Gen., U.S. Envtl. Prot. Agency, Fiscal
Year 2022 at 28 (Nov. 12, 2021) https://www.epa.gov/system/files/
documents/2021-11/certified_epaoig_20211112-22-n-0004.pdf.
\13\ Marie L. Miranda et al., Making the Environmental Justice
Grade: The Relative Burden of Air Pollution Exposure in the United
States, 8 Int. J. Env't. Res. and Public Health, 1755, 1755 (2011).
\14\ 33 U.S.C. Sec. 1251(a).
\15\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 6901 et seq.
\16\ Rachael E. Salcido, Retooling Environmental Justice, 39 UCLA
J. Envtl. L. & Pol'y 1, 23-24 (2021).
\17\ Id.
\18\ David Konisky, ``Flint, Federalism, and Environmental Justice
in the United States,'' MIT Press Blog (Feb. 16, 2016).
\19\ U.S. GAO, Air Pollution: Opportunities to Better Sustain and
Modernize the National Air Quality Monitoring System (Nov. 12, 2020),
https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-38.

The absence of explicit, substantive protections does not mean that
federal agencies cannot or should not take affirmative steps to address
the inequitable distribution of burdens and benefits that stem from
environmental racism. In fact, since 1994, E.O. 12898 has mandated that
federal agencies ``identif[y] and address[. . .] disproportionately
high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs,
policies, and activities on minority populations and low-income
populations . . . to the greatest extent practicable and permitted by
law.'' Dr. Beverly Wright of the Deep South Center for Environmental
Justice has described EO 12898 as ``groundbreaking'' yet ``limited''
\20\--and the executive order remains underenforced.\21\ Presidential
administrations have made commitments to tackling environmental justice
enforcement to varying degrees,\22\ with actions taken pursuant to
executive orders \23\ issued at the start of the Biden Administration a
notable and holistic example.\24\ In truth, however, even when
administrations lean into every opportunity to address environmental
racism, discretionary authority is time-limited.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Adam Mahoney, What Biden Could Learn From Bill Clinton's
Unfinished Work on Environmental Justice, Grist (Feb 24, 2021), https:/
/grist.org/politics/joe-biden-environmental-justice-executive-order-
bill-clinton/.
\21\ See e.g. William C.C. Kemp-Neal J.D., Environmental Racism:
Using Environmental Planning to Lift People Out of Poverty, and Re-
Shape the Effects of Climate Change & Pollution in Communities of
Color, 32 Fordham Envtl. L. Rev. 295, 320 (2021)(citing Sandra G.
O'Neil, Superfund: Evaluating the Impact of Executive Order 12898,
115.7 Envtl. Health Perspectives 1087, 1089 (July 2007), https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pme/artieles/PMC1913562).
\22\ See e.g. Plan EJ 2014: Legal Tools, U.S. EPA (Sep. 2011),
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-02/documents/ej-legal-
tools.pdf; Technical Guidance for Assessing Environmental Justice in
Regulatory Analysis, EPA (June 2016), https://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2016-06/documents/ejtg_5_6_16_v5.1.pdf.
\23\ Exec. Order No. 13,985, 86 Fed. Reg. 7,009 (Jan. 20, 2021);
Exec. Order No. 13990, 86 FR 7037 (Jan. 20, 2021); Exec. Order No.
14008, 86 FR 7619 (Jan. 20, 2021).
\24\ See generally Federal Environmental Justice Tracker, Harvard
Environmental & Energy Law Program (n.d.) (designed to provide up-to-
date information on the Biden administration's environmental justice
commitments, and progress made on those commitment).

Environmental justice protections remain easy to roll back \25\ and
even easier to ignore.\26\ Addressing environmental racism requires
legislation to convey to federal agencies, regulated industries,
federal funding recipients, and affected communities a consistent
understanding of expectations, obligations, and mechanisms for
accountability and an unwavering national commitment to environmental
justice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Amy Patronella & Saharra Griffin, Communities of Color Bear
the Brunt of Trump's Anti-Environmental Agenda, Ctr. for Am. Progress
(Feb. 27, 2020), https://www.amerieanprogress.org/issues/green/news/
2020/02/27/480820/eommunities-color-bear-brunt-trumps-anti-
environmental-agenda/.
\26\ See e.g., Jose Toscano Bravo, Amy Laura Cahn, Jeannie
Economos, and Rachel Stevens, Federal Dereliction of Duty:
Environmental Racism Under Covid-19 (Sept. 2021), https://
www.vermontlaw.edu/sites/default/files/2021-08/Federal-Dereliction-of-
Duty-Full-Report.pdf.

Question 2. Why is it so important to make sure that the disparate
environmental impacts experienced by communities of color are addressed
through the amendments to the Civil Rights Act proposed by the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Environmental Justice For All Act?

Answer. As stated in written testimony submitted for the February
15, 2022, hearing of the House Committee on Natural Resources regarding
H.R. 2021, Environmental Justice for All Act, environmental justice
communities have not been able to depend on civil rights enforcement by
federal agencies to fill the gap in environmental law.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ See, e.g., Deloitte Consulting LLP, Final Report: Evaluation
of the EPA Office of Civil Rights (Order #EP10H002058) 1-2 (noting
EPA's failure to ``adequately adjudicate[] Title VI complaints . . . .
has exposed EPA's Civil Rights programs to significant consequences
which have damaged its reputation internally and externally.'');
Kristen Lombardi et al., Environmental Justice Denied: Environmental
Racism Persists, and the EPA is One Reason Why, Ctr. for Pub.
Integrity, (2015) (noting EPA ``the civil-rights office rarely closes
investigations with formal sanctions or remedies,'' so EPA's Office of
Civil Rights ``appeared more ceremonial than meaningful, with
communities left in the lurch.''); U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights,
Environmental Justice: Examining the Environmental Protection Agency's
Compliance and Enforcement of Title VI and Executive Order 12,898, at 2
(2016) (``U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights Environmental Justice Report'')
(``The [United States Commission on Civil Rights], academics,
environmental justice organizations, and news outlets have extensively
criticized EPA's management and handling of its Title VI external
compliance program.''); see also Marianne Engelman Lado, No More
Excuses: Building A New Vision of Civil Rights Enforcement in the
Context of Environmental Justice, 22 U. Pa. J.L. & Soc. Change 281,
295-300 (2019).

Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 \28\ prohibits recipients
of federal funding from discrimination based on race, color, or
national origin, either through intentional discrimination or through
actions that, while neutral on their face, have a disproportionate and
adverse impact. Title VI applies broadly to recipients of funding from
the family of environmental, agricultural, natural resource, land
management, energy, and disaster recovery agencies. As such, Title VI
should be one of the most salient tools to remedy the harms created by
racial segregation and prevent future injustice as we respond to the
impacts of the climate crisis. However, the U.S. Supreme Court's
decision in Alexander v. Sandoval \29\ has barred any non-federal
parties from bringing disparate impact lawsuits and placed enforcement
against disparate impact discrimination solely in the hands of federal
agencies.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 2000d (1964) et seq.
\29\ Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 292 (2001).
\30\ Id. at 293.

Title VI mandates that every federal agency ensure compliance by
its funding recipients and investigate complaints of discrimination,
authorizing agencies to effectuate compliance by terminating or
refusing grant funding or ``any other means authorized by law.'' In the
absence of a private right of action, severe and long-standing
deficiencies in civil rights enforcement and oversight have enabled
funding recipients to permit the siting of waste and fossil fuel
facilities and infrastructure that exacerbate racially disproportionate
pollution burdens, approve transportation projects that split
communities of color, and deny equitable participation of people with
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
limited English proficiency in siting and permitting decisions.

Federal agency response to and resolution of complaints have
historically been subject to delay, requiring litigation to enforce
agency deadlines.\31\ Agencies, funding recipients, and the communities
they are mandated to protect from discrimination lack comprehensive
guidance on civil rights compliance.\32\ Complainants with firsthand
knowledge have been systematically sidelined from the investigation and
resolution of civil rights complaints.\33\ Agencies that refuse to
assert jurisdiction over complaints or make findings of discrimination,
much less wield their power to withhold or delay funding, send a
message to funding recipients that compliance is optional.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Court Declares that EPA Failed To Protect Civil Rights, Yale
Law School (April 3, 2018) https://law.yale.edu/yls-today/news/court-
declares-epa-failed-protect-civil-rights.
\32\ See generally Comment Letter: Environmental Justice and Civil
Rights with Appendices to Administrator Regan (w/ Appendices) (Title VI
Alliance, November 2021) https://www.prrac.org/letter-to-administrator-
regan-et-al-re-enviro-justice-and-civil-rights-with-appendices-11-24-
21/.
\33\ Id. at 15-16.

A 2019 comment letter to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) submitted by Earthjustice (2019 Earthjustice letter)
on behalf of residents of Flint, Michigan, and Tallassee and Uniontown,
Alabama, among others, highlights mechanisms by which the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has circumvented Title VI
enforcement.\34\ The 2019 Earthjustice letter called attention to
barriers to disparate impact claims brought by communities under Title
VI to reveal the danger of an analogous approach promulgated under the
Fair Housing Act by HUD under the Trump Administration.\35\ The
resultant lack of oversight over funding recipients, paired with a
systematic marginalization of complainants from the investigation and
resolution of complaints, has tangible impacts on environmental justice
communities. As stated in the 2019 Earthjustice letter:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ See Attachment A, Letter from Earthjustice et al. to Office of
General Counsel, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Re
Docket No. FR-6251-P-01: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Reinstatement
of HUD's Discriminatory Effects Standard (Aug. 21, 2021).
\35\ HUD's Implementation of the Fair Housing Act's Disparate
Impact Standard, 84 Fed. Reg. 42,854 (proposed Aug.19, 2019) (to be
codified at 24 C.F.R. pt. 100).

[T]he U.S. Government and experts have recognized that
environmental discrimination is a significant problem in this
country and has been for decades.\36\ In recognition of that
problem, EPA enacted regulations in 1973 codifying that
discrimination can be proven through a disparate impact
analysis. Those regulations provide that a recipient of federal
funds may not directly or indirectly use criteria or methods of
administering its program, or choose a site or location of a
facility, that has ``the effect'' of excluding individuals,
denying them benefits, or otherwise subjecting them to
discrimination because of race, color, national origin, or
sex.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ See generally Commission for Racial Justice, United Church of
Christ, Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States: A National Report
on the Racial and Socio-Economic Characteristics of Communities with
Hazardous WasteSites (1987); U.S. Gov't Accounting Office, Siting of
Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation with Race and Economic
Status of Surrounding Communities (GAO/RCED-83-168), 3-4 (1983), http:/
/archive.gao.gov/d48t13/121648.pdf; Mikati et al., supra note 22, at
480-85 (concluding that at local, state and national level, non-whites
are burdened by environmental harms disproportionately to Whites). For
an annotated bibliography of articles documenting environmental
discrimination, see Luke W. Cole & Sheila R. Foster, From The Ground
Up: Environmental Racism and the Rise of the Environmental Justice
Movement, 167-83 (2001).
\37\ See 40 C.F.R. Sec. 7.35(b), (c).

Yet, EPA has woefully failed to hold recipients of federal
funds accountable for discriminatory acts and policies, which
has subjected the agency to repeated criticism from multiple
sources.\38\ For example, EPA's Office of Civil Rights, now
called the External Civil Rights Compliance Office, has
rejected or dismissed a majority of the hundreds of Title VI
complaints it has received.\39\ A 2015 Center for Public
Integrity investigative study showed that even where there was
a reason to believe a recipient of federal funding had a
discriminatory policy, the Office of Civil Rights failed to
conduct an investigation.\40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ See supra n. 27.
\39\ See U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights Environmental Justice Report,
supra note 27, at 40; see also Yue Qiu & Talia Buford, Decades of
Inaction, Ctr. for Pub. Integrity (Aug. 3, 2015), https://
publicintegrity.org/environment/decades-of-inaction/.
\40\ U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights Environmental Justice Report,
supra note 27, at 40 (citing Kristen Lombardi et al., Environmental
Justice Denied: Environmental Racism Persists, and the EPA is One
Reason Why, Ctr for Pub. Integrity (2015), http://
www.publicintegrity.org/2015/08/03/17668/environmental-racism-persists-
and-epa-one-reason-why.

[O]ver time, EPA has informally applied needlessly heightened
standards . . . when conducting a disparate impact analysis. As
a result, . . . EPA has repeatedly concluded that no
discrimination--or ``insufficient evidence of
discrimination''--exists under a disparate impact analysis in
situations where a sensical and unencumbered application of the
disparate impact standard would have led to the opposite
conclusion. Indeed, in the 46 years since EPA's Title VI anti-
discrimination regulations became effective, EPA has only once
concluded that a prima facie case of alleged discrimination
under the disparate impact framework was established.\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ See Marianne Engelman Lado, supra note 27, at 303-05;
Agreement between the California Department of Pesticide and Regulation
& the U.S. EPA, Aug. 24, 2011, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/
files/2016-04/documents/title6-settlement-agreement-signed.pdf.

The 2019 Earthjustice letter details EPA's repeated failures to
enforce the Title VI obligations of the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality [MDEQ], despite long-standing harmful conditions
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in Flint, Michigan:

As the recent lead-in-water crisis has brought into stark
relief, the community of Flint, Michigan has long suffered from
environmental and civil rights injustices. Flint is a majority
African American community with a poverty rate nearly three
times the national average, ranking near last in various public
health metrics compared to other areas of Michigan.\42\ Decades
of redlining, racially restrictive covenants, and harassment
have led to the racially segregated Flint of today--the city
has been labeled the most segregated non-Southern city in the
country.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Flint Water Advisory Task Force, Final Report at 15 (Mar.
2016), https://www.michigan.gov/documents/snyder/
FWATF_FINAL_REPORT_21March2016_517805_7.pdf (``Flint Water Advisory
Task Force Final Report'').
\43\ Peter J. Hammer, The Flint Water Crisis: History, Housing and
Spatial-Structural Racism, Testimony Before Michigan Civil Rights
Commission Hearing on Flint Water Crisis (July 14, 2016), https://
www.michigan.gov/documents/mdcr/Hammer_PPt_for_MCRC_Flint_07-14-
16_552224_7.pdf.

For decades, community activists have fought back against the
disproportionate burdens that state permitting agencies have
placed on the people of Flint.\44\ In 1992, the St. Francis
Prayer Center submitted a complaint to EPA, alleging that
[MDEQ] violated the civil rights of the people of Flint in the
permitting of a wood-burning incinerator in their
community.\45\ Just four years later, when MDEQ permitted
another polluting facility in Flint--the Select Steel steel
mill--the Prayer Center submitted another civil rights
complaint to EPA contesting the disproportionate burdens faced
by Flint residents.\46\ While it took EPA just a few months to
issue the findings of its investigation into the Select Steel
complaint, EPA did not issue findings on the 1992 complaint
until 2017--a quarter-century later. In both cases, EPA
discounted allegations of disparate impacts under arbitrary
standards . . .\47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ See Emily L. Dawson, Lessons Learned from Flint, Michigan:
Managing Multiple Source Pollution in Urban Communities, 26 Wm. & Mary
Envtl. L. & Pol'y Rev. 367, 367 (2001).
\45\ Letter from Father Phil Schmitter and Sister Joanne
Chiaverini, St. Francis Prayer Center, to Mr. Valdas Adamkus, Regional
Administrator, Region 5, U.S. EPA (Dec. 15, 1992) enclosing letters
dated Dec. 15, 1992, to Mr. Herb Tate, Environmental Equity, US EPA and
Mr. William Rosenberg, U.S. EPA.
\46\ Letter from Father Phil Schmitter and Sister Joanne
Chiaverini, St. Francis Prayer Center, to Ms. Diane E. Goode, Director,
Office of Civil Rights, U.S. EPA (June 9, 1998).
\47\ Letter from Lilian S. Dorka, Dir., External Civil Rights
Compliance Office, U.S. EPA, to Heidi Grether, Dir., Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality (Jan. 19, 2017), https://
www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-01/documents/final-genesee-
complaint-letter-to-director-grether-1-19-2017.pdf; EPA, Office of
Civil Rights, Investigative Report for Title VI Administrative
Complaint File No. 5R-98-R5 (1998) (``Select Steel Investigative
Report'').

[In Select Steel,] EPA recognized that the facility would emit
pollutants such as lead and volatile organic compounds into the
air, but nevertheless closed the complaint on the basis that
the alleged harms were not sufficiently ``adverse'' because
modeling showed that the airshed would remain in attainment
with National Ambient Air Quality Standards.\48\ Thus, EPA
concluded, it need not review whether the effect of the siting
was disparate because, in EPA's eyes, the effect was
insignificant--even though there is no safe level of lead
exposure, and volatile organic compounds are also harmful. In
essence, EPA determined that harm from pollution that was
deemed ``acceptable'' under environmental laws categorically
could not result in a violation of civil rights law.\49\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ See Select Steel Investigative Report, at 16.
\49\ Id. at 27.

Indeed, EPA's injection of undefined ``significance'' into a
disparate impact assessment can lead and has led to disastrous
consequences. EPA's Select Steel investigation found that in
Genesee County, the county where Flint is located, 8% of
children already had elevated blood lead levels (above the
then-CDC level of 10 microg/dL) and that African-American
children there were four times more likely to have very high
blood lead levels (over 15 microg/dL) than white children,\50\
making the addition of a known lead-emitting facility a source
of dangerous impacts disparately suffered by the community. Yet
EPA shrugged off the facility's impact on blood lead levels as
``de minimis.'' \51\ So too did EPA disregard the lead
emissions from the Genesee power plant, about which the
community had complained starting in 1992. Decades later, the
Flint Water Advisory Task Force found that MDEQ bore ``primary
responsibility'' for the Flint Water Crisis that began in 2014
due, in part, to its ``cultural shortcomings that prevent it
from adequately serving and protecting the public health of
Michigan residents.'' \52\ Had EPA scrutinized--and potentially
rectified--these ``cultural shortcomings'' of MDEQ in the
1990s, instead of letting them fester for decades, the Flint
water crisis may have been abated or avoided.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\50\ Select Steel Investigative Report, at 32.
\51\ Id. at 31.
\52\ Flint Water Advisory Task Force Final Report, supra note 42,
at 28.

[With respect to the 1992 permit hearings, EPA eventually
found] that MDEQ had engaged in intentional discrimination in
its handling of the 1992 permit hearings. But by the time EPA
made this finding in 2017, it was too little too late, and EPA
had long lost the opportunity to address the policies and
practices of MDEQ that would eventually help cause the
disastrous Flint water crisis.\53\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ See Marianne Engelman Lado, supra n. 27 at 292.

EPA's 2017 determination remains the agency's only formal finding
of discrimination to date. With this finding, EPA ordered MDEQ to (1)
improve its public participation program to reduce risk of future
disparate treatment, (2) improve its foundational non-discrimination
program, and (3) establish an appropriate process to address
environmental complaints.\54\ Two additional Title VI complaints
regarding public participation for permitting in Genesee County
resulted in EPA entering into resolution agreements with both MDEQ--now
the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy
(``EGLE'')--and the county to ensure non-discriminatory public
participation.\55\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ Talia Buford, Rare Discrimination Finding by EPA Civil Rights
Office, The Center for Public Integrity (Jan. 25, 2017), https://
publicintegrity.org/environment/rare-discrimination-finding-by-epa-
civil-rights-office/.
\55\ External Civil Rights Compliance Office., U.S. Envtl. Prot.
Agency, In Reply to: Complaint No. 17RD-16-R5 (2019), https://
www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2019-12/documents/resolution_
letter_and_agreement_for_complaint_17rd-16-r5.pdf.

As evidenced in the context of a 2021 draft air permit for a hot
mixed asphalt plant in Flint, Michigan, EGLE's permitting processes
still lack adequate public participation processes and remain deficient
in the analysis of the permitting decision's adverse impact on classes
protected by Title VI.\56\ Despite having the authority to undertake a
cumulative risk assessment, and despite calls by the public and EPA
Region 5 for such a study, EGLE has to date refused to do so.\57\ This
is not simply EGLE's failing; it is symptomatic of EPA's civil rights
enforcement program.\58\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\56\ Mich. Dep't of Env't, Great Lakes, and Energy, Proposed
Project Summary: AJAX Materials Corporation--Flint, Genesee County,
Michigan, 1 (July 2021). http://www.deq.state.mi.us/aps/downloads/
permits/PubNotice/APP-2021-0019/APP-2021-0019PPS.pdf.
\57\ U.S. Envtl. Prot. Agency, Detailed Permit Comments Ajax
Materials Corporation PTI APP-2021-0019 (2021); Ron Fonger, EPA
Recommends Further Study Before Genesee Township Asphalt Plant Gets
Permit, Michigan Live (Sept. 16, 2021), https://www.mlive.com/news/
flint/2021/09/epa-recommends-further-study-before-genesee-township-
asphalt-plant-gets-permit.html.
\58\ Office of Inspector Gen., U.S. Envtl. Prot. Agency, Report No.
20-E-0333, Improved EPA Oversight of Funding Recipients' Title VI
Programs Could Prevent Discrimination (2020).

The Earthjustice letter also profiles the impact of an
``arbitrarily imposed[,] onerous[,] and ill-defined `causality''
requirement' '' \59\ to disparate impact claims that has led the EPA to
disregard legitimate allegations of the disproportionate impacts born
by predominately Black communities in Uniontown and Tallassee, Alabama.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\59\ 2019 Earthjustice Letter at 11.

The 2019 Earthjustice letter illustrates the situation in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uniontown, Alabama, as follows:

Uniontown, Alabama, is a city of fewer than 3,000, where 88% of
its residents are African American, and residents have a median
household income of $13,800.\60\ Once thriving with local
businesses, it is now known for its environmental
contamination. A cheese plant, a catfish mill, and a sewage
lagoon are all located nearby, but those sites are dwarfed by
Arrowhead Landfill, a municipal solid waste landfill.
Arrowhead, which sits on what was once a plantation, is
authorized to receive up to 15,000 tons of commercial and
industrial waste per day from 33 states. After the largest coal
ash spill to date occurred in majority white Roane County,
Tennessee in 2008, the coal ash was dredged up and shipped more
than 300 miles and dumped at the Arrowhead Landfill. As a
result, today the landfill site holds 4 million tons of this
coal ash, whose contents contain toxins such as mercury and
arsenic that are known to cause cancer, neurological damage,
and other detrimental health effects . . .\61\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\60\ American Community Survey 5-year estimates from Census
Reporter Profile Page for Uniontown, AL, U.S. Census Bureau (2017),
https://censusreporter.org/profiles/16000US0177904-uniontown-al/.
\61\ See, e.g., Environmental Integrity Project, Coal's Poisonous
Legacy: Groundwater Contaminated by Coal Ash Across the U.S., 9-11,
(Mar. 4, 2019), https://earthjustice.org/sites/default/files/files/
National%20Coal%20Ash%20Report%203.4.19.pdf; Kristen Lombardi, Thirty
Miles from Selma, a Different Kind of Civil Rights Struggle, Ctr. for
Public Integrity (Aug. 5, 2015), https://publicintegrity.org/
environment/thirty-miles-from-selma-a-different-kind-of-civil-rights-
struggle/.

In 2013, dozens of residents of Uniontown, Alabama filed a
complaint with EPA, alleging that the renewal of the permit [by
the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM)] for
the Arrowhead Landfill and the permit modification, allowing an
increase of its size by two-thirds, adversely and disparately
impacted the surrounding, primarily African American,
community. Even before the expansion, the permit authorized
15,000 tons of waste per day, twice the amount permitted at the
next largest landfill in Alabama at the time.\62\ And the
landfill had already received and held 4 million tons of coal
ash. The Complaint alleged impacts related to odors, increased
population of flies and birds, increased noise from heavy
machinery, increased emission of fugitive dust, illnesses,
contaminated water, believed degradation of a community
cemetery, and decline of property values, about which many
community members had previously complained.\63\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\62\ Uniontown Complaint, at 7-8.
\63\ Uniontown Complaint; Uniontown Closure Letter.

Residents had submitted a study showing health impacts, and the
record contained evidence that there had been an increase in
flies and birds. Even without such evidence, straightforward
logic compels a conclusion that renewing (the equivalent of
granting) a permit for an enormous landfill, containing toxic
coal ash and other industrial waste, causes adverse harms to
the surrounding community. And once a finding of
disproportionate adverse impact is made, the question shifts to
the justification for the action and whether there is a less
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
discriminatory alternative for achieving the objective.

Yet EPA used the cloak of ``causality'' in 2018 to find no
prima facie case of discrimination. EPA ignored record evidence
by residents that there had been an increase in pests and a
decrease in quality of life--which should have been sufficient
evidence of adverse harm on its own. And even though ADEM
allowed Arrowhead to use ``alternates'' for daily cover of the
landfill, such as coal ash, in violation of state law requiring
soil cover, EPA concluded it was ``unable to identify any
functions'' related to that decision that could result in the
alleged increased populations of flies and birds . . .\64\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\64\ Letter from Lilian S. Dorka, Dir., U.S. EPA, External Civil
Rights Compliance Office, Office of Gen. Counsel, to Marianne Engelman
Lado, Yale Law Sch., Envtl. Justice Clinic 15 (Mar. 1, 2018).

At bottom, EPA indicated that the absence of ``scientific proof
of a direct link'' compelled it to conclude that there was no
evidence that [ADEM's] permitting decisions caused any impact
to the community. But the action of ADEM--approving the renewal
and modification of the permit--clearly caused the adverse
impacts; absent the permit, the facility would not be
operating, or absent the permit terms ADEM had set, the
facility would be operating with different conditions and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
requirements.

EPA's determinations that causation could not be established
with respect to other parts of the Uniontown complaint were
similarly far-fetched. The complainants alleged that they
believed the permits interfered with the ability of community
members to visit the cemetery because of loud nearby equipment
and an acrid odor.\65\ EPA nonsensically determined that
causation could not be established because the cemetery was not
within the operational boundaries of the landfill. But sound
and odor do not stop at operational boundaries. EPA further
stated that it decided that ``it would not investigate
substantively the alleged harm of diminution of property
values'' and, as a result, concluded that there ``is
insufficient evidence in the record to suggest that ADEM's
permitting actions themselves resulted in a sufficiently
significant harm with regard to property values.'' \66\ Of
course, if an agency not only fails to recognize that the
decision to permit the facility directly causes adverse
impacts, but also refuses to investigate or consider evidence
of an obvious harm, it can and will find no causation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\65\ Id. at 16.
\66\ Id. at 18.

As outlined in the 2019 Earthjustice letter, EPA employed a similar
approach in response to civil rights complaints filed by residents of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tallassee, Alabama:

Located just north of the civil rights landmarks of Tuskegee
University, the majority African-American community members of
Ashurst Bar/Smith outside of Tallassee, Alabama have lived off
their land for generations, some owning property in the area
since the end of the Civil War. This unbroken lineage of Black
landownership makes Ashurst Bar/Smith unusual in the State,
since many Black communities could not own land in Alabama
until the passage of [Title VI].\67\ But the ever-expanding
Stone's Throw Landfill immediately next to the community
continues to displace community members and threatens to turn
this historical community into yet another unfortunate example
of black land loss.\68\ The Ashurst Bar/Smith Community
Organization (``ABSCO'') has fought against the expansion and
negative impacts from the landfill at the local, county, and
federal level. They submitted a civil rights complaint to EPA
in 2003 concerning a permit modification that allowed further
expansion of the landfill, but when EPA finally issued findings
on its investigation in 2017, it disregarded the community's
disparate impact allegations . . .\69\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\67\ See, e.g., Roy W. Copeland, In the Beginning: Origins of
African American Real Property Ownership in the United States, 44 J.
Black Studies, 646, 646-47 (Oct. 2013).
\68\ See Ctr. for Social Inclusion, Regaining Ground: Cultivating
Community Assets & Preserving Black Land at 6(2011), http://
www.centerforsocialinclusion.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Regaining-
Ground-Cultivating-Community-Assets-and-Preserving-Black-Land.pdf.
\69\ Letter, Tallassee Waste Disposal Center Expansion/Impact on
the Ashurst Bar/Smith Community (Sept. 3, 2003) (sender and recipient
redacted) (``Tallassee Complaint'') (attached to this letter as
Attachment 3); Letter to Karen D. Higginbotham, Dir., U.S. EPA Office
of Civil Rights (Dec. 8, 2003) (sender redacted); Letter from Lilian S.
Dorka, Dir., External Civil Rights Compliance Office, U.S. EPA Office
of Gen. Counsel, to Marianne Engelman Lado et al., Visiting Clinical
Professor of Law, Yale Law Sch. at 2-3 (Apr. 28, 2017), https://
www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-05/documents/06r-03-
r4_closure_recipient_redacted.pdf (``2017 Tallassee Closure Letter'').

In its closure letter, as it did with Uniontown, EPA
systematically discounted the various harms alleged in the
complaint under the assertion that there was ``insufficient
evidence in the record to show a causal link'' between the
permit modification and the alleged harm.\70\ For example, the
2003 ABSCO complaint raised the ``alternate'' daily cover issue
also raised in the Uniontown complaint: ABSCO alleged that
ADEM's grant of a waiver from the statutory requirement to use
daily soil cover caused harm to the community by increasing
exposure to rodents, wild dogs, and other pests, and the record
contained evidence that community members had observed
increases in these pests since the 2003 modification.\71\ EPA
acknowledged that it was ``possible'' that the permit
modification increased these pests, but, despite the record
evidence and without further investigation, inexplicably
concluded that it ``could not establish a causal link between
the 2003 permit modification and any changes in animal
population numbers.'' \72\ Yet after ABSCO filed a new Title VI
complaint regarding ADEM's renewal of the landfill's permit in
2017, EPA did a more searching review and found that the
evidence did ``establish a causal connection'' between the
alleged harms stemming from the landfill's failure to use
proper daily soil cover, but EPA steadfastly refused to make a
finding of disparate impact . . .\73\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\70\ Letter from Lilian S. Dorka, Dir. External Civil Rights
Compliance Office, Office of Gen. Counsel, U.S. EPA, to Marianne
Engelman Lado et al., Visiting Clinical Professor of Law, Yale Law Sch.
(Apr. 28, 2017).
\71\ 2017 Tallassee Closure Letter, supra note 35, at 11.
\72\ Id. at 11-12.
\73\ Letter from Lilian S. Dorka, Dir., External Civil Rights
Compliance Office, U.S. EPA Office of Gen. Counsel, to Marianne
Engelman Lado et al., (Dec. 10, 2018) at 20. In its second analysis,
EPA found that ADEM's failure to adequately enforce daily cover
requirements of the permit did cause harm, but nevertheless failed to
find disproportionality based on a faulty analysis of only 3 of the
state's 32 municipal solid waste landfills. Id.

Residents of Uniontown and the Ashurst Bar/Smith community outside
of Tallassee continue to contend with the impacts of the Arrowhead and
Stone's Throw landfills, in combination with other challenges. A recent
article co-authored by myself, Jan-Michael Archer, and Benjamin Eaton
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
describes current conditions in Uniontown.

Residents worry daily about exposures to carcinogenic air
pollutants such as particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide and
lead, plus ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, volatile organic
compounds and other hazardous air pollutants. They know that if
the air smells bad, likely it is also bad for them to breathe.
The water is bad, too. Studies have found lead and arsenic in
Uniontown's drinking water. It carries a foul aroma and causes
rashes on peoples' skin. Improperly treated sewage . . . enters
nearby creeks from an outdated wastewater treatment system, as
it has for decades. Community members endure a litany of health
issues, and health care is hard to find from the few rural
clinics available.\74\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\74\ Amy Laura Cahn, Jan-Michael Archer, and Benjamin Eaton,
Alabama Landfill Fight Tests EPA's Enviro Justice Promises, Law 360
(Feb. 15, 2020) https://www.law360.com/articles/1465095/alabama-
landfill-fight-tests-epa-s-enviro-justice-promises.

ABSCO President Ron Smith details current conditions for
communities adjacent to the Stone's Throw landfill in Tallassee. Like
Uniontown residents, residents of the Ashurst Bar-Smith community
continue to experience cumulative impacts on health and welfare and a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lack of enforcement by ADEM.

There is constant industrial traffic, day and night, and the
school bus driver has for years had to take extra precautions
for students entering the bus because the drivers ignore the
bus stop signs. Nuisance animal populations are thriving and
are a concern for safety, especially packs of wild dogs and
coyotes, while vultures encircle resident homes and yards.
Residents near the landfill complain of foul-smelling and ill-
colored tap water and water from the tap is contaminated to the
point that in one case it failed the test for use in home
dialysis. Surface and ground waters have been contaminated and
are currently impacting and threatening the health and welfare
of 50,000 citizens in three counties. The air is unbearably
foul, especially during adverse atmospheric conditions, causing
respiratory problems and forcing families who can afford it to
move off their land. Those who remain cannot enjoy their
property. Overall, there is no monitoring of the community's
health or provisions for health care. Yet, when the community
opposed the siting and/or expansion of the landfill in public
hearings, responses from EPA funding recipient ADEM are
sarcastically degrading.\75\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\75\ Email from Ron Smith to Amy Laura Cahn (Feb. 22, 2022).

The conditions described flow from a systematic failure to enforce
Title VI. The impacts of the heightened standards imposed by EPA are
exacerbated by the lack of rights of complainants from affected
communities who are at best consulted and at worst sidelined to the
point that investigations, resolution agreements, and remedies ignore
community needs and lived realities--or there is no remedy at all.
Sections 4, 5, and 6 of H.R. 2021 would restore the right of
individuals to legally challenge discrimination--including
environmental discrimination--prohibited under Title VI. This would
restore to communities--and the courts--the power to ensure that
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
discrimination does not occur without consequence.

______

The Chairman. Thank you. Let me thank all the witnesses for
their thoughtful and informed testimony.
Let me begin the questioning. The Members are limited to 5
minutes, and we will begin with myself. I will turn to Mr.
Stauber for his questions. Then we will alternate back and
forth. Let me begin.
Dr. Sheats, one of the pushbacks in discussing the
Environmental Justice For All Act or the topic in general is
that this is not the time, that we should leave things as is
because of the economy, jobs, national security, energy
independence, economic growth; that all these supersede and
need to be protected, so we leave things as is for EJ
communities and frontline communities or we do nothing at all.
That seems to be the tone.
Can you, Dr. Sheats, give some examples of economic
consequences of continuing to burden environmental justice
communities with the disproportionate share of our nation's
pollution?
Those economic consequences don't get talked about, but
please, if you don't mind, sir.
Dr. Sheats. Well, I think you are right, Chair Grijalva.
Those economic consequences are not discussed enough, and the
consequences are the health consequences to the residents of
people in communities of color and low-income communities.
And I think that being able to breathe without developing
some life-threatening disease probably trumps everything else
because if you are not around, if you are dead, or if you are
ill all the time, nothing else matters too much.
So, what we have done so far, and you are talking about the
associated economic consequences, is think about the pressure
that ill people put on our health system and the cost of caring
for these people.
Even though in our communities they tend not to have as
much health care as in other communities, this is still
imposing costs on our society.
Now, the ultimate costs are being borne by folks in these
communities because they are the ones getting ill, and what we
are saying is that these people should not be sacrificed
anymore. It is not fair and it is unconscionable.
And I have to say I don't think there is a contradiction
between trying to make people healthy and trying to improve our
environment and economic growth. I think if you make
communities healthier, you will find people and industry want
to be in these communities more because they are good places to
be.
Nobody wants to be somewhere where it is hard to breathe or
where the water is contaminated, and we have clean industry now
that can come into these communities and not increase pollution
but that can improve the economic outlook of these communities
and improve the economic outlook of our country.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Cahn, let me ask you about the ability to take legal
action for communities, particularly around the issue of
environmental justice that was lost to the Alexander v.
Sandoval Supreme Court decision back in 2001.
Why is it important to restore the right to challenge
disparate impact discrimination in court?
How effective have Federal agencies been in enforcing the
prohibition against disparate impact relative to the issue of
environmental justice and what the legislation attempts to
address?
If you could, Ms. Cahn, if you could maybe speak to that
point.
Ms. Cahn. Of course, and thank you so much.
In short, Federal agencies have not been responsive and not
been effective in enforcing civil rights in the environmental
justice context, and the barriers to that are numerous.
The response time and the resolution time--these complaints
have been subject historically to delay and even requiring
litigation to enforce agencies' own deadlines. Agencies and the
funding recipients themselves in the communities they are
mandated to protect lack guidance on civil rights compliance,
and complainants, often the ones with the firsthand knowledge
about the harms created by environmental discrimination, have
been systemically sidelined from investigation and resolutions.
And then the resolutions themselves are often not enforced
by the agencies who are funding recipients perpetuating
discrimination.
So, barriers upon barriers stand in the way of communities
seeking redress from the Federal agencies who are mandated to
enforce Title VI.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And my time has expired.
Let me now recognize Mr. Stauber for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Chair Grijalva, and thank you for
the witnesses testifying today.
First, I want to yield 30 seconds back to the Chairman. I
have a question.
Did you or your office send a letter to Secretary Haaland,
urging her to suspend work on the master development plan for
the Willow Project?
Mr. Chair?
The Chairman. I believe it was in discussion state, but if
we did, it was in the context of--I believe that letter was
either being developed or was already sent.
Mr. Stauber. OK. My question then will be to Mayor Brower.
Mayor Brower, in the spirit of environmental justice and
consultation, were you consulted on drafting that letter?
Mr. Brower, are you still with us, Mayor?
[No response.]
The Chairman. Can we move on to another witness? We can
return as soon as the good Mayor is on.
Mr. Stauber. My questions are to Mr. Brower. Is he on?
The Chairman. Mr. Brower?
Mr. Brower is available for your questions, Mr. Stauber.
Mr. Stauber. Oh, he is. OK, good.
The Chairman. Mayor, you need to unmute your equipment
there so that you can respond to Mr. Stauber's questions.
Mr. Stauber. Boy, I cannot wait until we can meet in
person.
Mr. Mayor, are you on?
The Chairman. He continues to be muted.
Mr. Mayor, you need to unmute so that we can continue.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair, do you have any Jeopardy music?
The Chairman. No. I mean, you just said earlier you are
dying to see us in person. I don't know if I am ready for the
full warm fuzzies, but you know, we will start to----
Mr. Stauber. I always enjoy full meetings with you, Mr.
Chair.
The Chairman. Mr. Stauber, I think the Mayor is available
now if you would like to direct your question.
Mr. Stauber. Great. Thank you.
Mayor Brower, I just want to say in the spirit of
environmental justice and consultation, were you consulted on a
drafting of a letter that requested the suspension of work on
the master development plan for the Willow Project?
Mr. Brower. No, we were not. North Slope Borough was not
consulted.
Mr. Stauber. So, you were not consulted on a project in
your community.
Mayor Brower, you sent a letter to my colleague at the end
of January calling on him to meet with you and the Indigenous
Peoples of the North Slope of Alaska before taking the
position.
Did that meeting take place?
Mr. Brower. No.
Mr. Stauber. Have you heard anything in response to your
letter?
Mr. Brower. Not at this time.
Mr. Stauber. OK. Can you describe how the Willow Project
will build on the economic development in your district?
Mr. Brower. The benefits would be numerous to the income
that would be generated from this project, and the items that I
mentioned earlier in my comments in regard to the health
communities, the fire departments, and the search and rescue
that are within the North Slope Borough. Those kinds of
benefits would be identified through the needs of the North
Slope Borough.
Mr. Stauber. In your testimony, would it be correct that
you said 95 percent of your investments in your community are
paid through the taxes of the oil and gas industry?
Mr. Brower. Yes, you are right.
Mr. Stauber. OK. And what would you say to those who claim
to support Native consultation but pick and choose which
projects to consult on and which people to be consulted?
Mr. Brower. In regard to consultation, we made our attempts
to invite the leaders of the Administration, the Biden
administration, to no results. We made attempts to identify
that the potential processes that need to be identified were
not.
Mr. Stauber. Right. So, I want to be clear. You are the
mayor of the community, the community in which the Willow
Project will be put forward, and in the spirit of environmental
justice and consultation, you as the community leader were
never consulted on the project, on the master development plan
for the Willow Project.
Mr. Chair, this is very concerning when we have folks
coming up talking about environmental justice and consultation
and you have a community that was never consulted on the master
development plan for the Willow Project. It is very concerning.
I think it is kind of hypocritical that you can pick and
choose who you consult with, and it is disappointing.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Stauber.
There is no inconsistency in that letter and the Members
who signed it, none whatsoever with this hearing. What
reinforcement there is to re-enforce the National Environmental
Policy Act, NEPA, and the Endangered Species Act, and the
public process attended to that.
This was flawed from the beginning. To disclose the true
impacts we were asking the Interior Department to do is a
legitimate thing.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair, would you yield?
The Chairman. The community that you are referencing, sir,
under NEPA has a full opportunity to be involved in that. So,
this right of disclosure, this right of everybody knowing, this
right of taking a flawed process, and saying this is the
opportunity to correct that.
Mr. McClintock. A point of order, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. There is no inconsistency.
Mr. Stauber. On whose time is the Chairman speaking?
The Chairman. And the approval of a flawed process by
anybody still does not take the importance of having full
disclosure in the NEPA process. That is only fair.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair. May I respond, Mr. Chair?
The Chairman. Of course.
Mr. Sablan. Chairman Grijalva, can we move on please?
Mr. Stauber. The mayor of the community has said he was not
consulted. The mayor of community in question, which is where
the Willow Project will be taking place, and the investments in
the community, was never consulted.
Mr. Huffman. It was a letter.
Mr. Stauber. That was my point of questioning. Never
consulted.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for that back-and-forth.
Let me now recognize Mrs. Napolitano for 5 minutes.
Representative, you are recognized.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
To Ms. Laura Cortez, I am close to east L.A., but can you
speak more to the drinking water studies that your organization
has led with members of the community?
Ms. Cortez. Sure. Thank you.
With our community, one of the big issues, I think, that I
have learned with water quality--because I am also a community
member who was completely unaware of some of the water issues
happening in our hood--education is a big, big issue starting
with the idea of understanding where your water comes from, how
water is exploited from other areas and taken, a lot of times
those are Indigenous communities whose water we are taking.
So, those are things that we learned together, and then
understanding our water reports in terms of our water quality.
I am not sure if any of you all look at your water reports, but
they are very technical, very complex, and that is something
that we learned as a community, want to understand the
pollutants, the thresholds, how our notice is given.
Every city, every water company is completely different
which creates a lot of complication in terms of being able to
understand when there are issues and, therefore, advocate for
improved water quality.
How can we advocate for something where the system is
created so we do not understand them.
So, with that, we have been able to make collaborations
with universities to be able to take community members to
understand the process of what contaminants are in water, how
they have health impacts, and how we can start advocating to
that.
Is that the jurisdiction of a water company? Is that the
jurisdiction that is a regional municipality?
We need to understand these different agencies, these
different pollutants, these different health impacts, so that
is something that we continue to work on with our community
members from east L.A. down.
I know there was a recent policy that passed on PFAS,
looking at some of our contaminants there, but there are so
many, including lead, mercury, nickel, that are in our water
that we need to continue to address.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much.
I think you are doing well, but I think really we need to
talk, Ms. Cortez. I am much versed on water, and I am sure that
the water companies maybe need to have more information
disseminated to the general public they serve because it
behooves them.
Dr. Sheats, today too many environmental justice
communities, especially tribal, live without safe and reliable
water supplies and basic water infrastructure.
One of the barriers that has led to this historic inequity
is the Federal funding. Can recent investments passed maybe
remedy or try to remedy some of these issues?
Dr. Sheats. Thank you for the question. I am not expert on
water issues, but let me say this. I think that the Biden
administration's initiative, Justice40 Initiative, really holds
out some hope that benefits and investments leading to benefits
will flow to communities to address all types of issues,
including the water issue that you bring up.
So, hopefully, when this initiative is fully implemented,
developed and implemented, communities that are suffering from
lack of water quality or access to water will be helped through
it.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, there are too many things that have
bothered all of us that in the past we have ignored, such as
all the illnesses that are borne in water and the air, and I
think the environmental justice community has the right to
bring them to court so that we can try to prevent them or
remedy them with the pollutants and make sure that our
communities are safe and safeguarded.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields.
Let me now turn to the Dean of the House, Mr. Young. You
are recognized, sir.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I hope you
understand it is awfully early in the morning for the Mayor and
myself. You guys have a nice, leisure morning. We have to be up
at 4 a.m. to have this hearing. I just want to remind you of
that. There is a little bit of a difference when we have these
Zoom meetings.
But thank you for having the hearing and, Mr. Mayor, thank
you for being here and for your testimony. I think it is
crucially important to recognize that there is a pick and
choose by certain people within the Congress when you take a
listen to the one side and won't listen to the other side. Yet,
you say you have consultation.
And for that, my opposite side of this, there is no
consultation, the people in the area, especially the Willow
Project and the North Slope. There is no consultation, Mr.
Chairman, with all due respect.
Sent a letter? Big deal. You haven't sat down and talked to
anybody. You haven't had a meeting with anybody. They have
asked for a meeting, and I suggest respectfully if we are going
to do this correctly, make sure you consult with everyone that
are Indigenous people who are directly affected by actions of
the Congress. I think that is very important.
Mr. Mayor, just out of curiosity, how much money do you
think you have received?
And what have you used it for from the industry itself?
How has it affected your society up there?
Mr. Brower. Thank you, Congressman Young.
It is near the $400 million, and that is what we are
banking on, the taxes that we receive from the industry. It is
subject to the Borough's operations.
Mr. Young. You have used it for water. We just heard about
water, drinking potable water.
Mr. Brower. Yes.
Mr. Young. You have used it for waste.
Mr. Brower. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. You have used it for education. You have done
everything right with the money, and yet people say, ``Oh, we
are going to help the poor, the Indigenous people.'' Yet, they
don't want you to receive the money. This is what I don't
understand.
There is such hypocrisy here. There is no justice in this,
and I do believe you have used the money correctly.
I go there. I know what I am talking about. I have seen the
improvement over when I first went there back in the early
1960s. You didn't have a whole lot. You did have natural gas,
which was good, but I do believe you handled this well.
You are still going half way on a subsistence livelihood.
You are a whaling captain, are you not, Mr. Mayor?
Mr. Brower. Yes, I am, Congressman. Thank you.
Mr. Young. Did you have a strike this year?
Mr. Brower. Yes, we landed a whale.
Mr. Young. Good. That sounds good.
Well, anyway, Mr. Chairman, I understand these hearings. I
just wish everybody would play on a level playing field. If we
are going to talk about consultation and justice, even though
you may disagree with them, you have to consult with them. That
is the fairness doctrine. That goes for the whole Congress.
And if we are going to deal with people of Indigenous rank,
do not pat them on the head and say we are going to take care
of you and then take it away. That is wrong.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Young.
And we will have that opportunity, sir, and I take your
recommendation seriously. We will have that opportunity when we
talk about the RESPECT Act and all its ramifications and to the
topic that we are talking about today.
So, I appreciate your comments and look forward to that
discussion in the very near future.
Let me now turn to Mr. Cohen, Representative. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and any
members of the Committee that yielded to me because I have a
packed day, and I am sure everybody else does, too, but it is a
packed day, including a funeral. So, it is a busy, busy, packed
day.
I want to thank you for having this hearing on this
important subject. It is something that strikes close to my
heart and to my community's. We have several African American
inner-city communities that have been the site of much
industrial pollution and industrial development over the years.
Recently, there was an attempt to put a pipeline from an
oil company----
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair, excuse me. Somebody has to mute.
Somebody is interrupting our speaker.
The Chairman. I think it is the Mayor. If somebody would
communicate that. I had to ask him to unmute this time. So, if
somebody would advise the Mayor to mute, I would appreciate
that.
Mr. Cohen, please continue. I am sorry.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Mr. Stauber for making note of that.
They tried to put a pipeline through a minority community,
and they had the nerve to say it was the path of least
resistance, the least resistance because the poor community,
which happens to be African American, which had been used for
so many years as places where industrial sites located that put
off lots of pollutants, and that community or those communities
had four times the cancer rates of anyplace else in the city.
They had not had the voices to stand up. This year, in what
was an historic moment with the grassroots support plus Vice
President Gore who got involved and my office and others, this
pipeline did not go through. It was stopped, and that was
wonderful.
But normally that doesn't happen, and industrial pollutants
go to places of least resistance, just like was said in that
situation.
There was a Senator I served with, a Republican Senator in
Tennessee, a State Senator named Donovan, a fine gentleman, and
he told me, which was nothing unique, the NIMBY statement,
``not in my backyard.'' And that is where I learned it.
Every place, they don't want it in their back yard, and the
powerful people, the wealthy people, the people that have
voices because of political contributions or other powers that
they might have to extend benefits on elected officials either
during or after office, they don't get the pollutants in those
areas in their neighborhoods because they have a stronger
voice. And it has gone on forever.
So, we need to have this environmental justice for the
future and to make up somewhat for the past, so I appreciate
this hearing.
Let me ask first--Dr. Sheats, and I appreciate your
testimony, the Byhalia Pipeline was a prime example of
cumulative impact. Were this to be built, communities that were
already at greater health risk would have had one more
potential source of pollutants. How would this bill have
affected the cumulative impact of projects?
Dr. Sheats. Well, I think it would be subjected to a
cumulative impacts review, application for the permit, and if
that review showed that the cumulative impact, standard and the
EJ For All Act, that if due to cumulative impacts there is not
a reasonable certainty of no harm to the community in which a
facility or pipeline would go through, if there is not a
reasonable certainty of no harm, then the application would be
denied. So, there is a level of protection there through
cumulative impact analysis.
Mr. Cohen. And have you seen a history of pollutant plants
that emit pollutants, oil or other industrial types, being put
in minority communities, both White and Black, throughout this
country?
Dr. Sheats. Well, there is, and those are the studies I
referred to, yes, there is a history of all types of polluting
facilities being disproportionately sited in communities of
color, and not just poor communities of color, in communities
of color and low-income communities of all colors, so including
low-income White communities. There is a history of that.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Cahn, you are an expert on environmental justice in the
context of civil rights law. Can you provide a real-world
example of how the current application of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 under the Supreme Court Sandoval decision does not
fully protect the rights of communities suffering from
discrimination?
Ms. Cahn. Yes. Thank you for this opportunity in 43
seconds.
I spoke of the communities in Uniontown and Tallassee,
Alabama in particular, both of whom have gone on more than one
occasion to the EPA filing civil rights complaints about the
disproportionate impact of the siting of those landfills on
those historically Black communities.
In particular, the Uniontown landfill holds 4 billion tons
of coal ash that actually were carted in from a disaster
outside of the state and is now impacting that community in a
negative way, along with a cheese plant, a catfish plant, and a
whole host of issues related to insufficient water and
sanitation services.
So, the community itself is dealing with its own set of
cumulative impacts and has failed to get redress from EPA by
filing complaints.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Cahn.
Thank you to all of the members of the Committee that
allowed me to go a little early. We will submit the remainder
of our questions in writing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I appreciate it, Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Let me now recognize Representative McClintock.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Chairman.
I have to admit that I joined this hearing largely out of
curiosity over how the leftist Majority can turn anything, even
natural resources policy, into a racial issue.
The fact is the American people of all races, ethnicities,
religions, and origins have suffered severely over the last
year because of leftist policies that are driving the most
alarming increase in crime and homelessness wherever they have
taken control, reckless spending that is driving the worst
inflation Americans have suffered in 40 years, mass migration
across our borders that threatens the prosperity, the social
services, and the safety of every community in our country.
And when it comes to the subject matter of this Committee,
their foolish policies have also done enormous damage to the
quality of life of Americans when it comes to resources policy.
Think about this. The first day the left took control of
the White House, Mr. Biden canceled the Keystone Pipeline,
sending thousands of workers into unemployment. It denied the
American economy some 600,000 barrels of crude oil a day coming
into American energy markets. He ordered a halt to oil and gas
leases on Federal land. He suspended oil drilling leases in
Alaska.
In the last years of the Trump administration, we had
achieved something that all of us thought was impossible during
most of our lifetimes. We had achieved American energy
independence, including some of the lowest energy prices in
decades.
The Democrats managed to reverse that achievement in a
matter of months. Oil prices increased 69 percent last year,
gasoline prices up nearly 40 percent, and this bill would add
still more cost to American energy production, ultimately paid
by Americans at the gas pump and in their skyrocketing utility
bills.
In his opening statement, Mr. Stauber complained that local
gasoline is going for, I believe he said $3.66 a gallon. I
would invite him to come here to California where leftist
policies have already pushed the average gasoline price across
California today to $4.70 a gallon.
I might also touch on the tolls on our forests here in the
Sierra Nevada. It has been taken by years of leftist
environmental prohibitions of forest management, prohibitions
that have resulted in catastrophic overgrowth of our forests.
The price of lumber hit an all-time high in May of last
year. That drives higher housing costs, while our Federal
forests are effectively abandoned to neglect and catastrophic
fire.
Meanwhile, America has become the second largest importer
of lumber in the world, including $4.5 billion of imported
lumber from Canada, while our forests sit idle.
These conditions are the stark and unmistakable effect of
the resources policies that the left has imposed on our
economy. The suffering they impose affect every race, every
community, and every family in our country, but none suffer the
resulting increases in energy prices, housing prices, and
transport prices more than the poor, regardless of their race
or where they happen to live.
I would suggest that maybe, just maybe, we ought to be
focusing on these policies before they do more harm to every
American of every race.
As this hearing makes crystal clear, the Democrats seem to
be incapable of doing so because they are unable to see beyond
a person's race. How sad, how sad for them and how sad for our
country.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
I would agree with Mr. McClintock. I think that the issue
of race and economic status should not be a criterion for
having to legislate, but when it is a factor in how decisions
are made, then we need to correct that imbalance and make it
not about race.
Again, that is where I think legislation like the one
before us, Mr. McClintock, has to play a role because powerful
decisions involve race and the corrective action involves a
protection so that it is not about race.
But having said that, let me yield to you, sir, because I
took time and that is not fair. Mr. McClintock?
Mr. McClintock. Well, I have nothing more to say, Mr.
Chairman. The facts speak for themselves very clearly. The
American people can see that very clearly. They are feeling it
every day as they go to the gas station, as they pay their
utility bills, as they search for affordable housing.
These policies are driving terrible suffering across the
land. Please stop it.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McClintock.
On that note, let me now turn to the gentleman from
California, Mr. Costa. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing. I think it is important.
I would like to focus on two areas, on water in rural areas
in America, and I will draw on some examples, my home where I
have lived all my life and grown up out on a farm and depended
on well water for our supply.
Senator Padilla and I worked very hard on the bipartisan
infrastructure package to ensure that we had money for clean
drinking water. We have communities like Alpaugh and Fairmead.
They aren't towns, but they don't have the wherewithal, the
resources to implement the level of clean drinking water that
they need and deserve.
There are others, many communities that make up the valley
that have similar situations. Small towns like Dos Palos, we
are helping them with USDA and the State and they have a little
better situation.
But how do you see communities throughout rural America
benefiting with the great social and economic disparities from
this $52 billion for clean drinking water?
I don't know if, Laura Cortez, you would like to speak to
that or Laura Cahn.
Ms. Cortez. Yes, I can share briefly. Thank you for that
question, Representative.
I do not live in a rural area. So, I will start there, and
I do not know where you are living, so I am learning a lot, and
I appreciate that.
I think one of the opportunities that I see that I think
does not get highlighted enough during this hearing so far is
the idea of we are opening doors for alternative and
sustainable energy.
That is the idea when we are talking about a just and fair
transition. So, when we talk about the rural areas, I hope, we
can look at different areas of exploring more sustainable,
healthier ways to do this work.
I think although this is not directly related to water----
Mr. Costa. Right, and you are talking about energy, and I
appreciate that, but I am talking about water here.
I want to defer to the Chairman, but let me just make a
personal comment. Just as important as clean drinking water is
to these rural communities so is a water supply for these rural
communities that produce food. I have had significant drought
conditions right now and in the past, but we have had 30, 40
percent, as much as half the communities unemployed because of
a zero water allocation.
And water is critical to our production of food. It is a
national security issue, and I think that needs to be taken
into account, the same in terms of the economic and social
disparities that occur.
Mr. Chairman, I will defer and allow you the balance of my
2 minutes.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Dr. Sheats, to just follow up on some things. Do you think
EJ communities might benefit if the Federal agencies did NEPA
reviews for federally permitted or funded projects that are
currently right now exempt from that NEPA review?
Would that be a benefit to include those for EJ
communities?
And I think the corollary question is, if Federal agents
were directed to choose a course of action under NEPA that
avoids further harm to overburdened EJ communities. Those are
currently not part of that process, and I just want to ask you
your reaction to that.
Dr. Sheats. I think communities would benefit if they could
weigh in on infrastructure decisions that currently they cannot
weigh in on. After all, you are talking about structures or
activities that will be in their communities for decades and
have an impact on their communities.
So, certainly they should be allowed to voice their opinion
on these types of projects.
And I think the whole process would be better, the projects
would be better, if they are allowed to weigh in because they
know their communities best. They know what will impact their
communities the most so they can make the best suggestions on
how to mitigate any harms that the project might cause.
The Chairman. And the question, Ms. Cortez, one of the
things that you have heard at the hearing, and we hear all the
time, is that we hear the refrain that stronger environmental
protections for all communities are going to kill jobs, they
are going to inflict economic harm.
Is that a choice we have, the choice being economic
prosperity and continuing to burden EJ communities with a
higher share of our nation's pollution and the damaging public
health effects by that?
How do you respond to that refrain?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, I think it is really narrow-minded to
think about jobs only, particularly when we are working those
jobs also, right? So, it is really important to know that in my
community, as an example, we have folks who are truck drivers,
who are port workers, who do work in these refineries, who are
our families and our neighbors, who are having the health
issues.
Most of them understand that, but risk that because of a
job. And in talking to these folks, it is very clearly
understood that if there was an alternative, that we would love
to transition to that alternative.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Cortez. Yes, thank you.
The Chairman. I have run out of time, and I apologize, but
I don't know if we are going to have a second round or not. It
depends on the will of the Committee.
But let me now turn to the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Graves, whom I recognize for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses for joining today.
Ms. Cortez, I appreciate your testimony about the NEPA
process and the documents being 5,000 pages in some cases and
that just not being helpful because nobody has the time or
expertise to sit around and read that type of documentation.
Do you think that that results in a better outcome for the
environment when you have documents that like that effectively
serve as an impediment for public participation or
understanding?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, thank you for that question.
One of the big issues is not that the document is so big,
because we think the studies are needed, but that they are
difficult to understand, that there is no support to be able to
analyze these things with community.
And, oftentimes, in my community they are done as a check
box. It is done, put it out, 30 days, close it up, with no
expectation or outreach to community to be able to really
understand and weigh in on that analysis.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
And look, I agree with you that I think that the NEPA
process is very difficult to participate in and digest, and we
actually have legislation trying to help to fix that.
Ms. Cahn, your testimony points to a NAACP document,
``Fumes Across the Fence Line,'' and it says that more than a
million people live within a half mile of natural gas
facilities.
Can you provide a little more context for this statistic?
And what is that, sort of in relation to the overall
population living within that radius?
Ms. Cahn. Thank you for that question. I appreciate it.
I would say as a starting point, I think that the study
stands for itself. But I'm happy to supply a written response
that puts that----
Mr. Graves. OK. I would appreciate that, Ms. Cahn, and I
would like to put a little bit more detail in there because I
think that it potentially was a bit misleading.
Nationally, about 2 percent of the population living within
a half mile of all the gas facilities are African American. In
my home state of Louisiana, it is about 5 percent.
So, I think it is important to put that in context
because--and, Mr. Chairman, I have to tell you this is, once
again, incredibly disappointing by sort of the disposition of
this hearing, that everything is being done because folks are
intentionally trying to discriminate against a certain
population.
I don't buy it. I haven't done the math. I am going to take
a quick guess that I am in the top three of every single person
on this Zoom right now or Webex right now that have a higher
number or percentage of African Americans living within a mile
away.
From where I live, I will bet you that I have more oil and
gas and chemical facilities within a few miles from my house
than anybody else here.
I don't believe that I am being discriminated against.
Somebody was talking earlier about Virginia and six to
seven facilities that are easier to permit than another one.
Let me tell you why there are so many facilities where I live.
I am at the bottom of the Mississippi River. It is one of the
easiest ways, the safest ways to transport goods, so people
want to be by the river. That is why they are here.
We also have a lot of the raw materials, resources, and
energy supplies. That is why they are here. It is not an intent
to discriminate against certain people.
If you want to talk about discrimination, let's do that,
Mr. Chairman. My home state of Louisiana, we have lost 2,000
square miles of our coast, and as the last hearing I
participated in, you had somebody try to come in and say that
offshore oil and gas production was discriminatory when the
facts showed that the closest community, Grand Isle, was .9
percent African American, .9.
People come and make up all of this stuff about racism.
Yes, we have lost 2,000 square miles of our coast, and this
Committee, in fact, Mr. Chairman, you yourself along with all
of the other Democrats on the Committee have opposed efforts to
try to protect these communities.
Is that discrimination because we are Cajun? I don't
understand.
And I think it is a total disservice for all of you to be
here suggesting that all of this is being done intentionally
because folks are racist. I don't believe that. I don't, and I
don't think it is good for our country to keep driving this
wedge.
There are problems, yes. There are environmental problems,
absolutely. There are racial problems. There are economic
problems. Let's just be candid and address those and stop all
of this driving divisiveness in this country and in this
Committee and trying to force people to believe that they are
discriminated against.
Like I said, I have more chemical, oil, and gas plants
within a few miles of my house than any of you, and I am not
out here yelling about discrimination. There is a fit there. I
chose to live here.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to follow up with a number of
questions for the record, but I think it is just dangerous
trajectory for us to continue to force this conspiracy of
racism on all of these decisions. It is not going to yield
results.
Let's work on things that will actually solve problems for
communities of color, for economically distressed communities
and others and stop voting against trying to protect and
sustain the people that we represent in South Louisiana like
you have all done.
It is just disingenuous to hear you sit here and act like
there are suddenly problems for other communities.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
Let me now turn to the original co-sponsor of this
legislation and a partner for about 2 years-plus in bringing
this legislation together through a long process.
With the indulgence of others and to be fair, I am going to
extend Mr. McEachin's time as I recognize him so that if there
is a concern, we can balance that extension to the other side
at any point.
Let me now recognize Mr. McEachin. Representative, you are
recognized for I will not give you a magic minute, but at least
10 minutes, I guess.
Mr. McEachin. I will try not to use all the time. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the Committee's indulgence, and
I appreciate the opportunity to work with you these past few
years on this very important legislation.
I will say to the previous speaker that he hit the nail
right on the head. He chooses to live where he lives. He has
the resources to move or not move. In many cases, individuals
who are in EJ communities don't have those resources, don't
have those opportunities, don't have those choices, and that is
the concern we have.
And look. Whether he wants to believe it is intentional or
not intentional, we don't have to delve into that debate. What
is, is. These communities exist. They are uniform in that they
are discriminated against from the standpoint that they are
disenfranchised, poor, Indigenous, brown, or African American.
Now, again, whether it is intentional or not is not the
point. The point is what are we going to do as a country, as a
nation, to lift these communities up, to empower them to fix
their problems and to move our country forward.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, again, I thank you for the
opportunity to have worked with you. I have to tell you that
when I was listening to the Ranking Member say all the bad
things about our legislation, I kept waiting for him to
introduce his legislation that would help this problem.
He seems to acknowledge the problem, but yet he does not
seem to want to put forth an amendment or his own piece of
legislation to fix this problem, and I find that discouraging,
to say the least.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to start off with--I hope I am
pronouncing her last name correctly--Ms. Cahn at the Vermont
Law School.
You have a clinic, I believe, and you have a case in that
clinic called CARE v. EPA. Can you just briefly tell us about
that? Because I have a question about that case. Just tell us a
little bit about what that case is about, please.
Ms. Cahn. Absolutely. That case was brought by Earthjustice
and first the Yale Law Clinic and then the Vermont Law School
Environmental Justice Clinic on behalf of communities in Flint,
Michigan, in Tallassee, Alabama, and in New Mexico, California,
Texas, and also on behalf of the National Sierra Club.
And that case was a case of the undue delay by EPA in
responding to Title VI complaints, complaints filed with EPA
asking them to enforce the civil rights obligations of their
funding recipients, and these complaints languished all for
over a decade in spite of EPA's own regulations setting strict
timelines for response and resolution of those complaints.
Mr. McEachin. Let me ask you this. One of the great
complaints that the other side seems to have about this
legislation is that it will encourage litigation, you know, the
same old song and dance.
I want to ask you how could greater enforcement of the
civil rights provisions under the EJ For All Act have prevented
this court case?
Ms. Cahn. Well, this was actually the second case raising
this question of undue delay. So, in terms of the judicial
inefficiency and drawing this out and the cost, had EPA
followed its own regulations from the outset and been
responsive and continued to address its backlog of complaints
and address them directly in collaboration with the
complainants themselves responding to community needs,
litigation and two lawsuits would not have been necessary.
Mr. McEachin. Interesting. I thank you for that.
Dr. Sheats, let me turn to you now, sir. And first of all,
thank you for the honor of having worked with you over these
past couple of years on this legislation. Your expertise has
been foundational to this bill.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted so many health
disparities in the United States. Can you explain how
cumulative pollution, the burden of cumulative pollution may
have led to some of the health care disparities that we have
seen throughout the pandemic?
Dr. Sheats. Yes. Thanks for the question, Representative
McEachin. Good to see you again.
I think, if I have time to say it fully, but I think COVID-
19 is an example of what we are talking about with cumulative
impacts.
The EJ community has said for a while that our communities,
the EJ communities, are vulnerable to environmental and health
threats that are coming to our country, and with COVID-19, we
see that air pollution increases the death rate and we see that
it has been tied to race, that there are higher death rates in
communities of color and low-income communities due to COVID.
So, when I gave the definition of cumulative impacts, you
see here both parts of it, the connection to air pollution and
connection to social vulnerabilities in our society. COVID-19
unfortunately demonstrates both of those and demonstrates
cumulative impacts.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you for your answer.
Can you take a moment if you can and illustrate how taking
into account the cumulative impacts in permitting decisions
would impact our communities, that is, our EJ communities?
Dr. Sheats. Well, I think right now one of the main
problems is you don't take into account pollution. You don't
take into account pollution across different types of
pollutants. You have the individual standard, and if that
standard is not violated, then the permit goes forward.
But it is not taking into account the mixture of pollution
in our communities, and when you breathe in air, you don't just
breathe in one pollutant and it goes through a partition in
your lungs. It all mixes in your lungs and can have detrimental
health impacts.
But the laws and regulations don't take into account that
total super pollution that exists in the neighborhood. So,
cumulative impact analysis would and should take that into
account.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, sir.
And, finally, I will turn to Ms. Cortez and just ask you,
ma'am, in thinking about NEPA, how would the EJ For All Act
help shift and enhance public engagement?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, being able to have longer periods for
community engagement and intentional community engagement,
which is what this policy outlines is critical and will be
critical to making sure it is not just a check off on the list,
making sure that community is fully aware of what is happening.
The rest of the work we learn how to do. Fortunately and
unfortunately, we are super adaptable. For example, at East
Yard, we have community committees who do not have technical
expertise who learn to read EIRs, who learn how to put public
comments, who learn how to put written comments together for
the record.
We can do that work. It is very possible. It is just very
difficult to do within a very short timeline and without
ensuring that everything is also included in these impacts,
because when we are just looking at one impact or another, it
also does not benefit us when we are experiencing a very
different reality than what is stated in this document.
So, there are a few ways in terms of outreach, engagement,
timing that NEPA would support or this policy would support
with NEPA.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your indulgence as well as the
indulgence of the Committee. I apologize for trespassing on
your time, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Always a gentleman, Mr. McEachin, but this is
your work as well, and I want to thank you for that.
Let me now recognize the gentlelady. Mrs. Radewagen, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Talofa lava. I
want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the Ranking Member for
holding this important hearing on this very important
legislation.
At this time, I would like to yield to Ranking Member
Stauber.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
I just want to, if I may, I want to talk a little bit about
what Congressman Young had spoken about earlier about the
importance of getting all people involved, whether you agree
with our position or not.
The Willow Project, Mr. Mayor stated he was not consulted,
and I think he was not consulted as Congressman Young
rightfully said. The position was not in line with some of my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle.
The hypocrisy here on this particular project is astounding
because of not having consultation, suspend the management plan
put forward on the Willow Project.
Ninety-five percent of the monies going into this community
come from revenues from oil and gas. Where else are they going
to get that?
And these are able bodied workers wanting to work, wanting
to live where they live, and there is no consultation because
the folks that are intending to do it don't support the project
or rather don't support the community.
The community has stated they want this project to go
forward the right way, but if there is no consultation. Mr.
Chair, it is hypocrisy.
For me, we talk about economic justice. What will face
communities and the good paying jobs that are going to come
there with the best environmental standards?
What about the investment that these levies and taxes bring
to the community? Ninety-five percent of this community's
revenues are because of the oil and gas industry, and the Mayor
has stated to all of us they want to be a part, they want this
project to go forward.
Yet, they are not consulted. I think the hypocrisy here, we
have brought it up enough. I think it is shown outright, and it
is unacceptable.
Economic justice as my good friend from Louisiana just
said, what about his constituents? What about allowing them to
have good paying jobs?
And, yes, I will bring it right back to mining. You talk
about economic justice in breathing air. We mine in Minnesota
to the cleanest, best environmental standards and the best
labor standards.
Yet, members of this Committee will not let us mine in
Northern Minnesota. The biggest copper-nickel find in North
America, yet they are OK with buying Chinese minerals mined by
child slave labor to this country.
Where is the economic justice there? Where is the economic
justice for my constituents in northeastern Minnesota to mine
these products, strategic national security minerals?
Yet, many of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
on this Committee refuse to acknowledge we have an opportunity
to do it right, and one of the witnesses, the gentleman, said
we all breathe this air. Absolutely. So, is it OK to allow
China to pollute our air and then still buy these critical
minerals from them?
The answer is no.
The gentleman is right. The jet stream carries that stuff
across the world, yet we are allowing it to happen.
Every single member of this Committee when it had a
resolution that said the United States will not buy minerals
from foreign countries where the critical minerals have been
mined by child slave labor, every single Member on the
Democratic side of this Committee voted against it. I never
thought child slave labor was a partisan issue.
I think we have an opportunity here to do what is right,
and economic justice means justice for those members who live
in the community, and they ought to be consulted.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
Let me recognize Mr. Sablan. Sir, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this hearing, and I would like to say welcome to our
witnesses.
I know that the Dean of the House told the Committee
earlier that it was a little early in Alaska where he was, and
I think it was, but this hearing started at 1 a.m., Mr.
Chairman, and I have another hearing following.
But let me ask a question, and this may get me in trouble,
but let me just think aloud and ask Ms. Cortez and Ms. Cahn to
please tell me if the commodity, water, is part of the
environmental justice agenda, I guess, since water over time
has been taken.
It is a public commodity. You know, it is water. It is
groundwater. It is a public commodity, and yet water continues
to be converted into a private commodity. They take water out
from the ground and put it in a bottle and sell it to us.
So, Ms. Cortez, in as short a time as you can, please give
me some ideas of your thoughts. Give me some of your thoughts
on this issue.
Ms. Cortez. Yes, thank you for that. At East Yard, we
definitely are working on water from an education and policy
beginning perspective. We fully believe that appropriating
water is not sustainable. We cannot continue to steal water, so
it is really important that we learn to conserve water.
Some of the things that we are doing is making sure that we
are investing in education and also support letters and
anything else we can do to make sure that we are retaining as
much water that we can from different sources, including like
rainwater.
We have a big project actually that is less than a block
from my house. It is like a 200,000 gallon, a huge gallon
situation, under a park to conserve water. So, these are the
types of efforts that we know that we need to be able to not
focus on stealing water from other areas.
Mr. Sablan. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Cahn, can you tell me what is the situation where we
give people permission to go out, dig a well, suck up all the
water that a whole community needs and uses, then package that
into these kinds of bottles, then sell it right back to the
community, and then they leave poison out there.
Is this an issue that we should all be looking at?
Ms. Cahn. This is absolutely the issue of water rights and
clean drinking water, and access to clean drinking water is
absolutely an issue of environmental justice and environmental
racism.
I would say I think about water as part of the public trust
that we need to be conserving and ensuring that communities
have equitable access to.
And the privatization causes enormous concern, and then if
you layer on top of that the denial of access to clean drinking
water for communities like Flint, or of the one intentional
discrimination case we know, the Holt case in Tennessee, where
a White community was given access to clean water and the Black
community was explicitly denied.
Those are situations in which the only option becomes
buying water and relying on private resources, and the cost of
that is insurmountable.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, thank you.
Ms. Cahn. So, I think it absolutely is an issue of
environmental justice.
Mr. Sablan. My time is up.
Ms. Cahn, just one question again. The Insular Areas, the
United States Insular Areas, sometimes called outlying areas,
territories, including my district, the Northern Mariana
Islands, have long borne the brunt of the most damaging effects
of climate change, and yet our natural resources have been
underfunded, overexploited for a long time.
How does chronic underfunding in the Insular Areas and
environmental justice communities make these commodities more
susceptible to climate change impacts?
Ms. Cahn. Well, I think this is all rooted in historic
disinvestment which layers burdens on top of burdens, and I
think about, in particular, maybe a slightly different
community, but a community that I know quite well in Eastwick
in Philadelphia, which took Federal resources to displace about
8,000 people from 2,300 acres of land and built in an urban
renewal community on top of the floodplain.
That community is now dealing with chronic stormwater
issues, catastrophic flooding, and is adjacent to a Superfund
site, while over many, many years that community was both
disinvested and disenfranchised from the decisions that
affected residents' lives.
So, all of these can come together to make communities more
vulnerable.
Mr. Sablan. All right. Thank you, Ms. Cahn.
Chairman Grijalva, thank you for this hearing. I need to
run off to another hearing, but I appreciate that you----
The Chairman. 1 a.m., Mr. Sablan?
Mr. Sablan. Yes. This is how loyal I am to the Chairman of
the Natural Resources Committee.
The Chairman. Please allow me to thank you. I do not feel
anywhere the guilt that I should feel now for my good friend
from Alaska, given the torture that we put you through. Thank
you very much, Mr. Sablan.
Mr. Sablan. Oh, see, I enjoy this Committee. Thank you very
much, and everyone have a good morning.
The Chairman. Let me now recognize Representative Tiffany
for 5 minutes.
Sir.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Chair Grijalva. I appreciate it
very much.
Mayor Brower, I am going to have a question for you in
about 2 minutes.
But first, Mr. Sheats, I have a couple of quick questions.
Have there been improvements in emissions that have been done
over the last few decades into the environment into America?
Dr. Sheats. There have been improvements, but there are
also areas where there are multiple sources of pollution where
we need to improve further.
Mr. Tiffany. So, do you think, just for the record, sulphur
dioxide, nitrous oxide, many of those pollutants like that are
down like 80, 90 percent. We really should also recognize the
improvements. There is further to go, but we should recognize
those improvements.
Should we recognize cumulative impacts? The life expectancy
of an American back at the turn of the century in 1900 was
about in the low 50s, and 1 in 10 children died as babies.
Should we consider the improvements that we have made when
discussing cumulative impacts?
Dr. Sheats. Well, I think you have to consider the
disparities, and I think even though we have made improvements,
I think all of us would say that it is still unfair that some
people don't live as long as other people.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you personally have an objection to North
Slope drilling for oil, that local community we have been
hearing from, Mayor Brower?
Dr. Sheats. I don't know that case at all, so I am not
going to comment on that.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Cahn, we have been hearing about how a
number of the very rich environmental NGOs have been taking
foreign money. Does your organization take any money from
foreign interests?
Ms. Cahn. I work for the Vermont Law School, and to be
perfectly honest, I would have to consult with the
administration to understand the larger funding landscape. But
I am happily able to supply a written response.
Mr. Tiffany. Oh, that would be terrific. So, that is all
publicly available information, I take it. Is that right?
Ms. Cahn. I actually would have to consult with the
administration and supply you with a written response.
Mr. Tiffany. That would be terrific.
Mayor Brower, I hope we have you aboard here. You commented
earlier about outside groups speaking for your tribe in
Northern Alaska. Could you expound on that a little bit more?
What was going on there?
Mr. Brower. Thank you. An important question. This is Mayor
Brower. I hope you can hear me.
In my comments, I indicated we have not had any
consultation, but there have been other groups of people trying
to speak for us, our region, to indicate that they were in
opposition to the activity in regard to Willow and oil and gas
operations on the North Slope.
Mr. Tiffany. And, Mayor, do you believe that they received
or that their voices were heard, and yours was not, by the
Federal Government?
Mr. Brower. It really reflects that. There has been very
little consultation, if any at all. There were comments and
staff folks that came to Alaska to discuss subject matter, but
then there was no real determination one way or the other.
Mr. Tiffany. Mayor, thank you so much for joining us today.
I appreciate those answers.
So, let's sum this up here. Here we have an effort to take
away local control, and we have wealthy environmental groups
that want to advance the green fantasy on America where we are
only going to run on windmills and solar panels, when we should
have an all of the above approach in terms of producing energy.
We are taking away local control here from this tribe in
Northern Alaska. We are not considering cumulative impacts,
including improvements that we have made as Americans.
Do we have or can we do better? Can there be improvements?
Absolutely, but we should also recognize where we came from and
those things that we are doing better.
And, to me, there are no boutique slices of justice.
Calling it environmental justice, I mean, should we have
economic justice, food justice, recreational justice? What
other types of justice should we have?
In America there is only justice, and it is really
unfortunate that we see this trying to divide Americans based
on something like this rather than us all working together.
Finally, I would say here in Northern Wisconsin people of
all socioeconomic backgrounds, including the poor, they are
paying twice as much for their energy this year. They are
paying twice as much to fill their propane tank. They are
paying significantly more for their natural gas bill if that is
what they are heating with.
That is what is happening, and this Committee is taking us
down that road. How can there be justice, including if you
subscribe to this notion of environmental justice, if poor
people have to pay more for their energy costs and they cannot
spend it on other things that are more important to them, like
their children, their health care, or whatever the case may be?
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Let me now turn to, I
believe it is Ms. DeGette; no, Ms. McCollum, sorry. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I look forward to
hearing from the gentlewoman from Colorado as well.
Thank you for holding this hearing. Representative
McEachin, thank you for your work on this issue. The
Environmental Justice For All Act will take critical steps to
address disproportionate environmental and public health issues
in low-income communities and communities of color.
Environmental justice for me though doesn't mean just
correcting those exposures to toxic pollution that the
communities face. EJ communities also lack equitable resources
to positively change their conditions and improve opportunities
to invest in their future. Nationwide, the poorest communities
have 41 percent less tree cover--yes, I am going to talk about
trees for a minute--than the wealthiest neighborhoods do
because that is important to air quality. Neighborhoods with
the majority of people of color have 33 percent less tree
canopy than the majority White communities, and in Minnesota,
tree canopy also helps with energy costs.
Frogtown is a neighborhood in St. Paul. I am going to bring
it on home as many of the others have done it. It is a
historically red-line community, and like many communities, it
experienced higher rates of pollution in part because of a
freeway that was forced into this community that brought
pollution along with it.
So, this community experiences higher rates of health
issues that are negative. One example would be asthma.
So, Frogtown, the neighborhood I am going to talk about,
has a neighborhood campaign, and it is working to change the
tree canopy issue. I am proud to have supported their work in
the Frogtown Park and Farm, a group that has planted over 500
trees in this neighborhood.
So, equal access to an urban canopy, equal access to green
space, equal access to community gardens makes EJ communities
more resilient to rising temperatures and improves overall
community health.
There are so many opportunities to get this right. I gave
one example, increasing an urban canopy. Facilitating new green
jobs is also another thing we can do. Working toward a green
infrastructure is another opportunity.
I believe we can use the model of EJ For All to act to
build on equitable access and to support new legislative
efforts as well. An example I have is the Mississippi River
Restoration and the Resilience Initiative Act. I incorporated
and put in set-asides dedicated to support and ensure
environmental justice communities have equal access to changing
their future.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that we just passed is
also making important investments to remove lead lines and
clean up PFAS in EJ communities.
Progress is the result of listening and working with
advocates, such as many of the people who have testified to
this Committee and the people who are testifying today, and
listening to community members who are directly impacted by the
harm that has been caused in the past.
So, I want to thank our witnesses today, and I have two
questions, but I am going to ask you to submit them in writing
to the Committee.
Ms. Cortez, could you please tell us more about some of the
EJ communities and how they are typically challenged in getting
access to Federal funding to improve their own environmental
conditions and build green infrastructure, and how the EJ For
All Act will help us in that effort, if you would do that?
And then, Dr. Sheats, I am going to turn to a different
topic and ask you to respond, and we will get to these
questions in writing to both of you.
Your testimony notes that there has been a cumulative
impact of pollutants which has been a difficult problem to
solve, especially when it is associated with race and income.
So, I would like you to maybe help us understand a little
more by answering the question in full later on to the
Committee. With the research that you have done to highlight
this issue, what can we do at a Federal level to help combat
these disproportionate exposures to all of these multiple
different types of pollution found in low-income communities
and communities of color?
Because the disparity issue is also an issue of
accumulative pollutants and exposure over generations.
Thank you all for your testimony, and I look forward to the
Committee receiving the response to my written questions that
will be submitted through the Committee.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
The gentlelady yields back.
Let me recognize Mr. Rosendale. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, Mayor Brower, just to get you on the batter's deck, I
am going to be going to you as soon as I complete this short
statement.
There has been a lot of talk today about environmental
justice, but I don't think my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle realize the extent of the economic injustice these
policies will have.
Many of the provisions of this bill will create new and
burdensome regulations causing more litigation, longer
permitting times, and less economic development.
In Montana, traditional energy and coal is crucial to many
of our small communities. Take the Crow Tribe, for example. For
46 years, they have leased their coal reserves, the
Westmoreland Mining, which operates the Absaloka Mine in
southeastern Montana.
In the last two decades, this partnership has generated
more than $325 million in taxes and royalties which play a
vital role for the Crow Tribe funding the tribal government,
providing essential services, and supporting tribal members
with per capita royalty payments.
The Absaloka Mine also generates opportunity. It employs
dozens of tribal members providing good paying jobs to workers
and economic stability for their families. In fact, in 2021, 59
percent of Absaloka Mine employees were Crow Tribe members.
This partnership between the Crow Tribe and Westmoreland
Mining empowers tribal members to provide brighter futures for
themselves and for their families.
Mr. Brower, partnerships like these are not just unique to
Montana. Can you describe the economic benefits that the
Northern Petroleum Reserve Alaska provided and what
subsequently happened in the North Slope due to Federal
intervention?
Mr. Brower. Thanks for the question, and I think it is very
important to reflect on the positive outcomes that time, but in
terms of the loss of services that that generates from the
reduction of production and taxation to the North Slope
Borough, we as a Borough start thinking of going through budget
cuts, as we are doing right now.
We are just getting into our budget cycle, and it impacts
the whole North Slope Borough. It is not just one community. It
is all eight communities across the North Slope that are
impacted from determinations of this type.
We have to think of what is happening for the next 2 to 3
years in terms of our operations and revenues that continue to
decline.
When thoughts of higher costs for expenses of resources, we
pay $5.75 a gallon, $5.95 a gallon for gas, and then a 100-
pound bottle of propane is nearly $500 and that only lasts a
month.
And these kinds of jobs that were being provided by
Westmoreland Fee and Gas Industry Operations now are
diminishing because of the actions that this Administration has
taken.
I hope it will help me identify the questions you are
posing.
Mr. Rosendale. Sure, and I want to go a little bit farther.
We have seen time and time again this Administration has
ignored the voices of those who they claim to represent,
whether it is the communities of North Slope or the hundreds of
thousands of Montanans who would have greatly benefited from
the Keystone XL Pipeline.
So, I want to reiterate a quote that we heard earlier in
the hearing of last year, and that is, ``no decisions about us,
without us.''
In regard to the Willow Project, did anyone consult you or
your community members before making these decisions? And do
you feel like justice has been served?
Mr. Brower. I would say no. What was out there,
determinations were made that we were provided information just
the fact that this Administration has taken. So, the immediate
answer is no, there was no real consultation.
Mr. Rosendale. In your opinion, was there adequate
safeguards in place to develop these resources safely and in a
manner to have a positive impact on your community?
Mr. Brower. I think it took several years of communication
through the NEPA process interactions with several of our
villages hosting meetings in villages, reviewing the documents
of the environmental impact statements and such to the Willow
Project. It took several years. It just didn't happen
overnight.
So, yes, there was interaction between the industry, the
Federal Government representatives, and the North Slope Borough
in making these determinations.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much for joining us, Mayor
Brower.
Mr. Chair, I see that my time has expired. I would yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman yields.
And let me recognize Mr. Huffman. Mr. Chairman, you are
recognized.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Several of our GOP colleagues are incredulous that
Democrats see racial impacts in the way our environmental
policy has worked for most of our history and they want us to
stop talking so much about race and disparate impacts and
environmental justice and just keep doing the same old things
the same old way.
I could not disagree more, Mr. Chairman. How can we not see
the racism even if some of it is not overt or intentional? The
disproportionate impacts are so obvious. How can we not talk
honestly about that and work to do more to end it?
That is what you and Mr. McEachin are doing with this bill
and, Mr. Chairman, I am proud to support you.
The story of economic development for most of our country's
history is that people with money and power who were always
White did what they wanted, and the impacts were born by people
without money and power who were generally Black, Brown, and
Indigenous.
And a great example is in my district. We are rich in
Indigenous culture in the 2nd District in California, and
tribes and other partners have been working for decades to
remove four obsolete hydro dams on the Lower Klamath River.
When these dams were built, nobody bothered to talk to
downstream tribes or fishing communities. The bedrock
environmental laws that our Republican friends continually mock
and deride as creating litigation, well, they would have given
tribes in downstream communities a voice, but they didn't exist
when these dams were built.
So, for decades the Yurok, Karuk, and Hoopa Tribes along
downstream fishing communities suffered terrible impacts, lost
salmon habitat, badly degraded water quality that causes
parasites and disease to ravage the salmon population, closing
entire fisheries, devastating their economies and way of life.
The environmental laws that we began passing in the 1970s
finally gave people like this a voice. But as we have heard
from the Ranking Member and so many other colleagues across the
aisle, when minority communities use environmental laws to
challenge projects that would harm them with pollution and
other impacts, they are derided as litigious.
I have to admire the clarity of what seems to be the
Republican EJ policy. Whenever tribal or minority voices
conflict with something the fossil fuel or mining industries
want to do, like the many tribes who opposed Keystone XL, the
Dakota Access Pipeline, other destructive fossil fuel projects,
the policy is to just ignore them, steamroll them, ridicule
them as litigious.
But when they can find a tribal or minority voice that
supports a drilling or a mining project, they temporarily
become interested in environmental justice.
Now, Mr. Chairman, the Gwich'in people and other Indigenous
people in the North Slope would tell you a very different story
about oil and gas development in Arctic Alaska than what we
have heard today from the Republican side. There is no question
the voices of fossil fuel advocates were heard by the Trump
administration when they fast tracked drilling projects.
But other voices were not heard, and that is the problem. I
agree with my colleague Don Young. We should not pick and
choose, but that means EJ voices should be heard and considered
even when they conflict with powerful polluting industries,
even when they don't get piles of money from the fossil fuel
industry, even when they struggle to find the resources to
engage in something like a NEPA process.
And that is why your bill, Mr. Chairman, is so important,
as well as the Biden administration's Justice40 Initiative.
With a whole bunch of Federal infrastructure funding we have an
opportunity right now to get this right, in the context of
building the infrastructure of the 21st century.
So, Dr. Sheats, I just want to ask you how can the
Justice40 Initiative ensure a fair distribution of Federal
resources to communities that have been historically left
behind.
Dr. Sheats. Well, I think we are going to have to--and you
have been talking about it, you have all been talking about
it--ensure the local communities have a say in where the
benefits from Justice40 activities we are talking about, where
the benefits and the funding go.
I think in each case we are going to have to set up some
system where local residents, local community groups, local EJ
groups, local citizens have a say in that and actually provide
guidance.
Mr. Huffman. Anything more the Federal Government can do to
ensure that tribes and other EJ communities have the resources
and support they need to take advantage of these opportunities?
Dr. Sheats. Well, just what you said. I know you want more
details, but even that and what you said is kind of a novel
idea, that the Federal Government should take steps to ensure
that the groups on the ground, including Indigenous groups and
tribes, have the capacity to be part of the implementation and
the decision making in these instances.
So, we have to find ways to do that through grants and
other mechanisms to do that.
Mr. Huffman. It is an important part of the Chairman's
bill.
With that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
The gentleman yields.
Let me recognize Mr. Obernolte. Sir, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our witnesses for what has been a
fascinating hearing.
Mayor Brower, I found your testimony very poignant. The
bill that we are considering today would make projects like the
energy exploration that is permitted in your community
substantially more difficult, more costly, and would lead to
fewer of them.
You had testified that about 95 percent of the Borough's
revenue comes from the royalties on these kinds of projects.
Can you talk to us just a little bit about the impacts on your
community if you didn't have that revenue?
Mr. Brower. Thank you. Yes, in regard to the 95 percent tax
revenue that supports the Borough, Congressman, taxation of oil
and gas companies within our region. The revenue supports
health clinics, schools, tribal college, water and sewer
infrastructure, and fire department, search and rescue. These
are essential services that we identify with that are needed
within our communities within the North Slope region.
It is something that we have to hold high standards for to
provide services and the need and we welcome the taxation to
the oil industry for the services it provides across the North
Slope.
Without it, we would be in a world of hurt today.
Mr. Obernolte. Right.
Mr. Brower. You know, we are very fortunate we have two
communities that are on natural gas. The rest are utilizing the
diesel fuel that serves these smaller communities.
Mr. Obernolte. Right.
Mr. Brower. And that is something that we need to continue
to communicate.
Thank you.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mayor Brower.
Ms. Cortez, I had a question for you. In your testimony,
you called the effects of the pollution in your community
environmental racism, and we just heard Mayor Brower talk about
the disastrous impacts that denying that community the ability
to profit from the resources adjacent to their community would
have on things like their drinking water and their health care.
And, of course, the Mayor represents one of the most
marginalized communities in the country.
How would denying them the ability to do that not also be
environmental racism?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, thank you for that question because I
think, I don't know too much about Alaska, but in hearing a lot
of how investing in fossil fuels is a leading driver of our
economy, these are some of the issues of what we have here in
Los Angeles. We are an urban economy. We are driven by these
fossil fuel investments. And for us, it is very marked, and we
stand very firmly that this is not sustainable. It doesn't
matter if you can extract these fossil fuels. It doesn't matter
if we can get jobs off of them if we are going to die, if my
lungs are being actively impacted daily.
So, does it matter at the end of the day? Yes. Does money
matter? Yes. We live in a capitalist society. I understand
that. We are not foolish to think that this is an overnight
response.
What is important to know is that we need investments now
to transition to alternative jobs, to alternative energy
sources so that Alaska, Los Angeles, and across the nation we
don't have to rely on these things. And that starts through
Federal policy, that starts through Federal investment.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. I think that is highlighting
something that we are all in furious agreement in here, and we
have kind of had a fascinating discussion this morning about
this term ``environmental racism.'' I think Congressman Graves
pointed out the fact that to have racism you have to have
intentionality because it is discrimination against a
marginalized community.
And then Congressman McEachin was talking about, well, it
really doesn't matter if it is intentional, what matters is the
effects on these communities.
And I strongly agree with both of those gentlemen, and I
wish that we could have a more frank discussion about that term
``racism'' when we use it because I think it distracts from our
shared goal of solving these problems for these communities.
That is the important thing.
And when we use words like ``racism'' I think it distracts
away from that goal, but I want to thank all of our witnesses
for what has been a fascinating discussion, and I hope this
kind of moves the conversation further.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Thank you.
Mr. Lowenthal is recognized for 5 minutes. Chairman.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I am glad also that we have come together to discuss
this critically important issue.
I remembered as I was beginning to prepare for this when I
first ran for office 30 years ago for City Council in the city
of Long Beach. And I walked my district, and as I got close to
the district that encompasses the southern part of the 710
freeway and the Port of Long Beach and adjacent, also did not
include but it was obviously the adjacent Port of L.A. was
backed up right to my district.
And as I walked and I got closer and closer to the port
area and to the 710, more and more people said as I was coming
to tell them why I was running for office, more and more people
said, ``Alan, that is really interesting why you are doing
that. But can you tell me what is this black soot in the
window?''
And as I got closer to the port they would talk more about
that black soot, and they would ask me, ``Does it really have
an effect? My kids have asthma. What is all of this all
about?''
So, I had become more and more aware as I studied what that
black soot was that certain communities in Long Beach that were
near this tremendous industrial complex of our ports and
freeways suffered much greater from black soot than more
suburban communities.
And I know there is no quick fix to fixing this, but it has
been 30 years and these communities are still suffering even
though we have made some giant steps and taken some steps.
I want to thank the Chair and also Mr. McEachin for their
leadership on the Environmental Justice For All Act, and I
appreciate the dedication of everyone on this Committee to
talking about solutions because I think whatever terminology
you want to use, I think both sides of the aisle have agreed
that there are some communities that are paying a much greater
price for the economic development in this country than other
communities, and those communities tend to be low-income
communities, frequently first generation communities, immigrant
communities, and also people who have not been allowed or have
not historically engaged in the economic development of this
country.
My first question is to Ms. Cortez. Over the years, I have
been very impressed and grateful to the leadership of East Yard
Communities for Environmental Justice. But I would like you,
who have been out there in the field, on the streets, to tell
me more about the environmental injustice that my community
suffers on the West Side of Long Beach.
Can you talk more about the very specifics that people who
grow up near the ports, near the 710 freeway, like yourself?
What is that experience like?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, I appreciate that question because it
allows folks to visualize what we may or may not see. I think
it is really important to know that specifically, although Long
Beach is huge, but specifically the West Side of Long Beach is
actually divided. It is on the other side of the 710 freeway.
And that is a marker, folks hear, ``the other side of the train
tracks.'' These are things that are systemic, but they have
huge impacts in terms of place relations to pollution and race.
And I understand folks not wanting to bring race into this
conversation, but folks who live in the West Side of Long
Beach, it is not the same demographics that lives in East Long
Beach. It is not the same demographic that lives in other
areas.
So, with West Long Beach it is primarily immigrant. It is
primarily Black, Indigenous, people of color. There are a range
of folks. There are also White folks there, but a majority of
folks are Black, Indigenous, people of color. In West Side
specifically, we have a small terminus freeway that is
specifically created for trucks. There is the 710 freeway,
which I mentioned sees 40,000 to 60,000 truck trips daily
because it is very close to the port complex, which is a port
complex that sees 40 percent of all goods that come into this
country come through those ports, right off the 710 freeway to
get to the railyards.
There is also right now a proposed new railyard
development, a new intermodal facility being proposed right
next to West Long Beach, so it is really important to look at
these are the cumulative impacts that we are talking about that
are not being addressed in any policy right now, but that could
be addressed with this new policy.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
My time is up, and just before I leave, I also want to talk
about--I remember having a community meeting in one of the
homes on the West Side, and the health director of Long Beach
said, ``If you were born on the west side of Long Beach, your
life expectancy is 10 to 15 years less than the life expectancy
of someone who is born out on the east side.''
I yield back.
The Chairman. Let me recognize Mr. Bentz.
Representative, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks everyone for a
most interesting conversation. I have some questions for
Professor Cahn.
And I want to start by asking if the Constitution as
currently written contains a right for those important things
such as clean air, clean water, so forth that are found in this
bill.
Does our Constitution contain a specific right to enjoy
those benefits?
Ms. Cahn. Our Federal Constitution does not. There are
actually increasing numbers of state constitutions who have
established a right to a healthy environment or a right to
clean air and water, including New York being the most recent.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
And as I understood it, it was about three states, but I am
sorry, I just looked at it this morning. There could be more.
The second question, does, in your opinion, this bill
create those rights specifically in the findings and then in
the second portion of the bill?
So, does this bill create those rights?
Ms. Cahn. This bill creates very clear environmental
justice protections and that demand action on the part of the
Federal Government through amendments to NEPA, through
amendments to the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act, as
well as by restoring the private cause of action under Title VI
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Mr. Bentz. I am just looking at page 4, Subsection 9. It
reads, ``All people have the right to breathe clean air, drink
clean water, live free of dangerous levels of toxic pollution,
and share the benefits of a prosperous and vibrant pollution-
free economy.''
And then later on, there are instructions to agencies, even
more direct than that. So, it would appear to me that there is
something being created. It is not a right. It certainly is a
basis for a lawsuit, would you not agree?
Ms. Cahn. I would have to really think through the strategy
on that, but I do see the bill as really strengthening the
rights of the communities who have historically been
disproportionately impacted by environmental and climate
burdens and creating opportunities for environmental benefits
and climate solutions.
Mr. Bentz. All right. Well, I don't think I would have
gotten away with that answer when I was going to law school,
but of course, I was going to Lewis and Clark in Portland, not
to Vermont.
And, by the way, you guys have a great environmental
program there. So, I think we are constantly trading places
with you as to who is ranked No. 1 in the nation.
Ms. Cahn. I can answer that question, yes.
Mr. Bentz. In any event, I read it as giving rights to
folks and thus lawyers will be ecstatic should this bill pass,
and particularly with the last right that is suggested here,
which is to ``share in the benefits of a prosperous and vibrant
pollution-free economy.''
Well, that sounds pretty broad. What happens if I go in and
say, ``Hey, I don't have as much value. I don't have the
economic benefit.''
Does this bill give us, the lawyers, the right to argue
that if someone doesn't have as much money as somebody else, we
can use this bill to suggest that we should be equal on that
basis too? We should all have the same amount of economic
benefit. Is that what this bill does?
Ms. Cahn. Well, I think this bill is intended to provide
benefits to communities who have been historically disinvested,
and there is actually an economic benefit for our country at
large when we do that, when we support and improve health
outcomes in communities where those outcomes have been
disproportionately burdened. Then there is actually going to be
an economic benefit to everyone.
Mr. Bentz. It seems to me that what this does is throw to
the courts the definition of extent and scope of whatever it is
this bill says it is doing, which I think is wrong, and the
bill should be far more clear in that which it is trying to
achieve.
The environmental injustice, although this bill appears to
be directed toward communities of color and other minorities, I
would suggest it is broader than that, and those in Oregon
along the West Coast suffering from smoke inhalation from the
fires that in large part are created by the failure to allow us
to go in and try to reduce fuel loads.
It looks to me like this bill gives all kinds of folks the
right to bring action against whoever it is that is preventing
us from getting in and protecting ourselves from that type of
future.
Mr. Chair, this is an extraordinarily interesting bill, I
think one that deserves a lot more work before we turn the
trial lawyers of America loose utilizing it to do God knows
what.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Thank you.
Let me recognize the Chair of the Subcommittee, Ms. Leger
Fernandez. Representative, you are recognized.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Chair Grijalva.
And I want to begin my comments focusing on the fact that
this bill is called the Environmental Justice, right? That we
are focused on making sure that everybody has justice in the
same sense of access to that clean air, access to economic
opportunities that don't come at the expense of somebody else's
health.
And I wanted to ask a bit of questioning on the concept of
the disparate impact and what Sandoval did to our ability to
have communities say, ``This is negatively impacting my
health,'' and it is simply the impact that we are focusing on.
So, we are moving away from saying we don't need to, and I
don't think there is anything in this bill that is talking
about that we have to prove racism. We simply are asking that
everybody have the same ability to live in a community where
they are not subject to an environment that is toxic to their
health, especially when they don't have the resources to move
somewhere else.
So, Ms. Cahn, can you explain why reinserting the ability
of bringing a cause of action that focuses on disparate impact
gives an important tool to the communities that are living
under a burden of, like in New Mexico, high methane emissions.
We exploded an atomic bomb here, and the people who were
exposed to that have not been able to get compensation.
We have high levels of methane. We have one of the biggest
methane clouds in the sky over part of our state.
Why is the use of disparate impact important?
Ms. Cahn. Thank you so much for that question.
And I have been pondering this throughout the whole hearing
because there has been some dialogue around whether intent is
necessary to prove discrimination, and intentional
discrimination is real, and we see intentional discrimination
cases all the time.
But disparate impact is also prohibited under Title VI of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and that was part of the intent
of the legislation. It was part of the intent, and it is
documented, the legislative history and statements by President
John F. Kennedy about the need to prevent actions, programs,
and activities with the discriminatory impact on communities,
that we need to ensure that this bill covers those as well.
And there are countless examples of how that plays out. It
is failing to account for how emissions from a facility would
disproportionately expose communities of color to high levels
of air pollution; failing to account for how rerouting a
roadway would have a disparate impact on the air quality, the
safety, or the quality of life for residents in a community of
color; or refusing to offer simultaneous interpretation as
disruptive or providing a Spanish language translation of
permitting decision a week later than English language version
but keeping the comment period the same.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Ms. Cahn, thank you so very much. I
wanted to get to a couple of other questions.
So, I am going to move on to the issue of the cumulative
impacts. Two things, one, the cumulative impact and the
importance of not looking--I keep thinking of how we are going
to look at this project through a keyhole, and as long as we
see that there is a bit of blue sky from that keyhole, we are
fine.
Whereas, if we open up our vista and we can see the
communities adjacent to that project and how there are lots of
other impacts, that is so key.
And, Ms. Cortez, I really appreciated the fact that you
pointed out the importance that you didn't have to eliminate
jobs and economic growth while you were looking to solve these
issues, and I appreciate that in this bill, that it is putting
more funds and resources into those communities that have
energized, though fossil fuel and other things are in our
economy.
I have several bills that seek to do that, that seek to
invest in that.
So, if you could describe to me a bit why you think it is
important that your community, as organized as you have become,
has the tools that you need that this bill gives you so that
you can protect your ability to thrive and to live in this
environment that is cleaner than what you do now.
Ms. Cortez. Yes, thank you, and I will make it really
quick.
The reality is that we already have so much education and
tools that we have already implemented locally, that we have
already implemented regionally, and either we have succeeded
and have proven it, either we have failed and learned and gone
back and done it, or we have realized that agencies,
municipalities, state legislation is not going to move until
the Federal Government can set an example by passing policies
like EJ For All to, one, invest by giving us the tools to be
able to do this work or pass policy that shows them that we are
just as important and that they should also pass these more
local, more smaller policies with us.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you.
My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
Let me now recognize Representative Tlaib. Representative,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairman. I cannot thank you
enough for your leadership on this and, of course, our
colleague, Congressman McEachin, on just really leading us and
trying to make sure that we have a good quality life for many
of our residents that have to take the brunt of environmental
pollution.
There has been so much discussion, and first of all to
Director Cortez, the center you co-direct and the work that you
are doing in your community reminds me of growing up in
southwest Detroit.
What must be distressing to all of you, as you all are
listening to this, is language saying, quote, ``you people.''
So, I want to apologize for that kind of rhetoric of ``you
people.'' You are our people, including our Indigenous brothers
and sisters across our nation. You are our people. You are not
``you people.''
So, I just want to really set that tone because it is so
critically important that as folks are talking about this, and,
Director Cahn, I want to ask you this. Do jobs fix cancer?
Ms. Cahn. Do jobs?
Ms. Tlaib. Does having a job, does that fix cancer?
Ms. Cahn. Having a job does not fix cancer, and also it is
a false choice.
Ms. Tlaib. Does it fix the asthma? Does it fix the asthma
rate? How about you, Director Cortez? Do jobs fix asthma?
Ms. Cortez. No, it does not.
Ms. Tlaib. Let me also ask. Dr. Sheats, one of the things I
keep stressing, everybody keeps talking about the high cost of
natural gas, the high cost of this.
Do you know that it has been increased? Did you know this,
that it increased by like 30 percent or so, the cost of asthma
inhalers?
Just yesterday, one of the mothers in my community was
testifying about an asphalt plant coming into her neighborhood
and how she had to put $300 aside to pay for asthma inhalers
for her children, for her boys.
Dr. Sheats, do you ever monitor the cost of public health
in essence of where people are living with the environmental
pollution?
Has anybody ever looked at it, Ms. Cortez, Dr. Sheats, or
Director Cahn?
Have any of you looked at the cost of public health living
in this highly polluted neighborhood?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, I will just share very quickly that I
remember there being an EPA statistic a long time ago that said
if we fix this industrial thing, we would actually be saving
this much money in health impacts. That statistic was from
about 20 years ago, and I have not seen another statistic since
on how to quantify and really focus on public health as a real
investment, as something that is monetary and just as valuable
or more valuable than these other economic impacts that folks
talk about.
Ms. Tlaib. How about you, Director Cahn?
Ms. Cahn. I just keep thinking about the situation under
the COVID-19 pandemic and the costs right now. Think about the
cost of preventing particulate matter pollution 5 years ago, 10
years ago, 30 years ago, and the economic and health benefits
that communities that have been overburdened for that long
would feel in this moment who are otherwise disproportionately
affected by infection rates, severity, and death from COVID-19.
Ms. Tlaib. Well, Dr. Sheats, I do want to put this in the
Congressional Record for the Chairman and for my colleagues.
More of my Black neighbors die from COVID because of pre-
existing conditions, even though they make up less than 14
percent of the total population in the state of Michigan.
And I really believe if you look at the statistics around
Flint, around Detroit, around other communities that are
predominantly people of color, my Black neighbors, they died at
a higher rate of COVID.
Dr. Sheats, do you believe that is because most of them are
bearing the brunt of environmental pollution, corporate
pollution?
Dr. Sheats. I think, of course, we don't know of their
personal circumstance, but I believe that is a part of it.
I think one thing that always strikes me about the COVID-19
pandemic is that--and we have talked a lot about race today, so
I will go ahead and say it even----
Ms. Tlaib. No, go. This is your Congress, not just ``some
people's.'' You can say it.
Dr. Sheats. I think COVID-19 in some ways showed how the
city is racist because I would not have predicted that one
reason that people of color die higher from COVID-19 is because
a higher percentage of us--it doesn't include me--but a higher
percentage of us have to actually go out and be in the world
and work and cannot stay home and work remotely.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes.
Dr. Sheats. And I think it shows the racial impacts are
very hard to predict and that we have to take every opportunity
that we can to address those issues.
Ms. Tlaib. And I know I have a little bit of time but,
Chairman, if I may, can I please submit for the record? I think
it is very, very important because cumulative impact analysis
and the Environmental Justice For All is so important to my
community.
But for the record, please can I submit an article by the
Detroit Free Press that said ``$175 million tax break for
Marathon refinery buys Detroiters only 15 jobs,'' and I will
explain this later in future jobs, but we gave $175 million at
the time when we were struggling in Detroit in exchange for
jobs, and they only gave us 15.
And do you know that is the most polluted zip code in the
state of Michigan.
So, if I may, can I submit that for the record?
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
Detroit Free Press

$175M tax break for Marathon refinery buys Detroiters only 15 jobs

Joe Guillen

Published 1 a.m. ET March 14, 2014

Updated 4:15 p.m. ET March 14, 2014

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Marathon Petroleum, which received a $175-million tax break from
the City of Detroit in a mammoth expansion project, is coming under
fire from City Council for failing to hire enough Detroiters.

When Marathon asked the city for the tax break as part of the company's
plan to expand its operations in southwest Detroit in 2007, with the
appeal came a pledge to recruit Detroiters for new jobs at the
refinery.

The City Council granted the company the personal property tax
abatement, forgoing millions in tax revenue. Even with the tax break, a
city analysis estimated the expansion would generate $181 million in
income taxes, real property taxes and other fees for the city over two
decades.

``As we discuss job creation, please understand that we will do what we
can to hire qualified Detroit residents,'' then-Marathon Senior Vice
President Garry Peiffer wrote to City Council in 2007. ``It is our
intention to work closely with the Detroit Workforce Development
Department and a local institution of higher education to develop
curriculum and offer training for interested Detroit residents.''

But the vision to hire more Detroiters never materialized. Now city
officials will more closely monitor Marathon's hiring practices to
ensure the company is making an effort to hire Detroit residents.

``In a city with double-digit unemployment, any company that's
receiving a tax abatement of nearly $180 million should be giving more
back, including hiring residents,'' Councilwoman Saunteel Jenkins said
in an interview.

Marathon employs 514 full-time workers at its refinery, thanks to the
$2.2-billion expansion. That's up from about 320 employees in 2007,
when the city approved the personal property tax abatement, the largest
of its kind in Detroit history.

Of the 514 employees, 30 are listed as Detroit residents as of January.
In 2007, before the expansion, the company employed 15 Detroit
residents. That means fewer than 6% of Marathon's workers at the
refinery live in the city, according to the company's employment
records, which must be submitted to the city annually under terms of
its abatement agreement.

Several City Council members briefed on the company's hiring practices
said the figures are unacceptable. Marathon's poor track record of
hiring residents, they said, coupled with the high number of Detroiters
looking for work, highlights the need to secure hiring guarantees when
companies ask for tax breaks or other incentives.

Representatives of Marathon said the company has had difficulty finding
qualified Detroiters, even though it funds a scholarship program at
Henry Ford Community College designed to promote local hiring. Some of
the available scholarships have gone unfilled, the company said.

``We would like nothing better than to have a higher percentage of
Detroit residents in our workforce,'' refinery general manager Tracy
Case told council members during a discussion on the company's hiring
practices at a Feb. 13 planning and economic development committee
meeting.

``We are aligned in that desire, but there are certain difficulties and
challenges and obligations we have to our company to find the best
people to work for us,'' Case said, adding that Detroit residency would
be a tie-breaker in a hiring choice between two similarly qualified
candidates.

Marathon bears a greater responsibility to hire Detroiters because the
refinery's expansion has raised environmental concerns, Jenkins said.
The expansion has allowed the company to process an extra 14,000
barrels of oil per day.

Portia Roberson, Mayor Mike Duggan's group executive for ethics and
civil rights, has been charged with further reviewing Marathon's hiring
of Detroit residents. She will report back to the council in six
months.

``I want to give everybody the benefit of the doubt, but also I want
Detroit residents to see where their tax dollars are going when you're
talking about tax abatements,'' council President Brenda Jones said.
``I want them to have the same fair chance that anybody else has, and I
want you to live up to the agreement that you came to this table and
said you would live up to. And the agreement was that you would hire
Detroit residents.''

The city's cost-benefit analysis, done before the abatement was
granted, estimated the refinery expansion would generate a net benefit
of more than $181 million over 20 years--despite the $175-million tax
break. The analysis assumed an increase of 60 full-time jobs at the
refinery.

The city has agreed to 23 personal property tax abatements for various
companies since 1998. The state treasurer has final approval of the
exemptions, which are granted for a specific period, not for a specific
dollar amount. However, the City of Detroit generally projects how much
revenue the city and the county would be forgoing for each abatement.

In 2008, General Motors received a personal property tax abatement
worth about $38 million from the city for its expansion at the Detroit-
Hamtramck plant. The company estimated it would add about 550 jobs, and
first preference would be to hire laid-off union workers.

Gov. Rick Snyder signed a package of bills in late 2012 to phase out
the state's personal property tax over 10 years. The new taxing policy,
which supporters say will boost the state's economy, is subject to a
voter referendum in August.

Marathon executives said the Detroit tax break was crucial to the
company's decision to expand here rather than in neighboring states
without such tax burdens on new industrial equipment. The Marathon
abatement carries a cost to the city of about $146 million in forgone
tax revenue over 23 years and about $29 million to Wayne County.

Marathon workers perform a variety of jobs at the refinery, including
engineers, refinery operators, maintenance workers and safety
representatives. Job openings at the refinery typically pay an annual
salary between $60,000 and $80,000, company representatives told the
City Council.

Marathon's corporate website, to which a company spokesman directed the
Free Press on Monday, showed the company has seven job openings in
Detroit, including a welder, pump mechanic and an engineer.

Although Marathon has exceeded the projection and added about 200 full-
time jobs, the company's scholarship program at Henry Ford has not
created many employment opportunities at Marathon for Detroiters.
Company representatives attend career fairs at Henry Ford to promote
the training program.

Marathon has contributed about $154,000 toward 37 scholarships since
2008. Of those scholarships, five students have interned at the
refinery. One graduate of the Henry Ford program applied for a job but
did not meet pre-employment testing requirements, according to the
company's written responses to the City Council's legislative policy
division, which produced a report on Marathon's hiring practices in
February.

The scholarship at Henry Ford fulfills the company's responsibility
under the abatement contract to develop a training program. The
contract, however, does not require the company to hire a certain
number of Detroit residents. Marathon stated that hiring Detroiters
would be a priority when it sought the tax break.

Marathon's results have been an eye-opener for new council members, who
appear poised to demand more from corporations seeking tax breaks in
the future.

In early February, veteran council members Jones and James Tate sought
but failed to get a guarantee to hire Detroiters in post-construction
jobs at the new Red Wings arena. Without the guarantee, they each cast
a ``no'' vote on legislation related to the arena project, but the
measure passed.

``I know that Madam President (Jones) beat the arena about the head and
shoulders about'' a post-construction job guarantee, said first-term
Councilman Scott Benson, who voted in favor of the hockey arena
legislation. ``Now I see why it's so important that we put language
into these contracts about post-construction jobs.''

Councilwoman Raquel Castaneda-Lopez, whose district includes the
refinery, said her office will work with Marathon to inform the
community about scholarship opportunities.

``Moving forward, we need to negotiate stronger employment requirements
when granting tax abatements or other incentives,'' she said in an e-
mail. ``A company's track record of hiring Detroiters and working with
the surrounding community should be factored into this process.''

______

Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, and I yield.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Let me now recognize the gentlelady from New Mexico, Ms.
Stansbury. You are recognized, Representative, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A thank you, Chairman Grijalva, for introducing this bill
and for convening this hearing.
And I, too, want to extend my thanks to all of the
witnesses for joining us today from all over the country and
sharing your experiences, your feedback, your expertise, and
helping to shape this legislation and to be educators to the
public and to our communities about what we are trying to
accomplish with this bill.
I, too, am a proud co-sponsor of the Environmental Justice
For All bill, and I am deeply proud of the process that the
Chairman and Chairman McEachin and others engaged in to create
this bill, it was a community-led process that included
engagement with organizations and communities across the United
States and incorporated the feedback of hundreds of people
across the United States.
So, let me be clear. Our communities must be at the table
in making decisions that affect their quality of life, their
health, and their futures, and that is what this bill is
fundamentally about.
It is about putting the power, the tools, and the resources
back into our communities that have experienced the
disproportionate impacts and legacies of pollution and the
disproportionate impacts of economic development that have
harmed our communities, so that they have the power to control
their own destinies going forward.
I am so grateful for this bill and all of the incredible
work that has gone into it. Obviously, the goals of this bill
are to strengthen the NEPA process, to provide data and tools
to prevent harmful environmental impacts, to account for those
impacts holistically across our environmental laws when we are
doing permitting and allowing activities on the landscape.
It is to ensure that our Federal agencies are coordinating
with each other, and that there are people at those agencies
that are not just looking out for the economic impacts and
benefits for our communities, but are looking out for our
communities themselves and making sure that their voices are
heard in the process as we are undertaking to permit and allow
activities and invest Federal resources, and to put those tools
and resources into our communities themselves so that they have
the power to shape their own destinies.
And nowhere is this more important than in New Mexico where
our state and our communities have faced this historical legacy
in disproportionate impacts. I have heard a lot of discussion
today questioning the history and the reality of what we know
to be the truth inside of our communities.
So, let me just say this is not hypothetical in New Mexico.
Our history and our landscape are peppered with the examples of
how the historical legacy has impacted our communities.
In Western New Mexico, we have communities that are still
living with the impacts of uranium mining. We have Pueblo and
Dine and Chicano communities that are still dealing with mines
that have been left unremediated and contaminated groundwater
that is undrinkable.
In the north, we have Pueblo and Hispano communities that
have lived in valleys for countless generations that now have
groundwater contamination caused by our government's nuclear
experiments.
In the east, we have dairies and ranchers and farmers whose
entire operations have been destroyed by PFAS contamination
because of Federal activities.
And in the south, as Representative Leger Fernandez talked
about, we have downwind communities in the Tularosa Basin who
were exposed to radiation in 1945 and that for generations have
experienced cancer and health impacts that are still killing
people today in those communities.
So, this is not a hypothetical. This is something that has
affected our communities for generations. We need tools. We
have to modernize our Federal Government. We need to ensure
that there are people and processes and opportunities and
resources for our communities to have their voices heard as
decisions are being made, and that they can help to reimagine
the futures that they want to see for themselves and their
communities.
I want to thank everybody who was involved in shaping this
legislation and thank you especially, Mr. Chairman, for your
vision and your ability to bring people together to help shape
and create an opportunity for this bill.
And I want to just turn very quickly to Dr. Sheats, Ms.
Cortez, and others here, can you please just reiterate? We have
been talking about this all morning, but why is it so important
that our communities have a seat at the table? Starting with
you, Dr. Sheats?
Dr. Sheats. I think it gives our communities a fighting
chance to address the elevated levels of pollution often found
in environmental justice communities. It gives them some hope
and the fighting chance to do so.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you.
And Ms. Cortez?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, I think for us we have nothing to lose,
literally. Like this is our lives, and we will continue
fighting for it.
And this policy and any policy that is truly focused on EJ,
we will continue fighting for it, and we will continue fighting
for a seat at this table.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you very much.
And thank you all so much for being here this morning and
for lending your voices and your expertise to this very
important bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields.
Let me recognize Representative Porter. Madam Chair, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Sheats, this is a map of abandoned and active oil wells
in Southern California, and as you can see, there are a lot of
them, and this is true in many parts of our country.
Under current Federal law, if an oil company wants to open
another oil well on Federal land in a place where there already
are lots and lots of oil wells, would they have to consider
other facilities in the area during the permitting process and
limit new pollution based on the cumulative effects?
Dr. Sheats. Let me say this, and I hope I don't get this
wrong. The way I understand it now, is that within a certain
category of pollution they have to consider other sources, but
across pollutants they would not.
Ms. Porter. OK. So, they don't necessarily have to mitigate
or account for air pollution, for example, if their facility
would create water pollution and even if they were adding
another polluting facility.
My understanding is that there are no limits on pollution
under current law based on cumulative impacts.
Ms. Cortez, do you or anyone else have a thought on that?
Ms. Cortez. I do not. I will defer to my colleagues.
Dr. Sheats. The total amount of pollution does not have to
be taken into account in the neighborhood.
Ms. Porter. OK. Because of that, in your experience do oil
and gas companies deliberately pick low-income and frontline
communities for their facilities?
Ms. Cortez. Yes.
Ms. Porter. Why, Ms. Cortez?
Ms. Cortez. Because the processes are so complex, these
companies are able to come into our communities with things
like an EIR, a negative declaration in which community members
who are already struggling to make ends meet, are working two
jobs, cannot find child care, are having health impacts, are
having to go to the emergency room, are not able to fully
participate in challenging these projects.
A lot of times, like I said, there is even a negative
declaration. So, it doesn't even undergo a process which allows
for the continued systemic placing of these facilities near our
homes.
Ms. Porter. And my understanding is that the Environmental
Justice For All Act, one of the ways it would address that is
to amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to prohibit
discrimination based on disparate impact, and it would
effectively allow these low-income communities when they are
harmed, and it is disproportionate to them, to be able to raise
discrimination claims on that basis.
Are companies right now currently cleaning up their
pollution in these communities, Ms. Cortez?
Ms. Cortez. They are not, so many of them are allowed to
leave. A lot of them just abandon ship and these are what we
now call brownfields in our communities.
And because Los Angeles is such an urban area, what we see
is that the only sites that are open, that there is nothing
developed on is because they are brownfields that continue to
pollute our communities through gas emissions.
Ms. Porter. And we have abandoned oil and gas wells, and
that is part of what this map shows. There are purple dots and
blue dots, and a lot of these are abandoned and they are
sitting there leaving taxpayers with the bill.
I want to enter into the record a story from MarketWatch
last week that said, ``Oil is the hottest sector, and Wall
Street analysts see upside of up to 48% for favored stocks.''
And those companies include some of the biggest oil and gas
producers on public land, like Chevron and Phillips. Instead of
covering the cost of their pollution, they are giving out
dividends to their investors. We are all getting cheated as a
result because we all have an interest in our public lands, but
frontline communities are literally paying with their health,
as you point out.
Ms. Cahn, I want to turn to climate change quickly. How do
national policies help local communities increase their
resilience to climate change?
Ms. Cahn. I think that the EJ For All Act provides a whole
set of resources that could help local communities really
invest in climate resilience and climate adaptation and do so
in a way that puts communities at the lead.
So, there are a host of funds, I think particularly the
open space funds that are dedicated in the EJ For All Act. One
of the legacies of disinvestment has been the lack of green
garden and open spaces and tree cover, which has an impact on
air quality, on health, and also on stormwater management.
And communities have responded by creating green garden
open spaces in the face of disinvestment, but those spaces are
largely land insecure. So, the open space funds in the EJ For
All Act actually could provide for land acquisition, also
technical assistance, and provide ways to either create new or
preserve existing spaces that would increase climate
resilience.
Ms. Porter. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields.
I recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Soto. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman.
Colleagues, America is finally emerging from crisis. We
passed the American Rescue Plan, shots in arms, money in
pockets, and we avoided another great recession. And 77 percent
of Americans are now vaccinated and cases are dropping.
Unemployment is below 4 percent. We avoided a key
foreclosure crisis in Florida and across the nation. Pensions
and 401(k)s were saved, and now we are turning to combat
inflation, supply chain, price gouging, managing the pandemic,
and possibly even a gas tax holiday are all in the works.
Thanks to my colleagues on the Democratic side, sadly all
Republicans voted no.
Then we passed the infrastructure plan. Roads and bridges,
airports and ports, water and electric reforms, $21 billion for
environmental remediation of brownfields, which I will get to
in a moment, rural broadband, and infrastructure equity, like
what we are talking about here today, breaking down those
barriers, reconnecting communities.
Thanks to Representative Don Young for voting yes. Sadly,
the rest of you voted no. A couple of you even tried to take
credit back home, but were quickly rebuffed by your local
press.
And now we are going to work on the America COMPETES Act,
domestic manufacturing, microchips, biotech, aerospace,
telecom, medical supplies. We are making microchips back in the
district now, and this is going to be huge for us.
Again, all of you voted no. I am hoping that you will
change your mind as we get to a final vote after the Senate. We
need to come together.
In our area in Florida, we have seen coal plants closing
and coal ash storage is an issue in Orange County and Osceola
County. We have boosted solar, wind, and natural gas. We may
even extend or expand our nuclear capacity, but highly toxic
coal ash is an issue. Some was even trucked in recently to
Osceola County, but we put a stop to that.
Dr. Sheats, have you seen similar issues in communities
where toxic pollution has compounded from multiple sources?
And what are the health implications for all those living
in those communities?
Dr. Sheats. Yes, well, we certainly see that in New Jersey.
Actually in Newark, New Jersey, the DEP, Department of
Environmental Protection, has actually acknowledged it is a
place that suffers from cumulative impacts.
And I think we see partially the results in the number of
kids in school, asthma attacks associated with air pollution.
And in the health disparities that exist in our nation,
again, part of the reason we believe is because of the
disparate amount of pollution in our communities.
Mr. Soto. And Dr. Sheats, how would the Environmental
Justice For All Act help address these issues of cumulative
pollution impacts?
Dr. Sheats. Well, finally a gap in our laws and regulations
will begin to be filled because it would mandate that the
cumulative impact analysis take into account all the pollution
in a neighborhood and not just look at pollution as individual
pollutants and ask if those individual standards are violated.
It would take a more holistic approach and say, hey, this
super pollution in the neighborhood has to be taken into
account.
Mr. Soto. Ms. Cortez, we passed $21 billion for
environmental remediation in the Build Back Better
infrastructure package. What do you think would be one or two
areas to focus on that we should work on to remediate past
environmental justice issues?
Ms. Cortez. Yes, I think remediation of brownfields, as I
was mentioning earlier, is super important because these areas
are toxic. A lot of these areas are dirt. They are uncovered.
Some of us, if we don't know how to find the tools, we
don't even know what toxins we are being exposed to, but a lot
of them are adjacent to homes.
We have seen that happen here where brownfields are active
polluting sites, have caused numerous metal types of cancers,
where folks are actively dying even after the facility is shut
down.
Mr. Soto. Ms. Cahn, what would be your recommendation for
us to focus on for the $21 billion in environmental remediation
that has passed?
Ms. Cahn. I would actually have to say let's start by
consulting with communities about where the needs are greatest
and the spaces that have been left unremediated for the
longest.
I will say that there have been recent studies, actually I
think 2 years ago by the EPA, looking at the intersection of
climate risk and brownfields and Superfund risk, so I would
also say let's look at the spaces that are at risk of flooding
and have the potential to spread toxins throughout a
neighborhood exacerbating the health impacts.
Mr. Soto. Thanks.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman yields.
Let me now turn to the gentleman from Chicago, Mr. Garcia.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Chairman Grijalva, and of course,
all of our outstanding witnesses and, of course, thank you to
Congressman McEachin for the environmental justice bill.
Look, everyone deserves a safe and healthy place in which
to work, live, play, and learn, and we all have the right to
pure air, clean water, and an environment that enriches our
lives.
But the reality is that for too many people of color and
low-income communities, including the ones I represent, they
lack access to these basic fundamental rights.
In 2022, Chicago still has an uneven and inequitable
exposure to pollution and toxins across its neighborhoods.
A question for Dr. Sheats. I know you have done crucial
work in New Jersey to push back against the disproportionate
siting of toxic and hazardous facilities in communities of
color and low-income communities.
In my district, we are dealing with similar issues.
Recently, two companies, with abysmal track records when it
comes to the environment and with issues of safety of the
communities that they enter, have indicated intentions to
establish plants in locations in Chicago on the South and West
Side.
We called on city officials to reject those applications in
order to protect the health of our neighbors who are already
overburdened by pollution.
My question is, how would the robust cumulative impact
assessments proposed in the Environmental Justice For All Act
help prevent this type of injustice?
Dr. Sheats. I think that the cumulative impact provision in
the EJ For All Act would very nicely address this issue
because, again, it says that if, due to cumulative impacts
there is not a reasonable certainty of no harm, and in doing
the cumulative impact analysis, you would have to take into
account existing pollution and the pollution that would be
added by the facilities that want to come into that community.
And if that standard is violated, if it would cause harm to
the community, then the permit will not be issued. But I think
it could play a role, a major role, in protecting those
communities.
Mr. Garcia. So, incorporating what we have learned and new
technology is essential to making places safe and healthy for
everyone.
Dr. Sheats, you helped pass groundbreaking legislation in
the state of New Jersey that requires an assessment of
cumulative impacts and sets a limit on cumulative impact
pollution in overburdened areas.
You also helped craft a municipal ordinance for the city of
Newark on environmental justice and cumulative impacts. You
have seen these cumulative impact policies be implemented at
the local and state level.
Can you speak to why the Federal Government should also be
required to consider cumulative impacts?
Dr. Sheats. Yes. And I should say, we are waiting for the
state regulations to be issued any day now. We have high
anticipation that they will help our communities, and it is not
enough to do this though on a state-by-state basis because
currently New Jersey is the only state that has passed a law
that says you should deny permits under certain circumstances
based on cumulative impacts.
Some other states are interested, but that doesn't replace
national legislation. How about all of the vast majority of
states that are not contemplating passing such cumulative
impact legislation? All those other communities in those states
should be protected, and the EJ For All Act would help to
protect them.
Mr. Garcia. Last week, this Committee held a hearing to
examine the lack of justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion
within environmental non-government organizations and
grantmaking foundations and how this creates a barrier to
robust public participation in the decision-making process,
particularly for those in marginalized communities.
But as we know, this problem is broader and beyond NGOs and
foundations. So, Dr. Sheats, communities of color have always
been at the forefront of the environmental justice movement,
but perhaps don't get as much recognition as other leaders in
this space.
How do we ensure that communities of color continue leading
the conversation and movement, in 30 seconds?
Dr. Sheats. You have to give them the resources so they
have the capacity to do so, and we ask that allies who work
with us, work with those communities, let those communities
lead.
Mr. Garcia. To the point. You have time to spare.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman, and the
gentleman yields.
Let me now turn to the gentlelady from Massachusetts,
Representative Trahan. You have 5 minutes.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership on this issue. And thank you to the witnesses for
joining us today to consider this important legislation.
As part of today's conversation about environmental
justice, I would like to highlight the important efforts we
must take to clean up brownfield sites that litter our
communities.
In fact, the other Committee I sit on, Energy and Commerce,
is holding a separate hearing on them today as well.
Brownfields, as well as Superfund sites, are
disproportionately found in low-income communities, like Lowell
where I grew up. They make it hard for businesses to open in
these areas, stalling economic development.
Last May, the EPA awarded the city of Lawrence a $500,000
brownfield clean-up grant to clean up the Merrimac Paper site.
Between 1866 and 2005, this site operated as a paper processing
and finishing plant. Unfortunately, despite its location in the
center of Lawrence along the Merrimac River, the factory
produced toxic chemicals, which have contaminated the site with
polynuclear, aromatic hydrocarbons, petroleum, heavy metals,
and other contaminants that stem from transformers, underground
storage tanks, and previous fires within the building.
Cleaning up the Merrimac Paper site will free up nearly 5
acres for redevelopment and make it possible to create a future
connection between the Lawrence River Trail and the Merrimac
River Trail.
Lawrence is not the only community in my district that is
coping with brownfields. The city of Lowell has a long history
of redeveloping several brownfields into signature projects:
the Paul Tsongas Arena, the Lasha Park, the GM Garage, the
Hamilton Canal District.
And these projects demonstrate the incredible potential we
have to leverage these contaminated locations from hazardous
properties to economic opportunities. Cleaning them up creates
jobs as well as room for small businesses to grow, and for
communities like Lowell and Lawrence, which have limited green
space and vacant land available for redevelopment, converting
these spaces into usable land, for example, parks, river walks,
and economic opportunity is just critical.
Federal investment in brownfield sites is key to
revitalizing communities in Massachusetts and across our
country. Fortunately, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
included $1.5 billion for brownfield remediation and
revitalization, and communities like Lawrence and Lowell will
be able to use these types of investments to transform
contaminated sites into community assets like public parks and
green spaces that can help communities thrive and prosper.
Ms. Cortez, I know you have already spoken extensively on
the importance of brownfields, but can you speak more to the
work you do to revitalize brownfields locally and the
opportunity we have in these areas to provide healthy outdoor
recreation spaces and environmental amenities in environmental
justice communities that lack access to such amenities now.
Ms. Cortez. Yes, thank you. I think similar to what you
mention in Lowell and I'm sure in other areas as well, our
communities, most of the brownfields that I know of were either
paint manufacturers, metal manufacturers, chrome platers, and
landfills.
So, as they leave, they leave this behind and leave behind
the compound gases, metals on the floor, and other such things
that continue to harm the community.
One of the big issues and why funding is so important is
because what is happening is that private developers purchase
these brownfields and they want to turn over their profit. So,
what happens is that the only thing that can be redeveloped--
because when you redevelop you have to clean, so these
developers end up doing a cleanup, but because they have to pay
for the cleanup, they make sure that they have a business that
is going to yield them a significant amount of profit.
So, what we see is that they get cleaned up to put other
polluters there. That is literally what we see, is they are
cleaning up to put more polluters there, and that does not
allow for greenspaces.
So, Federal funding that has already come through our hoods
is super important to allow for green spaces that so
desperately need to be created.
And in addition to that, these sites are so big that what
we see is right now in our urban neighborhoods, all we have
access to are pocket parks. That is a great start. That is not
enough. That is not enough for substantial recreation, so these
types of investments into brownfields are very important.
Mrs. Trahan. Yes, if you could just like bring it home for
us, how will the Environmental Justice For All Act help support
the more equitable access to parks and recreational
opportunities for these underserved and economically
disadvantaged communities?
Ms. Cortez. Yes. EJ For All will be able to provide funding
so that we can have these spaces cleaned and have green spaces
accessible to the communities that are most impacted and do not
have access currently to these types of facilities.
Mrs. Trahan. Thank you so much for that and for all the
work that you do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Let me introduce--not a member of the Committee, but part
of it today for Committee action. Madam Chair, Ms. Maloney, are
you joining us or have you joined us?
Ms. Maloney. Yes, I am here. We are trying to get the Zoom
going. But I am on it.
The Chairman. OK. You are recognized.
Ms. Maloney. Thank you so much, Chairman Grijalva, and
thanks to you and Congressman McEachin for writing this
terrific bill.
Communities like mine need the Environmental Justice For
All Act to become law. My constituents in western Queens live
in an area that has become and is called ``Asthma Alley.''
Across the street from Queensbridge Houses, the largest public
housing development in the country, is the Ravenswood
Generating Station, the dirtiest fossil fuel plant in the
state.
If you can believe it, there are 3 more peakers that burn
fossil fuels on the Ravenswood site, 2 more peakers just two
blocks away, and 10 within a mile, 24 just in that
neighborhood, and 91 across the city.
That is too many and that is why we have environmental
health challenges and problems.
Millions of people in New York live within a mile of these
plants, and if you live near one, you probably live near many.
Enough is enough. We need to stop polluting and harming
frontline communities. We need to pass your Environmental
Justice For All Act, and we need all Members of Congress to go
home to their districts, meet with local environmental justice
communities and ask how they can best fight for relief from
toxic pollution for constituents that get the short end of the
stick every time a polluter comes to town.
For some reason in New York, they put all of the pollution
in one area, and it is really a justice neighborhood usually.
The Oversight Committee worked with the environmental
justice leaders in New York's PEAK Coalition. We found that
while each of the city's 91 peakers and baseload plants may
stay under emissions' thresholds individually, the amount of
pollution they spew together is just too much, especially when
added to the thousands of gas and diesel boilers and generators
in buildings across our city.
It is more than our bodies can handle. It is too much for
our children. To a child's lungs, it makes no difference if
soot comes from 1 of the smokestacks or from 10. It should not
make a difference in the eyes of the law, and with the
Environmental Justice For All Act it will not.
In collaboration with Chairman Grijalva, members of this
Environmental Justice Working Group, frontline communities
across the country, and the authors of the Environmental
Justice National Climate Platform, I wrote the Justice and
Power Plant Permitting Act to complement his efforts.
My bill, H.R. 6548, builds on Environmental Justice For All
by inserting the cumulative impacts model into the permitting
of fossil fuel powered plants and other sources of air
pollution as prohibiting these sources if they cause harm.
With one of the country's leading practitioners in
developing this bill, and he is here today, Dr. Sheats, I would
like to submit a list to the panel, your panel and to you, Mr.
Chairman, of groups across the country that are supporting my
bill, for the record, and they should be supporting yours.
Dr. Sheats, the cumulative impacts framework has been a
profound success in state law, in state permitting decisions.
It is long past time that Congress put in place a national
framework.
What is your message to Members of Congress who may be
unfamiliar with this concept or unsure whether to support
cumulative impact bills like Chairman Grijalva's and
Congressman McEachin's and mine?
Dr. Sheats?
Dr. Sheats. I think that you pretty much said it, but let
me add that environmental justice communities, low-income
communities, communities of color have been working toward this
for years, saying that this gap in our laws has to be plugged.
There has to be some way to take into account the total amount
of pollution in the neighborhood.
It is just so unfair that these multiple sources keep going
into the same neighborhoods. The time is now, and we are glad
so many people are at least starting to listen and taking this
seriously.
And we really thank you and your colleagues in Congress for
paying attention to this issue.
Ms. Maloney. I think another item that is troubling is they
took the permitting process and gave it to the states. Yet, it
is the Federal Government that wrote the Clean Air and Clean
Water Acts.
And yet, they are looking at one source of pollution and
adding more and more peaker plants to the same neighborhoods.
Could you comment on the permitting process? It is not
working because they are continuing to pollute communities,
particularly communities of color, with polluting plants over
and over and over again, and they put so many of them in one
area.
Dr. Sheats. And the hard reality is that at some point the
permitting process has to say enough is enough, and at some
point, due to cumulative impacts and environmental justice, the
permitting process has to say we are not going to put more
polluting facilities in these neighborhoods that already have
more than their fair share of facilities.
Ms. Maloney. Well, that is the main point I want to make,
that we have to change our permitting process, and we have to
pass the Environmental Justice For All Act.
I congratulate Congressmen Grijalva and McEachin for their
leadership on this. We should pass it out of Committee and to
the Floor for a vote.
And I thank you for allowing me to share with you my
support for your bill, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Let me now invite any Committee member who had not had the
opportunity to comment or to question our witnesses to ask for
time and I will be more than happy to do that or else I will
move into closing the meeting.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Who seeks recognition?
Mr. Stauber. It's Stauber, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Stauber.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair, because in my opening statement we
had some technical difficulties, I am going to ask that my
opening statement be put into the record.
And then I would ask that Mayor Brower's Op-Ed dated
January 24, 2020, be also placed in the record.
And then the last request of you, Mr. Chair, would you
please share the letter to Secretary Haaland regarding the
Willow Project? Can you share that with the entire Committee?
The Chairman. Absolutely, and also all of the signatories
on the letter as well. Every office will receive it.
Thank you for requesting that.
So ordered.

[The information follows:]
OPINION -- COMMENTARY

Goldman Sachs to Native Alaskans: Drop Dead

The bank claims to value `stakeholder engagement' but dropped Arctic
drilling without consulting us.

By Harry Brower Jr.
Jan. 24, 2020 6:33 pm ET

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Pipelines in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska, Feb. 16, 2017.

Photo: Daniel Acker/Bloomberg News

Utqiagvik, Alaska

As the mayor of Alaska's North Slope Borough, I represent about 10,000
people in an area larger than most states. Beneath our lands are some
of the largest oil and gas reserves in the world, including Prudhoe Bay
and the coastal plain of the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge.

Since the 19th century, when our Inupiat ancestors made initial contact
with the West, we have worked to maintain a balance between the modern
world and our rich cultural inheritance. Largely because of the oil and
gas under our lands, which are developed using the highest
environmental standards, we have come far. My biggest fear is that we
will be set back in our quest--this time by those who claim to care
about us but are using my lands and my people as symbols for a larger
political goal.

Last month, Goldman Sachs announced it will no longer fund oil and gas
development in the Arctic region. The announcement came as a shock to
me and my constituents, particularly because the New York-based
investment bank claims ``stakeholder engagement'' and ``consultation''
with Indigenous peoples are core business principles. No one will be
more affected by Goldman Sachs's decision than the people of Alaska's
North Slope, yet we learned about it in the media.

By ignoring the concerns of Alaska Natives and basking in positive
publicity, Goldman Sachs demonstrated the condescending, subtly racist
attitude that too often has been the hallmark of the way Westerners
deal with Indigenous people. Had anyone at Goldman Sachs bothered to
ask us what we thought about funding energy plays on the North Slope,
here's what we would have said:

From the time of Western contact until we were able to claim the rights
to our lands, the people of the North Slope and other Indigenous
Alaskan communities suffered and lived under horrific conditions. In
1953, researchers from the University of Pittsburgh traveled throughout
rural Alaska conducting a health survey. The visitors were shocked by
what they found.

``The Indigenous peoples of Native Alaska are the victims of sickness,
crippling conditions and premature death to a degree exceeded in very
few parts of the world,'' the team wrote. ``Among them, health problems
are nearly out of hand.'' They documented ``the large numbers of the
tuberculosis [sufferers], the crippled, the blind, the deaf, the
malnourished and the desperately ill.''

These were my direct forbears--including my mother--and the ancestors
of many who still live on the North Slope. In the face of such
desperate poverty, our ancestors--some still alive--organized to get
access to our lands and resources. Elders, including my father, helped
organize Alaska Natives throughout the state. They formed associations.
They started a newspaper.

They traveled to Washington in large numbers, some even sleeping in
tents outside, to lobby Congress for the Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act of 1971, the largest lands claim act in history. The act
transferred ownership of what had been federal land to the Indigenous
people who lived there and paved the way for North Slope oil production
as well as logging, mining and fishing rights in other areas of the
state.

I'm proud that Prudhoe Bay has produced 18 billion barrels of oil since
1977, contributing billions of dollars to state coffers and funding
development in Native Alaskan communities. Today I see fellow residents
becoming doctors, lawyers, teachers and engineers. Some, like me, have
become whaling captains.

We have a long way to go to enjoy the amenities that most people in the
``lower 48'' take for granted. But thanks to oil production, our
children are no longer forced to live hundreds of miles away from their
families simply to attend high school. We are able to eat our native
foods, practice our native ceremonies and speak in our native tongues.
Many of us now live near a cutting-edge medical clinic. We can heat our
homes, turn on our lights with a flick of the switch, and in some cases
we even have indoor plumbing. We are no longer one whaling hunt from
starvation.

We are able to have all this because we treasure and protect our land
and wildlife--the resources that executives and environmental groups in
cities thousands of miles away claim to care about. The way we see it,
caring about the land and wildlife should also mean caring about the
Indigenous people who inhabit the land--and that means knowing us,
which Goldman Sachs hasn't bothered to do. We aren't hungry for oil, we
are hungry for progress and understanding from those on the East Coast
and beyond. We don't need your protection or judgment. We need your
respect. We need to be treated like fellow Americans.

Goldman Sachs says its decision to forgo participation in Arctic
drilling projects was born of a desire to fight climate change. But
given its business interests in oil-producing states around the world,
including involvement in last year's initial public offering of Saudi
Arabia's oil company, Aramco, that can't be true.

Goldman executives are simply looking to curry political favor with
powerful green interests. The cost of Goldman Sachs's hypocrisy will be
paid by my people, who may soon be on a path back to the deprivation
and hardship our ancestors worked so hard to leave behind.

Mr. Brower, a whaling captain, was elected mayor of Alaska's North
Slope Borough in 2016.

______

The Chairman. Let me thank the witnesses and the Members
for their questions.
Achieving environmental justice for all is a major
priority, and Congress, I really believe needs to act with the
level of urgency that it deserves.
And without objection, I would like to enter into the
record the many letters of support the Committee has received
from hundreds of organizations for H.R. 2021, from grassroot
community organizations and public health advocates.
So ordered.

[The information follows:]

Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments

Mount Rainier, Maryland

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

The Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments (ANHE) writes to
offer our strong support for the Environmental Justice for All Act
(H.R. 2021). We urge committee members to advance this important
legislation quickly to begin remedying the long history of
environmental racism and injustice, and cumulative and disproportionate
health and environmental impacts, that affects communities of color,
low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous nations and communities,
across the country.

This legislation is directly in line with ANHE's core mission and
vision, which the organization bases on both the Nursing Code of Ethics
and the Nursing Scope and Standards of Practice. ANHE upholds the
rights of all individuals to have access to healthy and safe
environments free from toxic pollutants, access to food and products
free from toxic chemicals, and most importantly the right and
opportunities to determine the needs of one's own community and its
future.

Decades of research and evidence, and the many testimonies of
impacted people and communities themselves, have documented a history
of cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards and impacts imposed
on communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous
communities. These affected peoples and communities have themselves
developed and demanded solutions to these injustices and harms for some
time. The extensive public input process that informed the Act's
creation reflects this history and evidence, and has produced
legislation uniquely influenced by the people and communities it seeks
to help.

We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities.
This Act has the potential to be immeasurably beneficial to the health
and advancement of communities that have been marginalized and
overlooked for far too long. We urge the Committee, and any other
committees with jurisdiction over this legislation, to begin to correct
these injustices and address this legacy of harm, by promptly passing
the bill out of Committee and sending it on to the full House of
Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by,

Katie Huffling, DNP, RN, CNM, FAAN
Executive Director

______

Anna Julia Cooper Center

Winston-Salem, North Carolina

February 14, 2022

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking Member,
Natural Resources Committee,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

The undersigned organizations write to offer our strong support for
the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge committee
members to advance this important legislation quickly to begin
remedying the long history of environmental racism and injustice, and
cumulative and disproportionate health and environmental impacts, that
affects communities across the country.
The undersigned organizations work together as members and allies
of the Coming Clean collaborative network to reform the industrial
chemical and fossil fuel industries so they are no longer a source of
harm and to secure systemic changes that allow a safe chemical and
clean energy economy to flourish. We are working toward a world where
no community's health, safety, or well-being is considered an
`acceptable' sacrifice to develop energy or to create and dispose of
products. We know we can build a world where our climate and economy
are nontoxic, sustainable, and just for all--and we're working to make
this vision a reality.
Our work together is guided by the Louisville Charter for Safer
Chemicals: A Platform for Creating a Safe and Healthy Environment
Through Innovation, a vision and set of principles to guide
transformation of the chemical industry, backed by policy
recommendations. The very beginning of the Charter recognizes that:
Justice is overdue for people of color, low-income people, Tribes and
Native/Indigenous communities, women, children and farmworkers, who
experience disproportionate impacts from cumulative sources. This
chemical burden is unprecedented in human history and represents a
major failure of the current chemical management system.
The urgent need to address disproportionate and cumulative impacts
is a central tenet of the Louisville Charter (endorsed by over 100
diverse organizations across the country). One of the ten foundational
principles of the Charter reads:

Prevent Disproportionate Exposures and Hazards, and Reduce
Cumulative Impacts on Environmental Justice Communities.

Adopt policies and practices that remedy the disproportionate
chemical hazards and exposures faced by communities of color, Tribes
and Native/Indigenous communities, and low-income communities, and that
address combined burdens of multiple pollutants, multiple sources, and
accumulation over time with vulnerabilities that exist in a community.
Break down and end discriminatory practices and policies that result in
disproportionate and cumulative impacts in these communities. To this
end, grassroots, fenceline and environmental justice communities must
be at the table when developing and advancing chemical policies at all
levels.
Other core Charter principles include the need to act with
foresight to protect health and prevent pollution; take immediate
action to protect, restore, and strengthen communities; and ensure the
public and workers fully have the right to know, participate, and
decide. The full Louisville Charter for Safer Chemicals, and a list of
endorsing organizations, can be found at www.louisvillecharter.org.
As the Committee likely knows well, given the extensive process of
research and public input that supported development of the Act, the
history of cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards and impacts
imposed on communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous communities is very well documented. Decades of research and
evidence were supplemented by a year-long public input process through
which disproportionately impacted communities and constituencies
detailed the harms and impacts that they experience, and the solutions
and remedies that would be most beneficial to them, producing
legislation uniquely influenced by the people and communities it seeks
to help.

Research supporting by Coming Clean network members and allies
which supports the need for the Act, and the policy solutions it
contains, include:

Who's in Danger? Race, Poverty, and Chemical Disasters: A
Demographic Analysis of Chemical Disaster Vulnerability Zones
(published by the Environmental Justice Health Alliance for Chemical
Policy Reform, or EJHA) documented that the percentage of Blacks living
in fenceline zones near 3,433 high-risk chemical facilities is 75%
greater than for the U.S. as a whole, and the percentage of Latinos is
60% greater. The poverty rate in these areas is 50% higher than for the
U.S. as a whole.
Life at the Fenceline: Understanding Cumulative Health Hazards in
Environmental Justice Communities (EJHA, Coming Clean, Campaign for
Healthier Solutions) found that in several communities that host
clusters of hazardous facilities, the fenceline zones near these
facilities are disproportionately Black, Latino, and low income, and
face multiple health hazards and risks. In addition, the most
vulnerable neighborhoods near these facilities (those that are both low
income and have low access to healthy foods) are even more heavily and
disproportionately impacted.
Watered Down Justice (Natural Resources Defense Council, Coming
Clean, and EJHA) found that the rate of violations of the Safe Drinking
Water Act increased in communities of color, low-income communities,
and areas with more non-native English speakers. The analysis also
found that water systems that serve these communities also stayed in
violation for longer periods of time, for more violations, for more
contaminants.
Environmental Justice for Delaware (EJHA, Delaware Concerned
Residents for Environmental Justice, Coming Clean, et al) found that
people in seven communities along the industrial corridor in the
northern portion of Delaware's New Castle County face a substantial
potential cumulative health risk from (1) exposure to toxic air
pollution, (2) their proximity to polluting industrial facilities and
hazardous chemical facilities, and (3) proximity to contaminated waste
sites. These health risks are substantially greater than those of
residents of a wealthier and predominantly White community in Delaware,
and for Delaware as a whole.

Our organizations strongly support the Act's central elements,
which are important steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and
ensuring the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--
regardless of color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect
to the development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits will
not be issued if projects cannot demonstrate a reasonable
certainty of no harm to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction over
this legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

______

Center for Earth Energy & Democracy

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

We write to offer our strong support for the Environmental Justice
for All Act (H.R. 2021) and urge committee members to address
environmental injustices by advancing this important legislation. We
support this legislation as aligned with our mission centered on
creating a just, pollution free energy economy; and grounded in our
values of self-determination in Indigenous, low income communities and
communities of color.

We strongly support the following central elements in the Act:

Providing research, education and outreach grants to
support community-based projects that address environmental
and public health issues in environmental justice
communities.

Addressing cumulative impacts of pollution in permitting
decisions and ensuring that permits to facilities
demonstrate a reasonable certainty of no harm to human
health.

Directing the federal government and federal agencies to
develop environmental justice strategies and regularly
report on implementation and progress.

Supporting communities and workers as they transition away
from fossil fuel dependent economies.

We commend all of the environmental justice advocates who
contributed to this legislation. We hope committee members engage
environmental justice communities as the Environmental Justice for All
Act continues its journey through Congress.

Respectfully submitted by,

Ansha Zaman,
Federal Policy Director

______

CENTER FOR FOOD SAFETY

Washington, DC

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Our organization writes to offer our strong support for the
Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge committee
members to advance this important legislation quickly to begin
remedying the long history of environmental racism and injustice, and
cumulative and disproportionate health and environmental impacts, that
affects communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous nations and communities, across the country.
We support this legislation as aligned with our mission and values,
which are supportive of environmental justice. We have established our
own Ethnic Diversity and Inclusiveness Team and hold monthly training
sessions with our staff.
Decades of research and evidence, and the many, many testimonies of
the impacted people and communities themselves, have documented a
history of cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards and impacts
imposed on communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous communities. These affected peoples and communities have
themselves developed and demanded solutions to these injustices and
harms for some time. The extensive public input process that informed
the Act's creation reflects this history and evidence, and has produced
legislation uniquely influenced by the people and communities it seeks
to help.

We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction over
this legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Respectfully yours,

Jaydee Hanson,
Policy Director

______

Children's Environmental Health Network

February 10, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Our organization writes to offer our strong support for the
Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge committee
members to advance this important legislation quickly to begin
remedying the long history of environmental racism and injustice, and
cumulative and disproportionate health and environmental impacts, that
affects communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous nations and communities, across the country.

The Children's Environmental Health Network (CEHN) supports this
legislation because it is aligned with our mission and values--to
protect the developing child from environmental health hazards and
promote a healthier environment.

Decades of research and evidence, and the many, many testimonies of
the impacted people and communities themselves, have documented a
history of cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards and impacts
imposed on communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous communities. These affected peoples and communities have
themselves developed and demanded solutions to these injustices and
harms for some time. The extensive public input process that informed
the Act's creation reflects this history and evidence and has produced
legislation uniquely influenced by the people and communities it seeks
to help.

We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies.

These urgently needed policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health.

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities.

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies.

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas, and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies.

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
have a moral imperative to protect our most vulnerable, our children--
children of today as well future generations. We urge the Committee,
and any other committees with jurisdiction over this legislation, to
begin to correct these injustices and address this legacy of harm, by
promptly passing the bill out of Committee and sending it on to the
full House of Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by,

Nsedu Obot Witherspoon, MPH,
Executive Director

______

CleanAirNow KC

February 8, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Our organization writes to offer our strong support for the
Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge committee
members to advance this important legislation quickly to begin
remedying the long history of environmental racism and injustice, and
cumulative and disproportionate health and environmental impacts, that
affects communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous nations and communities, across the country.
We support this legislation as aligned with our mission and values,
which are to work with and uplift communities most threatened by air
pollution; particularly those with vulnerable populations affected by
multiple, disproportionate environmental health burdens. CleanAirNow
aims to support and amplify the voices of these communities to increase
their organizational capacity for effective participation in local,
state, and federal policy in order to achieve environmental justice,
health equity, and climate justice for their communities. CleanAirNow
is devoted to help facilitate and maximize opportunities for cross-
disciplinary and community-based participatory research (CBPR),
bridging organizational and geographic boundaries to improve the health
and lives of citizens across our service area.
CleanAirNow recently released this report ``Environment Racism in
the Heartland'' which highlights the environmental racism communities
endure while we are trying to fight for equity, and health and being
exposed to cumulative impacts from government inaction and polluters.
Lugo-Martinez, Environmental Racism in the Heartland, Fighting for
Equity and Health in Kansas City, November 2021, Union of Concerned
Scientists and CleanAirNow, https://doi.org/10.47923/2021.14322.
Decades of research and evidence, and the many, many testimonies of
the impacted people and communities themselves, have documented a
history of cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards and impacts
imposed on communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous communities. These affected peoples and communities have
themselves developed and demanded solutions to these injustices and
harms for some time. The extensive public input process that informed
the Act's creation reflects this history and evidence, and has produced
legislation uniquely influenced by the people and communities it seeks
to help.

We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction over
this legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by,

Atenas I. Mena,               Beto Lugo Martinez,
Co-Executive Director         Executive Director

______

CLEAN WATER ACTION

Washington, DC

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Clean Water Action strongly supports the Environmental Justice for
All Act (H.R. 2021). This bill will help begin remedying the long
history of environmental racism and injustice in our communities. It
will also begin to remedy cumulative and disproportionate health and
environmental impacts that affect communities of color, low-income
communities, and Native/Indigenous nations and communities across the
country.

The legislation is aligned with our mission and values, which are
to protect our environment, health, economic well-being and community
quality of life. Clean Water Action organizes strong grassroots groups
and coalitions, to solve environmental and community problems such as
those included in the Environmental Justice for All Act. Comprehensive
environmental justice solutions serve not only to benefit directly
impacted communities, but also to improve social and environmental
livelihoods for all. We strongly support the Act's central elements,
which are important steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and
ensuring the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--
regardless of color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect
to the development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions.

Codifying and bolstering President Clinton's 1994
Executive Order by directing federal agencies to develop
environmental justice strategies and regularly report on
implementation and progress.

Ensuring that federal agencies consequentially include
diverse communities in public health research, data
collection, and analysis.

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies.

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies.;

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to the disproportionate harms that have been experienced by communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction, to
begin to correct these injustices and address this legacy of harm by
promptly passing the bill out of Committee and sending it on to the
full House of Representatives.

Respectfully,

Lynn Thorp,                   Jennifer Peters,
National Campaigns Director   National Water Programs Director

Kim Gaddy,                    Sean Jackson,
National Environmental
Justice Director              National Campaigns Coordinator

Thea Louis,
National Water Projects
Coordinator

______

Coalition for the Delaware River Watershed

February 11, 2022

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources,
U.S. House of Representatives,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva:

The Coalition for the Delaware River Watershed supports and urges
passage of the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We thank
you for your leadership on this issue and pledge our support to move
this bill through Congress and to the President's desk to be signed
into law. Our coalition represents more than 175 organizations across
the Delaware River watershed, which cover more than 13,539 square miles
and are home to over 13.3 million residents across 4 states.
It is no coincidence that marginalized communities continue to bear
the burden of living in close proximity to hazardous sites, facing
higher risk for exposure to toxic chemicals and associated health
impacts like asthma and lead poisoning. As our nation grapples with
racism, we must recognize that our environmental laws and policies
contribute to this never-ending cycle. The Environmental Justice for
All Act seeks to break this cycle and would strengthen legal
protections to combat environmental injustices. With this bill, people
in cities such as Camden, Trenton, Wilmington, and Philadelphia, could
bring statutory claims for damages under common law and request
injunctive relief for environmentally caused health crisis events that
have severe impacts on children and future generations. It would
strengthen the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by restoring the ability of
individuals to bring actions against entities engaging in
discriminatory practices.
All too often, pollution disproportionately impacts Indigenous
communities, people of color, and low-income families. This bill would
help to protect such communities by requiring the consideration of
cumulative impacts in permitting decisions under the Clean Water Act
and the Clean Air Act. It would require federal agencies to provide
early and meaningful community involvement, including tribal
representation, under the National Environmental Policy Act when
proposing an action affecting an environmental justice community.
Additionally, this bill would establish a fund to use revenues from
fees on oil, gas, and coal industries to support communities and
workers as they transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent
economies.
Furthermore, this bill emphasizes the need for equitable access to
the outdoors and nature, which provides countless benefits to
underserved communities. Studies show that a thriving environment is
invaluable for emotional, mental, and physical health, and Covid-19 has
provided a real-world case study of the importance of getting outdoors
in a safe and clean environment. This bill would prioritize projects
that create access to parks and recreational opportunities in urban
areas. This bill would also authorize $75 million annually for grants
to support research, program development, and implementation of
projects to improve environmental and public health issues in
environmental justice communities.
This legislation would benefit millions of residents in the
Delaware River watershed by ensuring equal protection from harmful and
unnecessary exposure to pollutants in the environment. We must act now
to undo the burdens that have been placed on marginalized communities
suffering from adverse public health impacts. Ignoring the lack of
regulation and enforcement of key environmental protections will
perpetuate marginalized communities. Thank you again for your
leadership on H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act, and we
pledge our strong support for this legislation.
Please contact Kelly Knutson at
[email protected]
with
any questions or concerns.

______

PRESS RELEASE
Statement for the Record
Equitable and Just National Climate Platform Co-authors Offer Strong
Support for the Environmental Justice for All Act

WASHINGTON (Feb. 15, 2022)--In response to the House Natural
Resources Committee hearing today on the Environmental Justice for All
Act (H.R. 2021), Equitable and Just National Climate Platform, a
coalition of environmental justice and national environmental groups,
released the following statement:

``We offer our strong support for the Environmental Justice for All
Act (H.R. 2021) and urge House Natural Resources Committee members to
confront the legacy of environmental racism in the United States by
advancing this important legislation. High concentrations of toxic
pollution, persistent and systematic racial discrimination and lack of
access to economic opportunities, have created disproportionately high
environmental and public health risks in communities of color and low-
income communities. We must confront environmental racism head-on by
prioritizing solutions that reduce pollution in environmental justice
communities at a scale needed to significantly improve public health
and quality of life. We urge lawmakers to develop equitable policies
that reduce toxic pollution in all its forms.

``We commend the environmental justice advocates who contributed to
this legislation along with Chair Grijalva and Representative McEachin,
who led the community-driven process to incorporate the needs and
perspectives of environmental justice communities into this Act.''

Witnesses for the hearing include Dr. Nicky Sheats, Director of the
Center for the Urban Environment at Kean University's John S. Watson
Institute for Urban Policy and Research, a founding member of the New
Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance, and a co-author and inaugural
signatory of the Equitable and Just National Climate Platform. His
testimony is here.

The Act contains the following:

Requires consideration of cumulative impacts in permitting
decisions under the Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act.

Codifies President Clinton's 1994 Executive Order 12898 by
directing federal agencies to develop environmental justice
strategies and regularly report on implementation and
progress.

Requires federal agencies to provide community involvement
opportunities under the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) when proposing an action affecting an environmental
justice community.

Requires Tribal representation throughout the NEPA process
for an activity that could impact an Indian Tribe,
including activities impacting off-reservation lands and
sacred sites.

Amends Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Funds research grant programs to investigate personal and
childcare products containing chemicals linked to adverse
health impacts.

Supports access to parks and recreational opportunities,
prioritizing projects and recreational opportunities that
benefit underserved urban communities.

Authorizes $75 million annually for grants to support
research, education, outreach, development, and
implementation of projects to address environmental and
public health issues in environmental justice communities.

Establishes a Federal Energy Transition Economic
Development Assistance Fund using revenues from new fees on
the oil, gas, and coal industries to support communities
and workers as they transition away from greenhouse gas-
dependent economies.

The Equitable & Just National Climate Platform celebrated its two-
year anniversary on July 17, 2021. In 2019, signatories to the platform
achieved consensus on a historic plan calling for national climate
action that confronts racial, economic, and environmental injustice as
it enacts deep cuts in climate pollution and accelerates a pollution-
free energy future that benefits all communities. The co-authors
included leaders from a dozen environmental justice organizations and
six national environmental groups. More here.

For more information, please contact Jake Thompson at

[email protected]
or Anahi Naranjo at
[email protected]

______

Friends Committee on National Legislation
Statement for the Record
on the Environmental Justice for All Act
March 1, 2022

Chair Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and members of the
Committee:

The Friends Committee on National Legislation (FCNL) welcomes this
opportunity to submit testimony to the House Natural Resources
Committee in relation to its February 15, 2022, full Committee hearing
on the Environmental Justice for All Act.
FCNL supports legislation to address long-standing environmental
injustices in the United States, including the Environmental Justice
for All Act of 2021. As a Quaker advocacy organization, FCNL works to
advance legislation that support peace, justice, and environmental
stewardship. Our vision for the world stems from the Quaker belief in
the worth and dignity inherently present in each person.
As long-time advocates, we know that opportunities to pass
transformational environmental legislation in the Congress are rare.
Chair Grijalva, you and your colleagues are here at one of those rare
opportunities. You can vote to pass legislation that extends justice to
communities across the U.S. who have long sought relief from
environmental racism.
The environmental challenges facing communities--low-income and
minority communities--are, at heart, rooted a long history of policies
that entrenched segregation, exacerbated economic inequality, and
exposed them to multiple environmental hazards. The results of these
policies can be seen in 2022 in communities like St. James Parish,
Louisiana, where residents of the Diamond neighborhood are subjected to
poor air quality due to an industrial facility sited directly across
the fence-line from people's homes.
In the past year, FCNL has been heartened to see initiatives by the
Biden Administration to address this environmental crisis. The
Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, for
example, established the White House Environmental Justice Advisory
Council and set out the goals of the Justice40 Initiative. We are also
grateful to the Congress for passing the Infrastructure Innovation and
Jobs Act (IIJA) in November 2021. That bill contains significant
funding to remove pollution from the water and soil, take down highways
built through minority communities, and expand public transit options.
These are moves in the right direction.
We believe, however, that more remains to be done. That is why FCNL
supports the Environmental Justice for All Act of 2021, introduced by
Chair Grijalva and Representative McEachin. We see as key this
legislation's provisions strengthening Title VI of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act to prohibit discrimination based on disparate impact, or
actions that appear neutral but have a lopsided impact on people of
color. We also support the Environmental Justice for All Act's
requirement to consider cumulative impacts over time in permitting
decisions under the Clean Water and Clean Air Acts. This will ensure
that permits will not be issued if the project fails to show that it
will not harm human health. These two provisions provide the legal
foundations for a strong response to environmental injustice.
The Quaker civil rights and social justice leader Bayard Rustin
said that ``one has to fight for justice for all.'' The 117th Congress
has a moral responsibility to lift the burden of injustice from the
shoulders of the communities that have borne the overwhelming burden of
pollution. We ask the Chair, members of the Committee, and the Congress
to meet this moment, show that the Congress listens to the voices of
the people, and pass the Environmental Justice for All Act.

Addendum: Statements from FCNL's Advocacy Corps Members

``Growing up in New Mexico, I have been familiar with adverse
and harmful effects of pollution on our communities and
ecosystems. My state has been fighting for years for federal
water protections. We have a saying in New Mexico ``El Aqua Es
Vida,'' meaning water is life. Like the waterways we have in
our state, our communities, families, and friends are all
connected. Pollution affects all of us. I am asking that on
behalf of your constituents, you protect the place you and they
call home by supporting the Environmental Justice for All Act.
I am asking for you to preserve the natural beauty of life and
our experience with it.''

--John Hoang, New Mexico*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Statement has been edited for clarity.

``I want to show people that their voices are loud, and that
it's important to speak on issues that have affected one's own
community. Passing the Environmental Justice for All Act is
critical for more environmental legislation and climate change
action to gain traction. Our environment has long outlived us,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and urgent action must be taken soon to protect it.''

--Taylor Powell-Abbinante, Ohio*

``The current situation in Ukraine and the newly released
United Nations Climate Report should serve to remind us how
vulnerable we all are to the perils of wartime and climate
change. Together we bear witness to our interdependency as the
World unites to stand against the poison Putin is inflicting
because know what happens in Ukraine doesn't necessarily stay
in Ukraine. If any Democracy is threatened, all Democracy is
threatened. The same holds true for our natural environment. If
one community in our world is suffering the negative impacts of
toxic waste or pollution, we will all have to face the
consequences. We must unite to protect the planet and pass the
Environmental Justice for All Act. If any one of us is not
protected, none of us are protected.''

--Marianne Wareham, Florida*

______

GreenLatinos

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

We write in support of the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R.
2021). While we know that some progress has been made, we must
acknowledge the reality of the present: Brown, Black, and Indigenous
communities are still disproportionately affected by environmental and
climate catastrophes facing our country. This is particularly unjust
given that we had the least to do with creating them.
Our communities cannot wait, we need action to achieve our
environmental liberation as soon as possible.
We know that the Environmental Justice for All Act is rooted in the
moral principle that all people have the right to pure air, clean
water, and an environment that enriches life. As participants in
providing extensive community feedback on the initial draft, we are
proud that this legislation is informed by the belief that federal
policy can and should seek to achieve environmental justice, health
equity, and climate justice for all communities.
We are heartened to see that the Environmental Justice for All Act
amends and strengthens Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. We are
enthused that this will prohibit discrimination based on disparate
impact and will permit private citizens, residents, and organizations
to seek legal remedy when faced with discrimination.
The core mission of GreenLatinos is to bring about racial and
social justice for all communities through environmental liberation. We
advocate for an equitable world that delivers clean, reliable, and
affordable water; clean air that doesn't choke the lungs of the most
vulnerable; and access to the beauty of our parks and coastlines and
ocean for all to enjoy equitably. It is evident that the climate crisis
and environmental degradation are causing a rapidly escalating
breakdown in civil and human rights, threatening our basic life-
sustaining needs, including access to fresh air, clean water, healthy
food, adequate health care, and shelter in our communities. Any real
solution to addressing this crisis will demand the unprecedented
transformation of every sector of the global economy over the next
decade.
Water Equity
GreenLatinos supports the provisions in the Environmental Justice
For All Act that increase access to clean water for drinking,
recreation, economic stability and for community health. We also
believe that clean and healthy water is vital to a healthy environment.
Water is a human right and unfortunately our communities have access in
disproportionate ways. As such we are pleased to see that the
Environmental Justice For All Act enhances the permitting decisions
under the Clean Water Act and the Clean Air Act. This will help ensure
that permits will not be issued if the project cannot demonstrate a
reasonable certainty of no harm to human health.
Equitable Access and Communication
Our communities have long been excluded from providing input into
the federal environmental process. Urgently needed action on climate
change and environmental justice in an equitable manner can only be
achieved if we center the voices of those most impacted. That is why we
are so pleased to see that the Environmental Justice For All Act
ensures that federal agencies include diverse communities in public
health research, data collection, and analysis. It also requires
federal agencies to provide early and meaningful community involvement
opportunities under NEPA when proposing an action affecting an
environmental justice community. In addition, we are pleased that the
act ensures robust Tribal representation throughout the NEPA process
for an activity that could impact an Indian Tribe, including activities
impacting off-reservation lands and sacred sites.
Public Lands and Ocean
Public Lands and Ocean are often seen as a defining feature of our
nation's character. Throughout our history, exclusion, oppression, and
injustices have traditionally shaped the operations of policies of land
and ocean management agencies and have created real barriers of access
to all overlooked communities. Latinx, Hispano, indio-hispano,
communities from across the nation all have deep-rooted connections to
land and ocean that define our culture and sense of place. As such we
are excited to see that the Environmental Justice For All Act supports
more equitable access to parks and recreational opportunities,
prioritizing projects and recreational opportunities that benefit urban
neighborhoods and underserved communities.
Climate and Clean Air
The public health crisis that wreaks havoc on our communities along
with the climate crisis causes severe diseases like respiratory
illness, cardiovascular disease, and shorter life span. Studies show
that Latinx children in the U.S. are twice as likely as non-Latinx
whites to die from asthma attacks. Nearly one third of Latino children
live in counties where hazardous air pollutant concentrations exceed a
1 in 10,000 cancer risk level. GreenLatinos is heartened to see that
the Environmental Justice for All Act authorizes $75 million annually
for grants to support research, education, outreach, development, and
implementation of projects to address environmental and public health
issues in environmental justice communities, including programs that
improve the air frontline communities breathe and with it, boosts
quality of life.
The climate crisis is already impacting Latino communities across
the country. Latino communities want to see action taken to protect
their health and mitigate the climate crisis. In fact, 86% of Latinx
people support carbon pollution limits on power plants--a key driver of
climate change. In this context, the Environmental Justice For All
Act's establishment of a Federal Energy Transition Economic Development
Assistance Fund is critical to our environmental liberation. Using
revenues from new fees on the oil, gas, and coal industries to support
communities and workers as they transition away from greenhouse gas-
dependent economies is a smart way forward.
For all these reasons, GreenLatinos is proud to support the
Environmental Justice for All Act. We urge all House Committees with
jurisdiction over this legislation to support it as well and to act
expeditiously to bring this important bill to the House floor. Thank
you for your attention.

Sincerely,

Mark Magana,
Founding President and CEO

______

Statement for the Record
Healthy Gulf

As a regional organization working to support clean air, water and
land for communities throughout the Gulf South, Healthy Gulf voices our
strong support for the Environmental Justice for All Act. It's clear
that this piece of legislation was crafted following direct
consultation of our nation's environmental leaders and impacted
residents. McEachin and Grijalva are doing exactly what elected
officials should do, by ensuring that communities closest to the
problem have a seat at the table as we develop policy solutions.
Our community partners, who live at the fenceline of polluting
industries in Texas and Louisiana, have for decades made clear demands:
that our regulatory agencies need to create real opportunities for
meaningful community education and engagement around environmental
issues. That we must take into account the cumulative impacts of
exposure to multiple sources of toxic emissions in the permitting
process. That sacred sites, burial grounds and Indigenous land must be
protected, and that as we shift away from oil, coal and gas, we must
guarantee economic justice for all workers in transition from these
industries.
All of these principles are reflected in the Environmental Justice
for All Act. This is a comprehensive policy plan that will move our
country toward truly guaranteeing what should be the fundamental right
of all its residents: to breathe clean air, to drink clean water, and
to live and thrive in healthy communities.

Respectfully submitted,

Michael Esealuka,
Louisiana Organizer

______

Statement for the Record
Inclusive Louisiana Joins Fight for Environmental Justice For All
Legislation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

St. James the Baptist Parish and the town of Convent are home
to Inclusive Louisiana, an environmental justice group fighting for
cleaner air, safer communities, and stronger federal regulation of
petrochemical companies and heavy industry. Over the past 60 years,
hazardous facilities with dangerous chemicals and emissions have
engulfed the majority Black residents that live in the town. Inclusive
Louisiana believes that the Environmental Justice For All Act,
Sponsored by Chair Raul M. Grijalva and Representative A. Donald
McEachin, ``will address the urgent pollution emergency and climate
crisis that has negatively impacted them and their families. The
legislation is rooted in the moral principle that all people have the
right to pure air, clean water and an environment that enriches life.''
According to Gail Lebouf, codirector of Inclusive, our local government
treats us like we're expendable. We've been crying for 60 years and our
cries are going unheard. If there's any place that cries out for
Environmental Justice, it's St. James Parish.

The legislation will amend and strengthen Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, which will prohibit discrimination based on the
disparate impact we endure as Black, fenceline communities. The act
will also hold companies accountable by allowing those of us impacted
to seek legal remedy when they discriminate. Another key feature of the
legislation includes cumulative impacts, which requires consideration
of the cumulative impacts in permitting decisions under the clean water
and clean air act and ensures that permits will not be issued if the
project cannot demonstrate reasonable certainty of no harm to health.

Inclusive Louisiana is a grassroots community advocate organization
with deep beliefs in our christian faith, and passionate about the
injustices we see imposed everyday on our health, air, water, and soil.
Our mission is to spread enlightenment and hope to all people to create
a fairer and more inclusive society.

______

Interfaith Power & Light

New Mexico & El Paso Region

February 14, 2022

Re: Environmental Justice Act

New Mexico & El Paso Interfaith Power and Light is very supportive
of Environmental Justice for All Act to create a Federal Energy
Transition Economic Development Assistance Fund.
New Mexico is one of the poorest states in the nation. We are the
second largest fossil fuel producing state in the nation. Over decades
the fossil fuel industry has not brought us out of poverty, rather, we
now face lessening water supplies, polluted land and water, orphaned
wells and miles of snaking pipelines from oil and gas sites to tanks
and other fixtures that will probably never be cleaned up. What were
ranching and farming areas seem to be destined for toxic wastelands. We
have uranium mining legacy sites that we still seek funds for clean-up
that we hope will provide training and jobs for our Navajo communities
well into the future. But, we should not have to rely on clean-up of
pollution for job training and jobs. We should not be left as a
sacrifice zone or part of what Pope Francis calls the ``Throw Away
Culture''.
We have created some avenues to begin just transition in our state
and the federal legislation would go along way in moving this forward
for justice and rights for our frontline and underserved communities.
Here is a statement from a community group that we work with in the
Permian Basin.

Statement from Kayley Shoup, Organizer, Citizens Caring for Future,
Frontline Community in SE New Mexico Permian Basin.

``My hometown of Carlsbad, New Mexico is home to the Permian Basin.
Also known as the largest oil field on the planet and likely the
nation's top emitter of methane. While Southeast New Mexico is home to
rich reserves of oil, we are also uniquely positioned to become a
manufacturing hub for many different supplies that are used in the
production of renewable energy. With the investment of time & resources
that The Environmental Justice for All Act will provide we can create
the political will in our communities to transition to a more
sustainable economy, instead of continuing to be shackled to the oil
industry. An industry that not only harms the health of those of us
that live among it, but also harms the world with its contribution to
global warming. Small oil towns in the most prolific basin in the world
want a seat at the table in a green economy, and this act gives us an
opportunity to take that seat.''

For decades rural states like New Mexico have provided fossil fuels
in many forms for the growth of the nation at the expense of
communities. It is morally and ethically responsible that some way to
address just transition be moved forward for our communities.

Peace and good,

Sr. Joan Brown,
Executive Director

______

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

The undersigned organizations write to offer our strong support for
the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge committee
members to advance this important legislation quickly to begin
remedying the long history of environmental racism and injustice, and
cumulative and disproportionate health and environmental impacts, that
affects communities across the country.
The undersigned organizations work together as members and allies
of the Coming Clean collaborative network to reform the industrial
chemical and fossil fuel industries so they are no longer a source of
harm and to secure systemic changes that allow a safe chemical and
clean energy economy to flourish. We are working toward a world where
no community's health, safety, or well-being is considered an
`acceptable' sacrifice to develop energy or to create and dispose of
products. We know we can build a world where our climate and economy
are nontoxic, sustainable, and just for all--and we're working to make
this vision a reality.
Our work together is guided by the Louisville Charter for Safer
Chemicals: A Platform for Creating a Safe and Healthy Environment
Through Innovation, a vision and set of principles to guide
transformation of the chemical industry, backed by policy
recommendations. The very beginning of the Charter recognizes that:
Justice is overdue for people of color, low-income people, Tribes and
Native/Indigenous communities, women, children and farmworkers, who
experience disproportionate impacts from cumulative sources. This
chemical burden is unprecedented in human history and represents a
major failure of the current chemical management system.

The urgent need to address disproportionate and cumulative impacts
is a central tenet of the Louisville Charter (endorsed by over 100
diverse organizations across the country). One of the ten foundational
principles of the Charter reads:

Prevent Disproportionate Exposures and Hazards, and Reduce Cumulative
Impacts on Environmental Justice Communities.

Adopt policies and practices that remedy the disproportionate
chemical hazards and exposures faced by communities of color,
Tribes and Native/Indigenous communities, and low-income
communities, and that address combined burdens of multiple
pollutants, multiple sources, and accumulation over time with
vulnerabilities that exist in a community. Break down and end
discriminatory practices and policies that result in
disproportionate and cumulative impacts in these communities.
To this end, grassroots, fenceline and environmental justice
communities must be at the table when developing and advancing
chemical policies at all levels.

Other core Charter principles include the need to act with
foresight to protect health and prevent pollution; take immediate
action to protect, restore, and strengthen communities; and ensure the
public and workers fully have the right to know, participate, and
decide. The full Louisville Charter for Safer Chemicals, and a list of
endorsing organizations, can be found at www.louisvillecharter.org.
As the Committee likely knows well, given the extensive process of
research and public input that supported development of the Act, the
history of cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards and impacts
imposed on communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous communities is very well documented. Decades of research and
evidence were supplemented by a year-long public input process through
which disproportionately impacted communities and constituencies
detailed the harms and impacts that they experience, and the solutions
and remedies that would be most beneficial to them, producing
legislation uniquely influenced by the people and communities it seeks
to help.

Research supporting by Coming Clean network members and allies
which supports the need for the Act, and the policy solutions it
contains, include:

Who's in Danger? Race, Poverty, and Chemical Disasters: A
Demographic Analysis of Chemical Disaster Vulnerability Zones
(published by the Environmental Justice Health Alliance for Chemical
Policy Reform, or EJHA) documented that the percentage of Blacks living
in fenceline zones near 3,433 high-risk chemical facilities is 75%
greater than for the U.S. as a whole, and the percentage of Latinos is
60% greater. The poverty rate in these areas is 50% higher than for the
U.S. as a whole.

Life at the Fenceline: Understanding Cumulative Health Hazards in
Environmental Justice Communities (EJHA, Coming Clean, Campaign for
Healthier Solutions) found that in several communities that host
clusters of hazardous facilities, the fenceline zones near these
facilities are disproportionately Black, Latino, and low income, and
face multiple health hazards and risks. In addition, the most
vulnerable neighborhoods near these facilities (those that are both low
income and have low access to healthy foods) are even more heavily and
disproportionately impacted.

Watered Down Justice (Natural Resources Defense Council, Coming
Clean, and EJHA) found that the rate of violations of the Safe Drinking
Water Act increased in communities of color, low-income communities,
and areas with more non-native English speakers. The analysis also
found that water systems that serve these communities also stayed in
violation for longer periods of time, for more violations, for more
contaminants.

Environmental Justice for Delaware (EJHA, Delaware Concerned
Residents for Environmental Justice, Coming Clean, et al) found that
people in seven communities along the industrial corridor in the
northern portion of Delaware's New Castle County face a substantial
potential cumulative health risk from (1) exposure to toxic air
pollution, (2) their proximity to polluting industrial facilities and
hazardous chemical facilities, and (3) proximity to contaminated waste
sites. These health risks are substantially greater than those of
residents of a wealthier and predominantly White community in Delaware,
and for Delaware as a whole.

Our organizations strongly support the Act's central elements,
which are important steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and
ensuring the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--
regardless of color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect
to the development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits will
not be issued if projects cannot demonstrate a reasonable
certainty of no harm to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction over
this legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by,

Center for Progressive
Reform                        PODER
National                      Austin, TX

Clean and Healthy New York    River Network
Albany, NY                    National
Clean Power Lake County       TX Campaign for the Environment
Waukegan, IL                  Texas

CleanAirNowKC                 Toxic Free NC
Kansas City                   Durham, North Carolina

Health Prof. for a Healthy
Climate                       Upstream
Minneapolis, Minnesota        National

Lake James Environmental
Assoc.                        UrbanPromise Ministries
Nebo, North Carolina          Camden, New Jersey

Locust Point Community
Garden                        Waterway Advocates
Baltimore, MD                 South Florida

Mother's of Diversity
America                       We the People of Detroit
Dunbar, WV                    Detroit, Michigan

National Family Farm
Coalition                     West End Revitalization
Association
Washington, DC                Mebane, NC 27302

National Women's Health
Network                       WV Environmental Council
National                      Charleston, West Virginia

Oregon Phy. for Social
Responsibility                West Virginia FREE
Oregon                        Charleston, WV

Our Future WV                 Wisconsin's Green Fire
Charleston, WV                Wisconsin

Pennsylvania Council of
Churches                      Women's Voices for the Earth
Harrisburg, PA                National/Montana/Colorado

Pesticide Action Network
National

______

February 15, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

We write in support of the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R.
2021). We commend Chairman Grijalva and Rep. McEachin for creating an
inclusive and open process to develop legislation that concretely
addresses vast and long-standing inequities in our environmental
protections. In process and in substance, the Environmental Justice for
All Act is a significant step forward to confront the legacy of
environmental racism and disparate impacts affecting frontline
communities nationwide. We urge committee members to support and
advance this legislation as soon as possible.
The Environmental Justice for All Act is the result of a process
that prioritizes the voices of the communities most harmed by
environmental degradation. It represents a bold and necessary shift in
the way we create federal environmental policy--it is the result of a
serious and years-long effort to genuinely listen to the expertise and
concerns of the very people experiencing the worst of pollution. Its
drafters carefully and transparently crafted legislation that reflected
those experiences and expertise while creating concrete and significant
improvements to our environmental protections systems.
Environmental justice communities--communities of color, low-income
communities, and Tribal and Indigenous communities, as defined in the
bill--continue to experience disproportionate levels of exposure and
vulnerability to toxic pollution and environmental risks. To combat
this reality, the bill would mandate bold actions that protect the
health and safety of communities that are forced to carry the vast
majority of the burden from our nation's historical and current
reliance on dirty fuels, toxic substances, and exploitative practices.
It also would invest in the same communities so that they can have
broader access to cleaner transportation, safer food and green spaces.
Moreover, it would redistributes the burden by having the same
exploitative industries--oil, gas and coal companies who have profited
from poisoning our air and water--pay for these new investments with
additional fees.
Notably, the bill would give communities the right to hold
polluters accountable in court when these polluters' actions result in
a discriminatory impact. For far too long, polluters have been able to
discriminate against people of color, forcing them to prove a
discriminatory intent even when the impacts of their actions were
clearly racist. The bill recognizes that front-line communities do not
live with the intent of the polluters' racist practices; communities
are forced to live with the impacts of those practices and they should
have the right to remedy the impacts of this racism in court.
Many attempts were made over the last few years to violate or
dismantle bedrock environmental protections like the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), but this bill offers a counter by
giving environmental justice communities a voice in infrastructure
development. The bill restructures current permitting processes so that
cumulative impacts are considered properly and consistently as new
infrastructure develops in environmental justice communities. The bill
also directs federal agencies to seek Tribal government input in the
NEPA process, and to ensure that Indian Tribes are invited to hold the
status of a cooperating agency for proposed actions that might impact
their reservation lands and sacred sites. Further, the bill codifies
2016 EPA guidance on consultation and coordination with Indian Tribes
and 1997 Council on Environmental Quality guidance on environmental
justice under NEPA. Taking a page from the process used to create the
bill, the legislation would ensure that environmental justice
communities most impacted by infrastructure projects have influence
over the permitting process.
Centered on the simple premise that everyone has the right to drink
clean water, breathe clean air, and live without fear of the poisonous
effects of toxic chemicals, the Environmental Justice for All Act and
the process used to create it, stand as an example to follow and
significant step to end environmental racism. Setting strong new norms,
it makes significant investments to limit and clean up the toxic
pollution that has plagued environmental justice communities for
decades. Concurrently, it invests in the same communities so that they
have equitable access to emerging resources and technologies that
should be equitably available to them as our nation recommits itself to
addressing our health, safety, and the climate crisis.
The undersigned organizations are proud to support the
Environmental Justice for All Act. We urge all House Committees with
jurisdiction over this legislation to support it as well and to act
expeditiously in order to bring this important bill to the House floor.
Thank you for your attention.

Sincerely,

Raul Garcia                   Donna Detweiler
Earthjustice                  Albuquerque Mennonite Church

Laura Neish                   Katie Huffling
350 Bay Area Action           Alliance of Nurses for Healthy
Environments

Patricia Hine                 Peniel Ibe
350 Eugene                    American Friends Service
Committee

Carolyn C. Barthel            Roxanne Blackwell
350 Mass                      American Society of Landscape
Architects

Emily Johnston                Charles Robles
350 Seattle                   Ancestral Lands Conservation
Corps

JL Andrepont, MPA, PhDc       Dori Peralta Baker
350.org                       Asian Pacific Islander Coalition-
YKM

Athena Christodoulou
Adelante                      Heather Cantino
Progressive Caucus            Athens County's Future Action
Network

Kyle Crider                   Ted Glick
Alabama Interfaith Power &
Light                         Beyond Extreme Energy

Pamela Miller                 Lisa Arkin
Alaska Community Action on
Toxics                        Beyond Toxics

Mark Hefflinger               Elaine Cimino
Bold Alliance                 Common Ground Community Trust

Lisette van Vliet             Sofia Martinez
Breast Cancer Prevention
Partners                      Concerned Citizens of Wagon Mound
and Mora County

Groger McNew                  David Feinman
Cambio Inc.                   Conservation Lands Foundation

Elizabeth Alex                Naina Panthaki
CASA                          Cottonwood Gulch Expeditions

Cathleen Kelly                Karyn Bigelow
Center for American
Progress                      Creation Justice Ministries

Brett Hartl                   Dahlia Rockowitz
Center for Biological
Diversity                     Dayenu: A Jewish Call to Climate
Action
Dr. Sacoby Miguel Wilson      Kyli Wagner
Center for Community
Engagement, Environmental
Justice and Health            Defend Our Future

Thomas Fox                    Cameron Walkup
Center for Environmental
Health                        Defenders of Wildlife

Darya Minovi                  Omar Sarabia
Center for Progressive
Reform                        Defiende Nuestra Tierra

Catherine Garoupa White       Hazel James
Central Valley Air Quality
Coalition                     Dine' Centered Research
Evaluation

Julie Waterman                Yolanda Whyte
City Parks Alliance           Dr. Yolanda Whyte Pediatrics

Kim Gaddy                     Bianca Sopoci-Belknap
Clean Water Action            Earth Care

Esteban Arenas-Pino           Mary Gutierrez
Climate Justice Alliance      Earth Ethics, Inc.

Laura Gardner                 Lauren Pagel
Climate Reality
Massachusetts Southcoast      Earthworks

Rabbi Daniel Swartz           Bianca Encinias
Coalition on the
Environment and Jewish Life   El Chante: Casa de Cultura

Ruth Santiago                 Kendra Hughes
Comite Dialogo Ambiental,
Inc.                          Environmental Defense Fund

Ann Mesnikoff                 Mark A Dunlea
Environmental Law & Policy
Center                        Green Education and Legal Fund

Thomas Wheeler                Barbara Carey
Environmental Protection
Information Center-EPIC       Green Faith Olympia

Mona Munroe-Younis            Amy Brooks Paradise
Environmental
Transformation Movement of
Flint                         GreenFaith

Leah Redwood                  Irene Burga
Extinction Rebellion San
Francisco Bay Area            GreenLatinos

Vernon C Butler               Deborah Jackson
Families United for
Education                     Harambee House

John Peck                     Charlotte Brody
Family Farm Defenders         Healthy Babies Bright Futures

Nayyirah Shariff              Lexi Tuddenham
Flint Rising                  Healthy Environment Alliance of
Utah

Shannon Smith                 Naomi Yoder
FracTracker Alliance          Healthy Gulf

Louise Lears                  Shanna Edberg
Franciscan Action Network     Hispanic Access Foundation
Elaine Tanner                 Laura Esquivel
Friends For Environmental
Justice                       Hispanic Federation

Michael Hansen                Camilla Simon
GASP                          Hispanics Enjoying Camping,
Hunting, and the Outdoors

Christina Schlegel            Cheryl Barnds
Global Center for Climate
Justice                       Honor the Earth

Jerry Otero                   Marc Brenman
Grand Canyon Trust            IDARE LLC

Adrien Salazar                Tom BK Goldtooth
Grassroots Global Justice
Alliance                      Indigenous Environmental Network

Shelley Silbert               Krystal Curley
Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    Indigenous Lifeways

Nadira Narine                 Lance Kittel
Interfaith Center on
Corporate Responsibility      Inland Ocean Coalition

Tiffany Hartung               Kyle Simpson
Interfaith Power & Light      National Recreation and Park
Association

Carson Barylak                Rebeca Villegas
International Fund for
Animal Welfare (IFAW)         National Wildlife Federation

Kimberly Baker                Roberto Morales
Klamath Forest Alliance       Nature For All Coalition

Monica Kleimeyer              Jodi Lasseter
Laudato Si Circle             NC Climate Justice Collective

Madeleine Foote               Mariel Nanasi
League of Conservation
Voters                        New Energy Economy

Alejandra Ramirez-Zarate      Dr. Virginia Necochea
League of Conservation
Voters-Chispa                 New Mexico Environmental Law
Center

Dr. Terrie E. Griffin         Sr. Joan Brown
League of Women Voters of
Pennsylvania                  New Mexico Interfaith Power and
Light

Dave Shukla                   Anthony Rogers-Wright
Long Beach Alliance for
Clean Energy                  New York Lawyers for the Public
Interest

Richard Moore
Los Jardines Institute        Next 100 Colorado

Molly Rauch                   Carol R. Foss, Ph.D.
Moms Clean Air Force          NH Audubon

Kera Panni                    Carol Gay
Monterey Bay Aquarium         NJ State Industrial Union Council
Leslie Raff                   Fernanda Banda
Morristown United Methodist
Church, Greenfaith Circle     NM Dream Team

Susan Gordon                  Jerry Rivers
Multicultural Alliance for
a Safe Environment            North American Climate,
Conservation and Environment

Maggie Ostdahl                Timothy Judson
National Aquarium             Nuclear Information and Resource
Service

Jesse Walls                   Cari Gardner
National Audubon Society      NYPAN Environ Committee

Jeff Slyfield                 Cari Gardner
Ocean Conservancy             NYPAN Greene

Lara Levison                  Dr. Robert K. Musil
Oceana                        Rachel Carson Council

NaTisha C. Washington         Donna Chavis
One Pennsylvania              RedTailed Hawk Collective

Jackie Antalan                Gabriel Thoumi, CFA, FRM
Operation HomeCare, Inc.      Founder, Responsible Alpha

Emily Martin                  Mustafa Santiago Ali
Our Climate                   Revitalization Strategies

Alexandra Merlino             Linda Starr
Partnership for Responsible
Business                      Rio Grande Valley Broadband,
Great Old Broads for Wilderness

Michael Malcom                Michael Richardson
People's Justice Council      Rivers & Mountains GreenFaith
Circle

Andrea Vidaurre               Nora Nickum
Peoples Collective for
Environmental Justice         Seattle Aquarium

Deborah L. Lynch              Elizabeth Perera
PHE INC                       Sierra Club

Liz Robinson                  Lauren Reliford, MSW
Philadelphia Solar Energy
Association                   Sojourners

Tonyehn Verkitus              Nat Mund
Physicians for Social
Responsibility Pennsylvania   Southern Environmental Law Center

Alexia Leclercq               Terry Sloan
PODER                         Southwest Native Cultures

Bishop Dwayne Royster         Nathan Taft
POWER Interfaith              Stand.earth
Beatriz Soto                  Shoshana Hershkowitz
Protegete                     Suffolk Progressives

Julia Bernal                  Jean Tepperman
Pueblo Action Alliance        Sunflower Alliance

Cesar G. Abarca               Lauren Maunus
Quelites Instutute            Sunrise Movement

Timothy Edward Duda           Wyatt G. Sassman
Terra Advocati                University of Denver Sturm
College of Law

Hal Connolly                  Desiree Luckey
The Climate Reality Project   URGE: Unite for Reproductive &
Gender Equity

Rev. Michael Malcom           Kelsey Anderson
The People's Justice
Council                       Voices for Progress

Myke Bybee                    Odette Mucha
The Trust for Public Land     Vote Solar

Shayna Han                    Rachel Dawn Davis
The Union for Reform
Judaism                       Waterspirit

Tamanna Brar                  Susan Jane Brown
The Wilderness Society        Western Environmental Law Center

Anita Amstutz                 Jennifer Byrne
Think Like a Bee              White River Natural Resources
Conservation District

Christopher Ramirez           Aubrey Bertram
Together for Brothers         Wild Montana

Gerry Seavo James             Juli Slivka
Together Outdoors-Outdoor
Recreation Roundtable         Wilderness Workshop

Connor Kippe                  Jamie McConnell
Toxic Free NC                 Women's Voices for the Earth

Tina M Cordova                Amara Jones
Tularosa Basin Downwinders
Consortium                    Youth Emergency Auxiliary Service
Sierra Leone (YEAS-SL)

Taofik Oladipo                Seneca Johnson
Union of Concerned
Scientists                    YUCCA Youth United for Climate
Crisis Action

Elizabeth Chun Hye Lee        Zanagee Artis
United Methodist Women        Zero Hour

Diana Dorn-Jones              Colton R. Dean
United South Broadway
Corporation, community
partner

Bruce A. Rose

______

Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)

New York, New York

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Letter for the Record on the Environmental Justice for All Act

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

On behalf of the Natural Resources Defense Council and our members,
we write to express strong support for the Environmental Justice for
All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge committee members to advance this
important legislation quickly to begin remedying the long history of
environmental racism and injustice, and cumulative and disproportionate
health and environmental impacts, that affects communities of color,
low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous nations and communities,
across the country.
We support this legislation as aligned with NRDC's mission and
values, which are to address the global environmental and climate
crises through actions that are rooted in justice and that reduce
historic and persistent inequities in health, socio-economic security,
and human well-being.
We underscore that this landmark bill has been developed in close
partnership with leaders in the environmental justice movement. The
extensive public input process that informed the Act's creation has
produced legislation uniquely influenced by the peoples and communities
affected by those it seeks to help. Accordingly, the Environmental
Justice for All Act recognizes that meaningfully improving the lives of
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color requires transformative change
led by those on the frontlines.
We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. Among the foundational
actions provided by the Environmental Justice for All Act is the
strengthening of the National Environmental Policy Act to ensure that
communities have a meaningful opportunity to engage in NEPA processes
that will impact them.
Another significant aspect of the Environmental Justice for All Act
is the requirement that federal agencies consider cumulative impacts in
Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act permitting decisions. The failure to
consider cumulative impacts is a long-standing and egregious oversight
in environmental regulation and policymaking. It ignores the lived
reality of frontline communities, who often face multiple environmental
threats at once, along with social stressors such as racial
discrimination, historical trauma, and reduced access to material
resources. It ignores the science that shows that the risks from
environmental pollution are heightened precisely when a person or
community faces multiple threats and stressors. Accounting for
cumulative impacts is fundamental to reducing inequities and ensuring
that additional burdens are not heaped upon those already experiencing
disproportionate environmental and social vulnerability.
Importantly, the Environmental Justice for All Act also strengthens
the Civil Rights Act to permit private citizens and organizations
facing discrimination to seek legal remedies. Providing this recourse
will help make progress toward correcting the unequal pollution burden
and stark environmental health disparities that frontline communities
experience due to historic and on-going structural discrimination.
Finally, we wish to underscore that the Environmental Justice for
All Act is ambitious because it must be. It responds to the scale of
challenges frontline communities face every day in their fight for
clean air, clean water, and a healthy and safe environment. It is a
long overdue correction to our nation's failed chemical management
policies, and the cumulative hazards and disproportionate harms that
have resulted for communities of color, low-income communities, and
Native/Indigenous communities. We urge the Committee, and any other
committees with jurisdiction over this legislation, to begin to correct
these injustices and address this legacy of harm, by promptly passing
the bill out of Committee and sending it on to the full House of
Representatives. NRDC looks forward to working with you, the rest of
the Committee, and environmental justice advocates to move this
legislation forward.

Sincerely,

Melissa Lin Perrella,
Chief Equity & Justice Officer
Environment, Equity & Justice Center

______

OUR FUTURE WEST VIRGINIA

Charleston, West Virginia

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

On behalf of Our Future West Virginia (OFWV), I write to offer our
strong support for the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021).
We are urging each committee member to quickly advance this important
legislation as a way to appropriately address the long history of
environmental racism and injustice, and the cumulative and
disproportionate health and environmental impacts that have adversely
affected communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/
Indigenous nations and communities, across the country.
OFWV supports this critical piece of legislation as it aligns with
our mission of helping communities in WV build local power to upend
oppressive systems around them and working to ensure that every West
Virginian has the justice, dignity, and equity needed to thrive.
Unfortunately, there are many communities in WV that have received
short shrift when it comes to the notion of Environmental Justice,
suffering in isolation and readily ignored by policy makers and toxic
producing manufacturers. Despite decades of research and evidence, and
the far-reaching testimonies from impacted people and communities
themselves, there has been little if any redress. Instead, the
documented history of the cumulative and disproportionate chemical
hazards and impacts imposed on communities of color, low-income
communities, and Native/Indigenous communities have continued for
generations ad nauseam. Impacted folks have curated their own solutions
to these injustices and harms for some time, while calls for official
intervention at the local and state levels have gone ignored. The
extensive public input process that informed the Act's creation
reflects this history and stands as evidence. Further it has produced
legislation that is uniquely influenced by the very folks it seeks to
help.
OFWV strongly supports the Act's central elements, which are
important steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and ensuring
the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless
of color, culture, national origin, income, or geographical location--
with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of
health and environmental laws, regulations, and policies.

These urgently needed policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue course
correction to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the
cumulative hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for
communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous
communities. We urge the Committee, and any other committees with
jurisdiction over this legislation, to rectify these injustices and
truly address this legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of
Committee and sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by,

Kathy Ferguson,
Interim Exec. Director

______

OUTDOORS ALLIANCE FOR KIDS

February 14, 2022

Dear Chairperson Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman and members of
the House Natural Resources Committee:

We, the undersigned members, partners and supporters of the
Outdoors Alliance for Kids (OAK), appreciate the prioritization of
equitable access to nature and increased transportation options to
parks, trails, green spaces and public lands in the Environmental
Justice for All Act. OAK is a national strategic partnership of more
than 100 businesses and organizations representing more than 60 million
Americans, with a common interest in connecting children, youth and
families with the outdoors. Our members and supporters believe that in
the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the need for equitable opportunities
to recreate in the outdoors has never been more apparent.
Parks and public lands belong to all Americans to enjoy, regardless
of income or zip code. Unfortunately, far too many under-resourced
families face significant obstacles to accessing these special places.
Urban, rural and remote communities, especially racially and ethnically
diverse, low-income, and disabled communities, disproportionately lack
safe access to their public lands and waters. The pandemic has
dramatically expanded this access gap, with the Governors Highway
Safety Association finding that pedestrian injury and death increased
21% during the pandemic.
The Environmental Justice for All Act is rooted in the principle
that all people have the right to pure air, clean water and an
environment that enriches life. With a multi-year inclusive public
process that involved a diverse set of stakeholders and impacted
communities, this legislation incorporates three vital programs to
support equitable access to nature for youth and families that OAK
strongly supports:
Section 11, Access to parks, outdoor spaces and public recreation
opportunities

This provision would codify and guarantee funding for the Outdoor
Recreation Legacy Partnership (ORLP) program to enhance access to
greenspace and develop recreational infrastructure in communities that
lack park space and have been traditionally under-resourced. This
important investment in local parks will expand access for one-third of
Americans, including 28 million children, who lack access to a quality
park close to home. Since the program's inception in 2014, ORLP funding
has supported 69 projects, leveraging more than $76 million in non-
federal funds, to improve close-to-home outdoor access. With parks
serving as critical, job-creating, resilient infrastructure and
offering communities the proven physical and mental health benefits of
access to the outdoors, we must act now to invest in open spaces.
Section 12, Transit to Trails grant program

The Transit to Trails grant program directs the Department of
Transportation to establish a block-grant program to fund accessible
transportation systems to parks, trailheads, green spaces and public
lands. This will provide federal grants to match state and local
funding of transit routes between cities and public lands to ensure
underserved and rural communities can safely and equitably access parks
and outdoor recreation opportunities. Connecting more families and
individuals with quality nature, especially in critically underserved
areas, will provide greater opportunities for employment, wellbeing and
outdoor exploration.
Section 13, Repeal of sunset for the Every Kid Outdoors program

The Every Kid Outdoors (EKO) program provides fourth graders and
their families with one year of free access to all national park
sites.This program must be made permanent; by statute, the Every Kid
Outdoors program will expire in 2026. Removing the sunset provision in
EKO now will be essential in allowing agencies to provide lasting
equitable access to federal public lands. Engagement with the outdoors
is essential for developing resilient youth and strong families, and
will develop future park visitors and stewards.
As we work to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is clear that
access to the outdoors is more important than ever. Engagement with the
outdoors has been a lifeline for many during the pandemic and will be a
crucial step in the healing process for youth and families while
developing future park visitors and stewards. Expanding and bolstering
programs that provide equitable access to nature will create healthier,
more sustainable, economically vibrant and climate-resilient
communities.
We strongly endorse and appreciate the inclusion of equitable
access to nature programs within the Environmental Justice for All Act.
For questions related to this letter, please reach out to Tara Brown,
Senior Government Relations Representative at The Wilderness Society at

[email protected]
. Thank you for your consideration.

Sincerely,

American Hiking Society       National Recreation and Park
Association

American Society of
Landscape Architects          Nature For All

Appalachian Mountain Club     Outward Bound California

Appalachian Trail
Conservancy                   Seed Your Future

Avid4 Adventure               Sierra Club

Children & Nature Network     SkyDay

Choose Outdoors               The Corps Network

Conservation Legacy           The Trust for Public Land

ForeverGreen Trails           The Venture Out Project

Latino Outdoors               The Wilderness Society

Move Redmond

______

People Organized in Defense of Earth and her Resources (PODER)

Austin, Texas

February 8, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Austin, Texas Community Testimony & Support for Environmental
Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021)

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

In 1928, the City of Austin's Master Plan set the stage for the
relocation of African American and Mexican American population along
with unwanted industry to East Austin.

East Austin residents have endured a legacy of racism. This legacy
of racism includes cumulative and disproportionate chemical hazards
that have impacted low-income and communities of color health and
environment in East Austin.

For more than 35 years, East Austin residents had lived next to
several bulk fuel storage tank facilities (Tank Farm) that devastated
the land and our community. The tank farm was in a predominately Latino
and African American neighborhood. Millions of gallons of petroleum
products were stored at the Tank Farm. The Tank Farm was a 52-acre site
with above ground fuel storage tanks owned by six major oil companies.
Even though these six oil corporations were located next to each other,
their permits at the state level were approved as if there was just one
corporation located on the 52-acre site. Cumulative impacts were not
considered. In 1992, PODER discovered that the companies had violated
air emissions and had contaminated the groundwater. There were numerous
health problems in the community.

The City of Austin's Holly Power Plant (HPP) located within feet of
East Austin residents had noise levels that exceed the Housing, Urban,
and Development (HUD) federal standards for residential areas, and
elevated EMF (electromagnetic fields). The HPP was the largest
stationary source of nitrogen oxide which contributes to ozone. Several
fires at the site raised additional public health and safety concerns.

BFI, a multinational waste management company, was contracted by
the City of Austin to collect recyclables such as plastics, glass,
cans, and newspapers of over 350,000 households. BFI was in a community
of color neighborhood. The site became a `mini' landfill causing an
infestation of rats, alarming residents' public health concerns.
Industrial pollution from the large trucks delivering recyclables to
the plant, devasted the residents. A five alarm fire at the site raised
additional public health and safety concerns.

Pure Castings uses numerous toxic metals. The Pure Castings
industrial metal foundry located across from Zavala Elementary School
and in a residential area. PODER has been working with City Council
members, health officials and other regulatory agencies to protect the
health of the children and the community.

PODER has demanded solutions to these injustices and harms, not
just for our communities but for communities throughout the United
States and the world.

PODER strongly supports the central elements in the Environmental
Justice for All Act, which are important steps toward remedying a long
legacy of harm and ensuring the fair treatment and meaningful
involvement of all people regardless of color, culture, national
origin, or income--with respect to the development, implementation, and
enforcement of health and environmental laws, regulations, and
policies.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with authority over this
legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by:

Susana Almanza,
Director

______

River Network

February 14, 2022

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman
Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking Member
Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

I am writing on behalf of River Network to express our strong
support for the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). Embedded
in our mission and values is the belief that all people have a right to
clean and ample water that sustains life. Unfortunately, biases and
disparities disproportionately burden communities of color, Indigenous
communities, and low-income communities with environmental damage and
on-going harm that limits access to healthy, life-sustaining waters for
all. Addressing and repairing these environmental injustices is
essential to ensuring everyone's right to clean water.
We commend Chair Grijalva and Representative McEachin for their
approach to developing this legislation. By collaborating with
communities impacted by environmental racism and oppression, extensive
community perspectives and input were used to craft this the bill. This
process led to a comprehensive bill with a clear set of policy
solutions, informed by those most impacted by environmental injustices.

In particular, we commend the inclusion of the following provisions
to strengthen the impact of the Environmental Justice for All Act,
inspired by the feedback received from impacted communities:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits will
not be issued if projects cannot demonstrate a reasonable
certainty of no harm to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

River Network commends this process, supports the legislators and
community members who identified these policy solutions, and fully
supports the Environmental Justice for All Act.

Thank you for your consideration of our letter of support.

Sincerely,

April Ingle,
Policy Director

______

SILENT SPRING INSTITUTE

Newton, Massachusetts

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

We are writing on behalf of Silent Spring Institute to provide
comments on the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021) and
detail the need for action on issues of environmental racism and
disparate exposure burdens to toxic chemicals across axes of race,
class, and geographic location.
Silent Spring Institute is a non-profit research organization that
studies the links between environmental chemicals and disease, with a
focus on breast cancer. As one of the fundamental principles of
environmental justice underscores, we believe that every American has a
right to live, work, and play in a safe and healthy environment
regardless of race, color, national origin, or income.\1\ We have
several research projects focused on environmental justice, including a
study that explores the influence of lead hazard control programs at
reducing other chemical hazards,\2\ an investigation of endocrine
disrupting chemicals in personal care products used by Black and Latina
women,\3\
,
\4\ and research on whether low-income and
communities of color in the U.S. have higher levels of contaminants in
their drinking water.\5\
,
\6\ We have also researched indoor
and outdoor air quality for environmental justice communities living
near industrial facilities and major transportation
corridors.\7\
,
\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Silent Spring Institute. (2022). Pursuing Environmental
Justice. Core Values. Accessed February 14, 2022. https://
silentspring.org/core-value/pursuing-environmental-justice.
\2\ Silent Spring Institute. (2022). Lead and Healthy Homes. How
are we exposed to toxic chemicals?: Household air and dust. Accessed
February 14, 2022. https://silentspring.org/project/lead-and-healthy-
homes.
\3\ Helm, J.S., Nishioka, M., Brody, J.G., et al. (2018).
Measurement of endocrine disrupting and asthma-associated chemicals in
hair products used by Black women. Environmental Research, 165, 448-
458. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.03.030.
\4\ Dodson, R.E., Cardona, B., Zota, A.R., et al. (2021). Personal
care product use among diverse women in California: Taking Stock Study.
Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology, 31(3), 487-
502. doi: 10.1038/s41370-021-00327-3.
\5\ Schaider, L.A., Swetschinski, L., Campbell, C., et al. (2019).
Environmental justice and drinking water quality: are there
socioeconomic disparities in nitrate levels in U.S. drinking water?
Environmental Health, 18(3). doi: 10.1186/s12940-018-0442-6.
\6\ Silent Spring Institute. (2019). Millions of Americans exposed
to elevated nitrate levels in drinking water. News. January 16. https:/
/www.silentspring.org/news/millions-americans-exposed-elevated-nitrate-
levels-drinking-water.
\7\ Dodson, R.E., Udesky, J.O., Colton, M.D., et al. (2017).
Chemical exposures in recently renovated low-income housing: Influence
of building materials and occupant activities. Environment
International, 109, 114-127. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2017.07.007.
\8\ Brown, P., Brody, J.G., Morello-Frosch, R., et al. (2012).
Measuring the success of community science: the northern California
Household Exposure Study. Environmental health perspectives, 120(3),
326-331. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103734.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
World War II, over 80,000 new chemicals have been released onto the
market, very few of which are tested for safety or are subject to
regulations.\9\ For breast cancer alone, more than 200 chemicals have
been associated with mammary gland tumors in animal studies,\10\ and
about half of these are chemicals that people are routinely exposed to
in their everyday lives.\11\ These chemicals are found in furniture,
food packaging, cleaning products, personal care products, and numerous
household items. Significantly, exposure to these chemicals are higher
among low-income communities of color. Our research shows that water
systems with higher levels of nitrate tend to serve predominantly
Latinx communities.
5
Exposure to nitrate itself is shown to
be associated with cancers \12\
,
\13\ as well as birth
defects,
12,
\14\ and high nitrate levels are also a good
indicator of other drinking water contaminants present.
6
Our
studies have also found that beauty products marketed to women of color
contain higher concentrations of toxic chemicals,
3,4
which
may contribute to the trend of women of color having higher chemical
body burdens than white women.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Lloyd-Smith, M., & Sheffield-Brotherton, B. (2008). Children's
environmental health: intergenerational equity in action--a civil
society perspective. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1140,
190-200. doi: 10.1196/annals.1454.051.
\10\ Brody, J.G., Moysich, K.B., Humblet, O., et al. (2007).
Environmental pollutants and breast cancer: epidemiologic studies.
Cancer, 109(12 Suppl), 2667-2711. doi: 10.1002/cncr.22655.
\11\ Rudel, R.A., Ackerman, J.M., Attfield, K.R., & Brody, J.G.
(2014). New Exposure Biomarkers as Tools for Breast Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomonitoring, and Prevention: A Systematic Approach
Based on Animal Evidence. Environmental health perspectives, 122(9),
881-895. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1307455.
\12\ Temkin, A., Evans, S., Manidis, T., et al. (2019). Exposure-
based assessment and economic valuation of adverse birth outcomes and
cancer risk due to nitrate in United States drinking water.
Environmental Research, 176, 108442. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.04.009.
\13\ Espejo-Herrera, N., Gracia-Lavedan, E., Boldo, E., et al.
(2016). Colorectal cancer risk and nitrate exposure through drinking
water and diet. International Journal of Cancer, 139: 334-346. doi:
10.1002/ijc.30083.
\14\ Brender, J.D., Weyer, P.J., Romitti, P.A., et al. (2013).
Prenatal Nitrate Intake from Drinking Water and Selected Birth Defects
in Offspring of Participants in the National Birth Defects Prevention
Study. Environmental health perspectives, 121(9), 1083-1089. doi:
10.1289/ehp.1206249.
\15\ Zota, A.R. & Shamasunder, B. (2017). The environmental
injustice of beauty: framing chemical exposures from beauty products as
a health disparities concern. American Journal of Obstetrics &
Gynecology, 217(4), 418.e411-418.e416. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.07.020.

The disparate exposures we have studied are only small parts of a
disturbing national trend. More than half the people in the US who live
within 3km of a toxic waste site are people of color.\16\ Low-income
communities of color are disproportionately exposed to air
pollution,\17\
,
\18\
,
\19\ and 40% percent more
likely to be serviced by water systems that continually violate the
Safe Drinking Water Act.\20\ All of these trends of disparate exposure
contribute to a myriad of health and social wellbeing disparities
between minority and white communities,\21\ including disparate rates
of asthma,\22\ lead poisoning,\23\ adverse birth outcomes,\24\
pesticide exposure,\25\ and Covid-19 mortality.\26\
,
\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Justice and Witness Ministries of the United Church of Christ.
(2007). Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987-2007. Cleveland, OH:
United Church of Christ. https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/
toxic-wastes-and-race-at-twenty-1987-2007.pdf.
\17\ Miranda, M.L., Edwards, S.E., Keating, M.H., & Paul, C.J.
(2011). Making the Environmental Justice Grade: The Relative Burden of
Air Pollution Exposure in the United States. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 8(6), 1755-1771. Retrieved
from https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/8/6/1755.
\18\ Tessum, C.W., Paolella, D.A., Chambliss, S.E., et al. (2021).
PM2.5 polluters disproportionately and systemically affect people of
color in the United States. Science Advances, 7(18), eabf4491.
doi:10.1126/sciadv.abf4491.
\19\ Bell, M.L. & Ebisu, K. (2012). Environmental inequality in
exposures to airborne particulate matter components in the United
States. Environmental health perspectives, 120(12), 1699-1704. doi:
10.1289/ehp.1205201.
\20\ Pullen Fedinick, K., Taylor, S., & Roberts, M. (2019). Watered
Down Justice. National Resources Defense Council, Coming Clean, &
Environmental Justice Health Alliance. https://www.nrdc.org/sites/
default/files/watered-down-justice-report.pdf.
\21\ Meyer, P.A., Yoon, P.W., & Kaufmann, R.B. (2013).
Introduction: CDC Health Disparities and Inequalities Report--United
States, 2013. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention: Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), 62(03): 3-5. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/su6203a2.htm?s_cid=su6203a2_w.
\22\ Nishimura, K.K., Galanter, J.M., Roth, L.A., et al. (2013).
Early-life air pollution and asthma risk in minority children. The GALA
II and SAGE II studies. American journal of respiratory and critical
care medicine, 188(3), 309-318. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201302-0264OC.
\23\ Wengrovitz, A.M. & Brown, M.J. (2009). Recommendations for
Blood Lead Screening of Medicaid-Eligible Children Aged 1-5 Years: an
Updated Approach to Targeting a Group at High Risk. Centers for Disease
Control & Prevention: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR).
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5809a1.htm.
\24\ Woodruff, T.J., Parker, J.D., Kyle, A.D., & Schoendorf, K.C.
(2003). Disparities in exposure to air pollution during pregnancy.
Environmental health perspectives, 111(7), 942-946. doi: 10.1289/
ehp.5317.
\25\ Carter-Pokras, O., Zambrana, R.E., Poppell, C.F., et al.
(2007). The environmental health of Latino children. Journal of
pediatric health care: official publication of National Association of
Pediatric Nurse Associates & Practitioners, 21(5), 307-314. doi:
10.1016/j.pedhc.2006.12.005.
\26\ Brandt, E.B., Beck, A.F., & Mersha, T.B. (2020). Air
pollution, racial disparities, and COVID-19 mortality. The Journal of
allergy and clinical immunology, 146(1), 61-63. doi: 10.1016/
j.jaci.2020.04.035.
\27\ Wu, X., Nethery, R.C., Sabath, M.B., et al. (2020). Air
pollution and COVID-19 mortality in the United States: Strengths and
limitations of an ecological regression analysis. Science Advances,
6(45). doi:10.1126/sciadv.abd4049.

The Environmental Justice for All Act contains several measures
that could greatly alleviate these exposure and health inequities,\28\
including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Committee on Natural Resources, House of Representatives.
(2021). Environmental Justice For All Fact Sheet. Fact Sheets.
Published March 2021. https://naturalresources.house.gov/imo/media/doc/
EJ%20Fact%20Sheet%20-%20March%202021.pdf.

Requiring permits under Clean Water Act and the Clean Air
Act to consider cumulative impacts and only be issued when
the project can demonstrate no harm to human health within
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reasonable certainty.

Additional funding for research grants that study
chemicals of exposure concern in personal and childcare
products; funding for research into safer alternatives for
cosmetic product chemical, specifically for those product-
containing chemicals marketed specifically to people of
color; requirements for transparent and accurate disclosure
of ingredients in personal care products' labels.

$75 million annually in grants to support research,
outreach, development, education, and projects on
environmental and public health issues in environmental
justice communities.

Requiring federal agencies to implement environment
justice strategies and engage with diverse communities, as
proposed by Executive Order 12898.

Expanding and improving genuine and meaningful
opportunities for community engagement and influence under
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and specific
strengthening of Tribal representation and consultation in
projects affecting Tribal land or even sacred sites off-
reservation.

These key measures of the Act represent a long-awaited addressment
of the hazards and inequities posed by toxic chemicals, insufficient
regulations, and the resulting harms for communities of color, low-
income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We hope the
peer-reviewed scientific information we have provided can help inform
your decision to support this Act. We greatly appreciate the
opportunity to submit comments.

Sincerely,

Summer-Solstice Thomas,       Dr. Jennifer Liss Ohayon,
Research Assistant            Research Scientist

______

Statement for the Record
The Alliance For Appalachia
London, Kentucky

Dear Chair Grijalva and members of the House Committee on Natural
Resources:

The Alliance for Appalachia is a regional coalition that promotes a
healthy, just Appalachia by supporting member organizations in
communities impacted by destructive resource extraction. Our coalition
brings together some of the most experienced groups from across the
region to share resources, strategize for collective impact, and
organize for a just transition that shifts from an extractive economy
to a regenerative economy. This includes building local and political
power to redress past harms and lift up all people.

The Alliance for Appalachia supports the Environmental Justice For
All Act (H.R. 2021) as legislation rooted in the moral principle that
all people have the right to clean air, water, and soil. We need the
safeguards included in this bill to ensure that these rights are a
reality.

We know that our region is not unique and that we are not alone in
our pursuit of justice. Environmental racism and oppression plague
communities across the country in the name of profit and people of
color and low-income individuals suffer first and worst.

The cumulative impacts of coal mining in our region are pervasive
and devastating to communities across our region and beyond. Fossil
fuel extraction like coal mining impacts the environmental and human
health of workers and communities. Mountaintop removal coal mining
devastates the landscape, turning beautiful, plentiful forests into
ugly, barren lands where native plants and animals struggle to thrive.
The U.S. EPA estimates that more than 500 mountains have been destroyed
by mountaintop removal and over 2,000 miles of streams have been buried
with many more being poisoned by heavy metals and toxins.

We know that water is life, and yet we have witnessed countless
violations of the Clean Water Act at mines across Appalachia. While the
industry may be on the decline globally, mountaintop removal mining is
not over. Just last year, the WV Department of Environmental Protection
approved a 1,085-acre MTR permit on Coal River Mountain, and a few
months ago, approved a 1,112-acre Paint Mountain MTR permit on Paint
Mountain, despite the overwhelming evidence that communities near
mountaintop removal have significantly higher rates of birth defects,
serious disease, and mortality.

Before coal is ever extracted, mountains are blown up with war-like
explosives to expose coal seams. During the extraction process, workers
breathe in silica dust that leads to the deadly black lung disease, and
the same dust falls on communities below, often less than a mile from
the site. This process buries headwater streams and poisons our
drinking water. When mining is finished these companies skirt
reclamation responsibilities and leave behind polluted abandoned mine
sites for taxpayers and community members to clean up.

Further down the supply chain, coal-fired power plants are the
largest single source of carbon dioxide emissions around the world. The
waste created from burning coal, coal ash, is similarly dangerous to
the surrounding communities, and again is disproportionately dangerous
to communities of color who have often had to bear the burden of
storing the waste.

Julie Bledsoe of Powell, Tennessee, who shared part of her family's
story during the House Natural Resources Committee 2020 EJ Now Tour,
has been directly impacted by the dangers of coal ash:

``My husband worked to clean up the Kingston Coal Ash Spill. He
was a healthy life long non-smoker and he now has COPD. I would
like to share the dangers of coal ash. There are coal ash sites
in EJ communities and all over our Nation that must be cleaned
up. The cleanup workers and communities must be protected. What
happened at Kingston must never happen again. Coal Ash is
currently classified as non-hazardous, but it is deadly for
humans to breathe. Workers at Kingston were denied respiratory
protection. There are now over 50 workers dead that worked on
the Kingston Coal Ash Spill cleanup. Many more are sick.''

And yet, extreme coal mining practices aren't the only form of
extraction in Appalachia. Members of the Alliance for Appalachia are
also resisting a huge petrochemical buildout to process fracked gas in
the Ohio Valley, where elected officials and the oil and gas industry
are telling residents it's their only hope for jobs. We know this is
not true and we know the environmental and health impacts of this
industry by following the experiences of our comrades in the Gulf South
whose home is now referred to as ``Cancer Alley.''

The impacts of fossil fuel extraction reach beyond environmental
injustices. In a region like ours, economies are inextricably linked to
and impacted by the boom and bust cycles of extraction. For example,
property taxes and royalties from coal fund local school systems. When
trucks hauling coal destroy our roads, it's county taxes that have to
repair them. When companies deny workers their health benefits, it's
taxpayers that foot the bill. When they file bankruptcy and walk away
from reclamation responsibilities, it's taxpayers that are footing the
bill. And when our water is poisoned, it's up to us to find safe
sources to drink and bathe that are often more expensive and labor-
intensive than a public system.

The Environmental Justice For All Act would ensure that communities
have the tools to protect themselves and fight back against harmful
industries. It requires federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in making
permitting decisions and ensures that permits will not be issued if
projects cannot demonstrate a reasonable certainty of no harm to human
health. And, it requires permitting authorities to determine that there
exists a reasonable certainty of no harm to the health or general
population, or to any potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulation
located in or immediately adjacent to the area of the major source.

We believe that we can achieve environmental justice by building
power in communities and connecting people of all backgrounds and
identities from geographically and culturally disparate places. We lean
on people's personal experiences to tell the stories and perspectives
necessary to reach strategic decisions. This bill is no different. As
members of the Environmental Justice Working Group with the House
Natural Resources Committee, we know this legislation is based on
principles defined and demanded by people like our members who are on
the frontlines of environmental injustices. Had it been in place
decades ago, it could have saved our communities and our mountains from
the corporate greed that has robbed us of life-sustaining natural
resources. We support its passage so we can right the wrongs already
done and protect future generations.

For the mountains and the people,

Members of the Alliance for Appalachia

Kentuckians for the Commonwealth
West Virginia
Highlands Conservancy

Coal River Mountain Watch
Appalachian Voices

Southern Appalachian Mountain Stewards

Statewide Organizing for Community eMpowerment

Center for Coalfield Justice

The STAY Project
Heartwood
Sierra
Club Environmental Justice

Southwings
Highlander Education and Research Center

Keepers of the Mountains

Black Warrior RiverKeeper
The Clinch
Coalition

______

Statement for the Record
The Descendants Project
The Descendants Project Announces Support of Key Environmental
Legislation

February 7. Wallace, LA. The Descendants Project, a nonprofit
organization committed to eradicating the legacies of slavery for black
descendant communities especially fighting pollution within Louisian's
``Cancer Alley'' announced its support for the Environmental Justice
For All Act. Sponsored by Chair Raul M. Grijalva and Representative A.
Donald McEachin,'' the legislation is rooted in the moral principle
that all people have the right to pure air, clean water and an
environment that enriches life.''
Residents within Louisiana's cancer alley, an 83-mile stretch of
highway along the Mississippi River inundated by petrochemical and
heavy industry, endure cancer risks higher than 95% of the country.
Plants and manufacturing facilities are often located on the former
sites of plantations. Black neighborhoods and ``freetowns'', which are
often on the perimeter of plantations, are now ``fenceline''
communities overburdened by the pollution from the facilities.
Consequently, Black communities experience a disproportionate amount of
exposure to carcinogens, PM 2.5, and even damage to homes and personal
property. According to Dr. Joy Banner, one of the founding directors of
The Descendants Project, ``This legislation will amend and strengthen
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which will prohibit
discrimination based on the disparate impact we endure as Black,
fenceline communities. The act will also hold companies accountable by
allowing those of us impacted to seek legal remedy when they
discriminate against us.''
Another key feature of the legislation includes cumulative impacts,
which requires consideration of the cumulative impacts in permitting
decisions under the clean water and clean air act and ensures that
permits will not be issued if the project cannot demonstrate reasonable
certainty of no harm to human health.
Residents and EJ groups within cancer alley have highlighted the
loophole whereby the heavy burden of pollution is not taken into
consideration when evaluating the potential harm to the community from
a new permit applicant. ``It's like pouring water into a glass that's
already two-thirds full, but not taking into account the water that's
already in the glass. The glass can't handle the water, just like our
bodies can't handle the pollution.'' Says Banner.
The Descendants Project is in their own fight for environmental
justice; the foundation is suing St. John the Baptist Parish for
illegal industrial zoning that is still on the books from the 1990s.
The Parish President at the time served five years in federal prison
for corruption and taking a bribe to rezone the land for Formosa. The
illegal zoning is now being used by Greenfield, Louisiana LLC to plan a
massive grain terminal that would inundate the community with more
harmful dust, pollution, and emissions.
According to Banner, ``It's vital to our survival that we have
federal legislation to hold states accountable for the protection of
our environment and our health. We know from personal experience that
without oversight, our states are not doing their due diligence to keep
us safe. What more proof do you need than ``Cancer Alley?''

Through programming, education, advocacy, and outreach, The
Descendants Project is committed to reversing the vagrancies of slavery
through healing and restorative work. We aim to eliminate the narrative
violence of plantation tourism and champion the voice of the Black
descendant community while demanding action that supports the total
well-being of Black descendants. Visit thedescendantsproject.com to
learn more or to donate.

______

The Wilderness Society

Washington, DC

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Committee on Natural
Resources                     Committee on Natural Resources
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and all Members
of the House Committee on Natural Resources:

On behalf of our more than one million members and supporters, The
Wilderness Society (TWS) writes to express enthusiastic support for
H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act, being heard before
the House Natural Resources Committee on February 15, 2022.
The Environmental Justice for All Act was developed over a year-
long process that included environmental justice leaders, frontline
communities, and a wide range of stakeholders. This helped shape the
policy while keeping the most impacted communities on the front-end of
the policymaking process. The development of this legislation
represents a critical step toward meaningful community engagement,
collaboration, and environmental justice action to alleviate
environmental racism nationwide.
From the inclusive public process that involved a diverse set of
stakeholders and impacted communities, H.R. 2021 is rooted in the moral
principle that all people have the right to pure air, clean water, and
an environment that enriches life. The Environmental Justice for All
Act is informed by the belief that federal policy can and should strive
for environmental justice, health equity, and climate justice for all
deliberately overlooked and underserved communities. This legislation
establishes that Congress and other federal agencies should seek to
achieve environmental justice, promote meaningful public involvement,
provide technical assistance on environmental justice issues to
communities, and cooperate with Tribes, States, and local governments
to address environmental injustice.
TWS supports H.R. 5986 as a whole and believes that legislation
should center historically underrepresented populations to better
address existing inequities. We commend Chair Grijalva, Representative
McEachin, and their staff on pulling together a diverse coalition of
contributors to this legislation and believe that it has strengthened
the outcome of these community-based discussions. Below we have
highlighted a few areas that we support and have particular expertise
in:
Equitable Access to the Outdoors

H.R. 2021 would ensure more equitable access to parks, thus
promoting individual health and economic benefits, specifically through
the inclusion of the Every Kid Outdoors Act, Outdoors for All Act, and
Transit to Trails Act. These programs prioritize and directly serve
deliberately under-resourced and overlooked communities by addressing
inequities in access to parks and natural outdoor spaces. There are
proven benefits to investing in parks and recreation. The outdoor
recreation economy accounts for billions of dollars in consumer
spending and supports millions of jobs. By improving connectivity with
outdoor recreation, more people can benefit from outdoor industry
employment opportunities, as well as the physical and mental wellbeing
associated with recreating outdoors. If we maximize the opportunities
for all people to experience the physical, mental, and social benefits
of nature, then every community--regardless of race, income, or zip
code--will be stronger, healthier, and more resilient for generations
to come.
Fair and Just Transition

The Environmental Justice for All Act would increase the onshore
coal, oil, and gas royalty rate to ensure companies pay a fair price
and that the public is compensated properly for the private use of our
shared public lands. The legislation also establishes a Federal Energy
Transition Economic Development Assistance Fund and two new fees on the
oil, gas, and coal industries to support communities and workers as
they transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies.
Transparent and Inclusive Federal Decision Making

H.R. 2021 ensures early and meaningful community involvement
opportunities under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when
federal agencies propose an action that can harm the health and
environment of an environmental justice community. The bill directs
Federal agencies to solicit robust Tribal representation throughout the
NEPA process for an activity that could impact an Indian Tribe,
including activities impacting off-reservation lands and sacred sites.
Federal agencies would also be directed to conduct and compile
environmental and health research while soliciting community input,
particularly with Indigenous communities. Additionally, H.R. 2021 would
require the consideration of cumulative impacts in permitting decisions
and ensure that permits issued pursuant to such acts demonstrate a
reasonable certainty of no harm to human health.
Collaboration and Representation

The Environmental Justice for All Act would establish channels of
collaboration between federal agencies and environmental justice
communities, including Tribal and Indigenous populations, to ensure
meaningful and transparent community collaboration in the development
and implementation of environmental justice strategies and research.
The bill would also bolster protections through the expansion of legal
rights and recourse for impacted communities and individuals when faced
with discrimination. Lastly, through agency trainings on justice and
community grants to fund environmental justice initiatives and
research, H.R. 2021 will generate educational benefits both for those
in government and those in the community about the environment as a
contributor to public health issues.

TWS supports the expansion of legal rights for people and
communities experiencing environmental injustice, ensuring early and
meaningful involvement of frontline communities in federal decision
making, increasing environmental justice training for agency staff,
providing resources to expand environmental justice programs, promoting
equitable access to quality outdoor spaces, and ensuring just
transitions for workforces in impacted communities. For these reasons,
TWS supports the Environmental Justice for All Act and urges all
Members of the Committee to support H.R. 2021.

Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Drew McConville,
Senior Managing Director, Government Relations

______

TOXIC FREE NORTH CAROLINA

Durham, North Carolina

February 14, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Toxic Free North Carolina writes to offer our strong support for
the Environmental Justice for All Act (H.R. 2021). We urge you and your
fellow committee members to advance this important legislation quickly
to begin remedying the long history of environmental racism in our
nation, and the cumulative, disproportionate health impacts resulting
from our institutional injustices.
Since 1986, Toxic Free NC has been advocating for safer and more
just policies to protect environmental health in North Carolina. This
legislation is aligned with our mission and values as we fight for a
toxic-free future in which all individuals and communities across our
state have sovereignty over their health and environment. Those who are
living on the frontlines of toxic pollution--predominantly Black and
Brown and low-income communities--also bear disproportionate impacts
from racial injustice, an escalating climate crisis, and a public
health emergency. Last week's Winston Weaver fertilizer plant fire in
Winston Salem, North Carolina, is only the most recent example in a
long history of environmental injustice in our state.
Many, many testimonies of the impacted people and communities, and
academic research based on their stories have documented
disproportionate chemical hazards and health impacts imposed on
communities of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous
communities--currently and historically.
These affected peoples and communities have themselves developed
and demanded solutions to these injustices and harms for some time. The
extensive public input process that informed the Act's creation
reflects this history and has produced legislation uniquely influenced
by the people and communities it seeks to help.

We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction over
this legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Respectfully submitted by,

Connor Kippe,
Policy Advocate

______

Statement for the Record
Virginia Interfaith Power & Light
Faith Harris & Kidest Gebre

Introduction:

Greetings and thank you for the opportunity to submit the following
written comments to the committee in support of H.R. 2021, also known
as the EJ4All Act. Virginia Interfaith Power & Light (VAIPL) represents
over 16,000 supporters representing faith communities across the
Commonwealth of Virginia. Our written testimony will focus on the
importance of defining cumulative impacts and for providing meaningful
community involvement opportunities to achieve environmental justice
for all, especially for low wealth, Black, and Brown communities.
In Virginia, as well as in other states, we know that low-income
communities and ``communities of color are already at greater risk from
pollution from fossil-fueled power plants than the general population.
In 2015 as a supplement to the final Clean Power Plan, the EPA
conducted an environmental justice proximity analysis. This analysis
summarized all of the affected electricity generating units while
collecting socio-demographic characteristics and other environmental
data at a distance of 1 and 3 miles around each regulated source. The
analysis showed that people who live within 3 miles of a power plant
have an average income of $18,400 compared to the national average of
$21,587. Thirty-nine percent of the people that live within 3 miles of
a power plant are people of color compared to the national average of
thirty-six percent.'' \1\ While there have been no subsequent reports,
this type of analysis is a foundation to identify potential areas,
communities, and regions to expand the analysis process accordingly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency , EJ Screening Report for
the Clean Power Plan, supra n.5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 7. Consideration of cumulative impacts

``Many fossil fuel-fired power plants in the United States are
located in the same areas where other industrial facilities are sited.
Many of those facilities contribute to the nonattainment of other Clean
Air Act standards. Residents in these communities are overburdened by
numerous pollution sources as well as social and economic stressors.''
The EPA should provide the standard for states to ``address the
cumulative impacts of multiple pollution sources on low-income
communities and communities of color. Communities should advocate for
their state to take a multi-pollutant approach to plan development. The
EPA has suggested in the final rule. Application of a multi-pollutant
approach increases the likelihood of limiting or eliminating localized
emission increases that would otherwise affect overburdened
communities.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Final Clean Power Rule at 258 (2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``Cumulative impacts are defined as impacts that result from
individually minor but collectively significant actions over time. Such
impacts are known to increase racial and economic disparities in health
outcomes resulting from harmful environmental activities such as energy
generation, mining, waste disposal, and wastewater treatment.
Disproportionate adverse environmental impacts have resulted from
Virginia's fossil fuel infrastructure, housing infrastructure, siting
of industrial facilities, waste management, and transportation system.
Numerous fossil-fuel based power plants have been placed in localities
that have a higher percentage of people-of-color than the state
average.'' \3\ For example, the Mountain Valley Pipeline (MVP) would
carry fracked gas across 303 miles from northern West Virginia to
southern Virginia. The proposed pipeline would have a carbon impact
equivalent to 26 typical coal plants and risk water contamination in
local communities and homes. ``The project would pump and pressurize
fracked gas to travel from Chatham into North Carolina, posing several
environmental and public health risks for the historically Black
community.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Talking Points: Omnibus Environmental Justice Bill (2021)
Virginia Environmental Justice Collaborative.
\4\ Walters, Makaelah. ``Residents near Proposed Lambert Compressor
Station Push Back, Cite Environmental Racism.'' Appalachian Voices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
MVP's ``Southgate Extension'' plan includes the Lambert compressor
station in Pittsylvania County. The Lambert compressor station would be
the third compressor station located in the same community.
``Compressor stations, which help maintain pressure and flow of the
natural gas in pipelines, can be significant sources of pollution,
emitting carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, fine particulate matter,
sulfur dioxides, and volatile organic compounds, among other harmful
substances. The station emits constant noise, but noise levels are most
severe during a ``blowdown'' or release function.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The cumulative impacts of environmental issues are associated with
adverse effects on public health that disproportionately impact
communities of color. Considering cumulative impacts will allow federal
``agencies to thoroughly evaluate their historical and anticipated
environmental actions. This is particularly significant for
environmental activities near low-income areas, communities of color,
or historically underserved communities that are impacted by several
environmental risks and harms simultaneously.'' \6\ Mountain Valley
Pipeline's decision regarding the Lambert station at the MVP Southgate
extension would perpetuate patterns of environmental racism that
concentrate toxins in Black and Indigenous communities and is an
excellent example of why we need to incorporate cumulative impact
considerations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 20. Public Meetings

As a grassroots organization, Virginia Interfaith Power & Light
consistently supports community members to overcome barriers to
participation in the current system for environmental decision-making.
Public participation related to environmental decisions should include
rulemaking and permit decisions. The environmental justice for all act
requires involving impacted communities in the decision-making process
for environmental justice issues. Public meetings are essential to
improving public engagement in permitting procedures and related
regulations for environmental justice issues.
Public meetings are crucially important for community participation
and involvement in ``consideration of the development of certain new
polluting facilities for community members such as most fossil fuel-
fired power plants, landfills, and sewage treatment plants.'' \7\ For
example, here in Virginia, ``current public participation requirements
do not provide for the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of
Virginians in agencies' environmental decisions and actions. This
unfair treatment is demonstrated by the persistent environmental
injustices related to siting of fossil fuel infrastructure, landfills,
and other environmentally hazardous activities in environmental justice
communities.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Talking Points: Omnibus Environmental Justice Bill (2021)
Virginia Environmental Justice Collaborative.
\8\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similar to Pittsylvania County, many ``environmental justice
communities, especially rural Black communities as of recently, are
known to be at risk of or directly face unequal burdens from the
state's environmental decision-making activities and the current
cumbersome pathways for providing public feedback that have prioritized
professional expertise and technical arguments over legitimate health
concerns of residents of environmental justice and fenceline
communities.'' \9\ As people of conscience, we believe the voices of
marginalized communities across the commonwealth need to be
prioritized, valued, and empowered in all decision-making processes.
Public hearings on permits should be held in the directly impacted
communities earlier in the process with both in-person and hybrid
options. Public hearings should be held when accessible to full-time
workers. Communities also need more advance notice of when public
hearings will be held.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Environmental Justice for All Act will help our federal
agencies to advance environmental justice and set the standards for
state agencies to follow. During our current General Assembly 2022, we
at Virginia Interfaith Power & light are working to oppose legislation
introduced to curtail the authority of citizen boards to approve or
deny permits for both air and water pollution. One bill also removed
the opportunity for public hearings and public comments. Passing
legislation at the federal level where the EPA is tasked to hold public
hearings regionally will set forth language and practice useful to
state and non-governmental organizations like Virginia Interfaith Power
& Light to hold state agencies and legislators accountable to engage
impacted communities.

______

Women's Voices for the Earth

February 8, 2022

The Hon. Raul Grijalva,
Chairman                     The Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking
Member
Natural Resources Committee   Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Women's Voices for the Earth, an environmental health organization
representing tens of thousands of people across the nation, strongly
supports the Environmental Justice for All Act (HR 2021). For too long,
people of color and low-income communities have suffered the
disproportionate impacts of pollution.

It is well-established that women of color experience some diseases
and conditions at significantly higher rates than white women. African-
American women are 34% more likely to die of breast cancer than white
women,\1\ and lupus, an autoimmune disease, affects African-American
women at three times the rate of white women. Lupus also
disproportionately affects women of Latina, Asian and American Indian
descent.\2\ African American women are more likely to have premature
births and babies born with low birth weights.\3\ While there may be
numerous factors associated with these increased risks, each of these
risks has also been linked with exposure to toxic chemicals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010. Finding
Solutions to Health Disparities: At A Glance 2010. Available: http://
www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/AAG/reach.htm.
\2\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Office of Minority
Health and Health Disparities. 2008. Eliminate Disparities in Lupus
(Online Factsheet). Available: http://www.cdc.gov/omhd/amh/factsheets/
lupus.htm.
\3\ March of Dimes Fact Sheet: Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
Birth Outcomes. Available at: https://www.marchofdimes.org/March-of-
Dimes-Racial-and-Ethnic-Disparities_feb-27-2015.pdf.

People of color, including African Americans, Latinos, and Asian
Americans, comprise a majority of the population in neighborhoods where
commercial hazardous waste facilities are located. Forty-six percent of
housing units for the poor--mostly people of color--sit within about a
mile of factories that reported toxic emissions to the EPA.\4\ As a
result, people of color suffer higher-than-average rates of asthma,
lead poisoning, and exposure to contaminated water, pesticides, and
mercury.\5\ These factors, when combined with exposure in the
workplace, home, and diet, often lead to greater adverse health effects
in women of color than in the rest of the population.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Bullard, R; Saha, R; Wright, B. 2007. Toxic Wastes and Race and
Twenty 1987-2007: Grassroots Struggles to Dismantle Environmental
Racism in the United States. Report for United Church of Christ Justice
& Witness Ministries. Available: http://www.ejnet.org/ej/twart.pdf.
\5\ Ibid.

Indigenous people who rely on traditional diets of fish and marine
mammals are also strongly affected by environmental contamination,
particularly of water. One study found blood levels of polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) at levels six to nine times higher in the Yupik people
of Alaska than in the general population in the lower 48 states.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.3402/ijch.v64i4.18010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We strongly support the Act's central elements, which are important
steps toward remedying a long legacy of harm, and ensuring the fair
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people--regardless of
color, culture, national origin, or income--with respect to the
development, implementation, and enforcement of health and
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. These urgently needed
policy improvements include:

Requiring federal agencies to consider cumulative health
impacts under the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act in
making permitting decisions, and ensuring that permits are
only issued when there is a reasonable certainty of no harm
to human health;

Providing $75 million in annual grants for research and
program development to reduce health disparities; and
improve public health in environmental justice communities;

Strengthening the Civil Rights Act to permit private
citizens and organizations facing discrimination to seek
legal remedies;

Creating an energy transition economic development
assistance fund--paid for through new fees on oil, gas and
coal companies--to support communities and workers as they
transition away from greenhouse gas-dependent economies;

Strengthening the National Environmental Policy Act to
ensure that communities have a meaningful opportunity to
engage in NEPA processes that will impact them.

The Environmental Justice for All Act is a long overdue correction
to our nation's failed chemical management policies, and the cumulative
hazards and disproportionate harms that have resulted for communities
of color, low-income communities, and Native/Indigenous communities. We
urge the Committee, and any other committees with jurisdiction over
this legislation, to begin to correct these injustices and address this
legacy of harm, by promptly passing the bill out of Committee and
sending it on to the full House of Representatives.

Women's Voices for the Earth strongly supports (HR 2021).

Sincerely,

Jamie McConnell,
Deputy Director

______

The Chairman. The members of the Committee may also have
some additional questions to the witnesses, as I do, and we
will ask you to respond to those in writing.
Under the Committee Rules, Members can submit additional
questions to the witnesses within 3 business days following the
hearing, and the record will be kept open for 10 days for these
responses.
Let me just close by again thanking the Members and the
Committee.
There are so many things that Congress is dealing with and
the people of this nation are dealing with right now, and one
would wonder, and it sort of came up either by implication or
by direct statement, why are we focusing on this right now when
we have so many other things that we should be worried about.
And there is child slave labor, the China and Russia
threat, and the economic pain that this bill would inflict,
inflation, the cost of fuel, cost of energy, and the fact
remains that what this legislation is about is fundamental to
what we do in Congress and what our role is and what we should
support. And that is fairness and equal protection under the
law. It is about corrective action. There are efforts ongoing
to erase history, to rewrite history, and you cannot do either.
But you can correct what occurred and make sure that we put in
place those protections for generations to come so we are not
revisiting this issue over and over again.
And I think that Congresswoman Stansbury said this is not a
hypothetical, and it is not. It is quantifiable, and the means
to empower and protect all communities equally is before us.
So, as we go forward heading toward a markup, I think we
need to keep in mind that this bill is not about ending
anything that is positive. It is about ending everything and
the legacy that has created a situation.
It is no coincidence, this is not just mere happenstance,
that the concentration of polluting and endangering emissions
and discharges in this country happen to be in communities that
are predominantly poor, predominantly of color, and adjacent to
Indigenous and tribal lands in terms of impact.
It is no coincidence that when Bismarck did not want the
pipeline going through their town because, ``it would endanger
their water quality and their groundwater,'' that the Dakota
Pipeline was moved, so it now affects the Sioux Tribe, and you
wonder why you have a controversy.
Here in Tucson, the local county, municipalities, the City,
want more stringent standards on an emission plan, but as the
state and the Environmental Quality Board says, and the local
ones, ``we don't have the authority to look at EJ impact, at
cumulative impact, and to have higher standards because there
is no overarching Federal guidance and law.''
That is what we are trying to address.
So, I look forward to it. I look forward to your comments
and, in terms of the letter to the Mayor, no disrespect. I
would hope that everybody----
Would somebody mute?
And, Representative Stauber, the position in the letter
really boils down to sending a letter demanding more public
input. After the court decision delayed the action on the
Willow Development Project, there was an opportunity, a pause,
and that is when that letter went to Interior demanding more
local input. It was a flawed and questionable process that
occurred in the initial study.
That is all. So, if I am being castigated for not seeking
local input before I send a letter seeking more local input, I
plead guilty.

With that, the meeting is adjourned. Thank you very much.

[Whereupon, at 1:22 p.m., the Committee meeting was
adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Porter

Deep Dive

Oil is the hottest sector, and Wall Street analysts see upside of up to
48% for favored stocks

Last Updated: Feb. 15, 2022 at 8:15 a.m. ET

First Published: Feb. 11, 2022 at 8:07 a.m. ET

Analysts favor Canadian oil companies but also some large U.S. players,
such as ConocoPhillips, Schlumberger and Valero

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Energy is the best-performing stock-market sector this year. Given
today's strong economic growth and inflation, many believe oil prices
could remain at current levels for years or maybe even move higher.

Below are two screens of stocks derived from the holdings of three
exchange-traded funds that invest in oil and natural gas companies.

An oil price review
First, here's a chart showing the price movement of forward-month
delivery contracts for West Texas Intermediate Crude Oil CL00 over the
past 10 years:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FACTSET
That steep but brief plunge on the chart is April 2020, when demand for
oil tanked during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic, storage
sites were full and those holding front-month futures contracts
essentially had to pay people to take the oil off their hands.
Oil price expectations from here
So what lies ahead for oil prices?

In a report provided to clients on Feb. 10, analysts at BCA Research
said they believe prices will rise over the next decade in the face of
increasing demand and declining supplies. Those threats to supplies
include government action that curbs fossil-fuel production as well as
``climate activism at the board level at major energy suppliers and in
the courtroom.''

In other words, the best intentions to reduce carbon emissions can push
oil pries higher because alternate energy sources take a long time to
be available in sufficient quantity to curb demand for fossil fuels.

The BCA analysts favor long-term exposure to oil through ETFs.
Three energy ETFs
If you agree with the above scenario you might want to consider a broad
investment in the sector through one or more ETFs. Here's a quick look
at three of them:

The Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF XLE tracks the energy
sector of the S&P 500 SPX. That's a group of 21 stocks.
This is the only sector of the S&P 500 that is up this
year--a total return of 24.4% through Feb. 9, with
dividends reinvested. XLE has $35.7 billion in assets and
annual expenses of 0.12% of assets. It is highly
concentrated, with shares of Exxon Mobil Corp. XOM and
Chevron Corp. CVX making up 44% of the portfolio.

The iShares Global Energy ETF IXC holds 46 stocks,
including all the stocks held by XLE. It brings in large
non-U.S. companies, such as Shell PLC UK:SHEL SHEL,
TotalEnergies SE FR:TTE TTE and BP PLC UK:BP BP. (For the
three companies just listed, the first ticker is the local
one, the second is the American depositary receipt, or ADR.
Many of the locally traded non-U.S. companies listed below
also have ADRs.) IXC has $1.8 billion in assets, with an
expense ratio of 0.43%. The fund's largest two holdings are
Exxon Mobil and Chevron, which together make up 25.5% of
the portfolio.

The iShares S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index ETF CA:XEG holds
20 stocks of Canadian energy producers. It is also heavily
concentrated, with the largest three holdings, Canadian
Natural Resources Ltd CNQ., Suncor Energy Inc. SU and
Cenovus Energy Inc. CVE making up half the portfolio. The
ETF has 2 billion Canadian dollars in total assets, with an
expense ratio of 0.63%.

You might wonder why a foreign single-country ETF is included in the
list, but Canada stands out with its expansion of fossil-fuel
production. The iShares S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index ETF has
outperformed the other two ETFs in recent years, while underperforming
longer term.

Here's a comparison of total returns, with dividends reinvested, for
the three ETFs and the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust SPY through Feb. 9:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The iShares S&P/TSX Capped Energy Index ETF has shined over the
past one and three years. You can also see how dramatically the oil
price decline from mid 2014 through early 2016 hurt the energy sector's
long-term performance.
A look ahead for the ETFs
Here are forward price-to-earnings ratios for the three energy ETFs and
SPY, along with expected compound annual growth rates (CAGR) for
revenue and earnings per share through 2023, based on consensus
estimates among analysts polled by FactSet:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

From the forward P/E ratios, the energy ETFs might be considered
cheap relative to SPY, however, they ``earned'' investors' mistrust
during the long decline of stock prices from mid-2014 through early
2016, and, of course, early in the pandemic.

Analysts don't expect to see spectacular revenue growth for the energy
portfolios over the next two years. However, they do expect better
earnings growth than they do for the broad U.S. market--especially for
XLE.
Two energy stock screens
The three energy ETFs together hold 63 stocks. The two screens below
show which ETF or ETFs hold each stock.
First screen: dividend yields
Given what appears to be a healthy environment for oil prices, a broad
round of dividend cuts, such as those we saw early in the pandemic,
appears unlikely. With that in mind, the first screen of the 63 stocks
held by the three ETFs is simply by dividend yield.
Here are the 21 stocks held by the three ETFs with the highest dividend
yield (over 4%), along with a summary of analysts' opinions of the
stocks. Share prices and consensus price targets are in the currencies
of the country where the stocks are listed.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

You can click on the tickers for more about each company.
Then read Tomi Kilgore's detailed guide to the wealth of information
available for free on the MarketWatch quote page.

Don't assume dividends are distributed quarterly, as is common for U.S.
stocks. Some companies only distribute annually.

Also note that the highest-yielding stocks on the list are American
depositary receipts of Petroleo Brasileiro SA (known as ``Petrobas'')
common shares PBR and preferred shares PBR. Unlike traditional
preferred stocks issued in the U.S., this Petrobas preferred issue has
no par value. (More information about the Petrobas ADRs is available in
this filing from Dec. 21, 2021 with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.)

Any stock with a dividend yield above 14% has a built-in warning. If
investors expected the dividend to be safe, the share price would be
higher and the dividend yield lower. So this is an investment that
might best be left to professionals or other sophisticated investors.
Second screen: analysts' picks
Going back to our combined list of 63 stocks, here are the 18 favored
by at least 80% of analysts polled by FactSet, sorted by 12-month
upside potential as implied by consensus price targets. You can see
that analysts favor many of the Canadian oil and gas producers in
lockstep:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As always, do your own research and form your own opinions about
which investments, whether through ETFs or other funds or a combination
of those and/or individual stocks, match your investment objectives.

______

Submission for the Record by Rep. Maloney

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney

Endorsers of the Justice in Power Plant Permitting Act

Center for Earth, Energy & Democracy

Ironbound Community Corporation

Michigan Environmental Justice Coalition

New Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance

New York Communities for Change

PEAK Coalition (New York City Environmental Justice
Alliance, The Point CDC, UPROSE, New York Lawyers for the
Public Interest, Clean Energy Group)

South Bronx Unite

WE ACT for Environmental Justice

Earthjustice

Evergreen Action

League of Conservation Voters

Sierra Club

Sunrise Movement

Supporters of the Justice in Power Plant Permitting Act's Key Policies

Equitable and Just National Climate Platform

+ Center for American Progress

+  Center for Urban Environment, John S. Watson Institute for
Public Policy, Thomas Edison State University

+ Deep South Center for Environmental Justice

+ Environmental Justice Health Alliance for Chemical Policy
Reform

+ Harambee House--Citizens for Environmental Justice

+ Little Village Environmental Justice Organization

+ Los Jardines Institute

+ Natural Resources Defense Council

+ ReGenesis Project

+ Tishman Environmental and Design Center at the New School

+ Union of Concerned Scientists

Rewiring America

Co-Sponsors of the Justice in Power Plant Permitting Act

Jamaal Bowman                 Barbara Lee

Andre Carson                  Stephen F. Lynch

Yvette D. Clarke              Gwen Moore

Emanuel Cleaver               Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez

Adriano Espaillat             Mike Quigley

Eleanor Holmes Norton         Ritchie Torres

Mondaire Jones                Nydia Velazquez
