- PUERTO RICO ELECTRIC POWER AUTHORITY (PREPA) POST- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LUMA TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION CONTRACT

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PUERTO RICO ELECTRIC POWER AUTHORITY (PREPA) POST-

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LUMA TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION CONTRACT

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, October 6, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-9

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-791 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Chair
JESUS G. ``CHUY'' GARCIA, IL, Vice Chair
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, CNMI, Vice Chair, Insular Affairs
BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Ranking Member

Grace F. Napolitano, CA              Don Young, AK
Jim Costa, CA                        Louie Gohmert, TX
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Doug Lamborn, CO
CNMI                             Robert J. Wittman, VA
Jared Huffman, CA                    Tom McClintock, CA
Alan S. Lowenthal, CA                Paul A. Gosar, AZ
Ruben Gallego, AZ                    Garret Graves, LA
Joe Neguse, CO                       Jody B. Hice, GA
Mike Levin, CA                       Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Katie Porter, CA                     Daniel Webster, FL
Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM           Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR
Melanie A. Stansbury, NM             Russ Fulcher, ID
Nydia M. Velazquez, NY               Pete Stauber, MN
Diana DeGette, CO                    Thomas P. Tiffany, WI
Julia Brownley, CA                   Jerry L. Carl, AL
Debbie Dingell, MI                   Matthew M. Rosendale, Sr., MT
A. Donald McEachin, VA               Blake D. Moore, UT
Darren Soto, FL                      Yvette Herrell, NM
Michael F. Q. San Nicolas, GU        Lauren Boebert, CO
Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, IL         Jay Obernolte, CA
Ed Case, HI                          Cliff Bentz, OR
Betty McCollum, MN
Steve Cohen, TN
Paul Tonko, NY
Rashida Tlaib, MI
Lori Trahan, MA

David Watkins, Staff Director
Sarah Lim, Chief Counsel
Vivian Moeglein, Republican Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, October 6, 2021.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Gonzalez-Colon, Hon. Jenniffer, a Resident Commissioner in
Congress from the Territory of Puerto Rico.................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:

Aviles-Deliz, Edison, Chairman, Puerto Rico Energy Bureau
(PREB), San Juan, Puerto Rico..............................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    23
Questions submitted for the record.......................    34
Fontanes, Fermin, Executive Director, Puerto Rico Public-
Private Partnership Authority (P3A), Santurce, Puerto Rico.    44
Prepared statement of....................................    46
Questions submitted for the record.......................    52
Gil, Fernando, President, Puerto Rico Electric Power
Authority (PREPA) Governing Board, San Juan, Puerto Rico...     6
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13
Irizarry, Agustin, Professor of Electrical Engineering,
University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez (UPRM), Mayaguez,
Puerto Rico................................................    79
Prepared statement of....................................    81
Questions submitted for the record.......................    84
Laboy, Manuel, Executive Director, Central Office of
Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resiliency (COR3), San Juan,
Puerto Rico................................................    59
Prepared statement of....................................    61
Questions submitted for the record.......................    67
Santiago, Ruth, Community and Environmental Attorney,
Salinas, Puerto Rico.......................................    85
Prepared statement of....................................    87
Stensby, Wayne, President and Chief Executive Officer, LUMA
Energy Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico..................    36
Prepared statement of....................................    38
Questions submitted for the record.......................    39

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

AES Puerto Rico, Comments Submitted to the Natural Resources
Committee, dated October 6, 2021...........................   127

CAMBIO PR, Sierra Club of Puerto Rico, El Puente and the
Union of Electrical and Irrigation Industry Workers
(UTIER), Joint letter to the Committee, dated October 14,
2021.......................................................   129

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW),
Letter from Lonnie R. Stephenson, President to Chair
Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman, dated October 5,
2021.......................................................   131

Windmar Group, Letter to the Committee, dated October 12,
2021.......................................................   131

Submissions for the Record by Hon. Javier A. Aponte Dalmau,
Majority Speaker, Puerto Rico Senate

Letter to Chairman Grijalva on the Energy Crisis in
Puerto Rico, dated October 5, 2021.....................   133

Senate Resolution 1, First Partial Report, dated June 28,
2021...................................................   134

Submissions for the Record by Hon. Luis Raul Torres-Cruz,
Puerto Rico House of Representatives

Letter to Chairman Grijalva on the Transformation of the
Electric System of Puerto Rico, dated September 30,
2021...................................................   134

H.R. 136 Final Report, dated May 11, 2021................   138

Submissions by Ruth Santiago, Esq.

LUMA Energy Report, ``Net Metering Program Update,''
dated July 22, 2021....................................   138

Letter to the Committee, ``Supplemental Information for
Hearing,'' dated October 14, 2021......................   143

Sotomayor-Ramirez, David, ``The Case for Preserving
Agricultural Land Area in Puerto Rico and Green-Energy
Projects,'' dated October 14, 2021.....................   144

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON PUERTO RICO ELECTRIC POWER AUTHORITY (PREPA) POST-
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LUMA TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION CONTRACT

----------

Wednesday, October 6, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:04 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Raul M. Grijalva [Chairman of the Committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Grijalva, Napolitano, Costa,
Sablan, Porter, Leger Fernandez, Stansbury, Velazquez, Soto,
Garcia, Tonko, Tlaib; Gohmert, Wittman, McClintock, Graves,
Radewagen, Gonzalez-Colon, Tiffany, Moore, and Obernolte.
Also present: Representatives Espaillat, Ocasio-Cortez,
Price, and Torres.

The Chairman. The Committee on Natural Resources will come
to order. This oversight hearing is on the Puerto Rico Electric
Power Authority post-implementation of the LUMA transmission
and distribution contract, and the Committee is meeting today
to receive testimony on the status of Puerto Rico's electrical
infrastructure, including the privatization of the transmission
and distribution system from PREPA to LUMA Energy, and the
transition toward renewable energy.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chair and the Ranking Minority
Member or their designees. This will allow us to hear from our
witnesses sooner and help Members keep to their schedules.
I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted to the Clerk by 5 p.m. today or at the close of
the hearing, whichever comes first.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Without objection, the Chair will also declare a recess,
subject to the call of the Chair.
Also, without objection, Representative Torres,
Representative Ocasio-Cortez, Representative Price, and
Representative Espaillat are authorized to question the
witnesses at today's hearing.
As described in the notice, statements, documents, and
motions must be submitted to the electronic repository at

[email protected]
.
Additionally, please note that as with in-person meetings,
Members are responsible for their own microphones. As with our
in-person meetings, Members can be muted by staff only to avoid
inadvertent background noise.
Finally, Members or witnesses experiencing technical
problems should inform Committee staff immediately.
The Chair now recognizes, for her opening statement, the
Vice Ranking Minority Member for Insular Affairs.
So recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, A RESIDENT
COMMISSIONER IN CONGRESS FROM THE TERRITORY OF PUERTO RICO

Miss Gonzalez-Colon. I want to thank you, Chairman and
Ranking Member Westerman, for the opportunity to have this very
timely hearing.
I also want to recognize the witnesses who have responsibly
come before us.
The hearing is timely because over the summer Puerto Rico
has faced extreme instability of the power supply, with
widespread prolonged power interruptions, due to a near
collapse of the generation fleet in the hands of PREPA, the
state-owned utility. As of last Sunday morning, only 38 percent
of its nominally operational base load, and 42 percent of its
peaker and backup capacities were available for dispatch.
That means that, all together, running even with the
backups, it is still nearly 1,000 megawatts short of estimated
daily load. That is also almost the full capacity of the two
base load private generators. So, we see that the whole system
will barely meet demand and any spike could bring it down. Plus
that is being done by keeping our units on-line, and that are
known to require repair, or are past due, way past due, for
maintenance, creating a time bomb. Because of that, this is why
much of the old installed capacity is now unavailable.
This also creates a paradox that, since it increases costs
on both PREPA and the distribution operator, LUMA, it means
consumers see the bills go up when they are not even getting
electricity. Four years after Hurricane Maria, 1 year since the
obligation of over $10 billion in different funds, Federal
funds, to build back a better grid, 3 months later, after a
much-proclaimed contract of transmission and distribution, this
has ended people's patience.
How long is this going to happen? LUMA and PREPA must
answer that question, explain what is happening, what is going
to be done in the short term and long term, and how are they
preparing to build back better.
The people of Puerto Rico want their power to be on today--
I am not just thinking about the future--and the cost to stop
rising, and accountability for when it happens, not just great
plans about the future, or the greatest plans that they are
going to be installing. We want to see service improve now. And
if anyone is objectively failing, then take the needed steps
provided under the law and contracts to rectify it.
It worries me if this hearing, instead, revolves around an
ideological position of blaming privatization itself, that it
will be based on a demand that contracts must be reverted just
because they should be, and that we should take the FEMA
rebuilding funds and forbid them from being used for anything
other than someone's favorite alternative. I think we should be
more precise on this.
We support having community renewables and distributed
generation microgrids in Puerto Rico's recovery; these are
tools for resiliency and self-reliance itself. But, again, the
renewable energy plan in Puerto Rico is already very ambitious,
with goals of 50 percent by 2030 and 100 percent by 2050. And
now we just have 2 percent of renewables. If that is achievable
under the current parameters, great; if not, we need to discuss
now what are the necessary steps to get there.
In order for that to happen, we must now, first and
foremost, provide the people of Puerto Rico an energy supply
that is affordable for the consumer; reliable for both base
loads and peak loads for the private sector, as well--our
manufacturing industry is important, and they cannot operate
just with batteries; resilient in case of a natural disaster or
infrastructure mishap; and compliant with all environmental and
public health requirements. We cannot do that if we exclude
upfront resources like LNG, which I support, or if we rush
plant closings that are already programmed to happen before the
new grid is really ready.
I hope this hearing provides better guidance to all of us
in addressing this issue, in answering what is going to happen
when the people of Puerto Rico are going to have power, and
when PREPA is going to submit to FEMA all the necessary
documents and actually get the Federal funds that are available
from last year.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Miss Gonzalez-Colon follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, a Resident
Commissioner in Congress from the Territory of Puerto Rico
I want to thank you, Chairman Grijalva (and Ranking Member
Westerman), for the opportunity to have this very timely hearing. I
also want to recognize the witnesses who have responsibly come before
us.
The hearing is timely because over the summer Puerto Rico has faced
extreme instability of the power supply, with widespread prolonged
power interruptions, due to a near collapse of the generation fleet in
hands of PREPA, the state-owned utility. As of last Sunday morning,
only 38% of its nominally operational base load and 42% of its peaker
and backup capacities were available for dispatch.
That means, all together running even the backups, it is still
nearly 1,000 megawatts short of estimated daily load. That is also
almost the full capacity of the two base load private generators. So,
the whole system would barely meet demand, and any spike could bring it
down. Plus, that is being done by keeping units on-line that are known
to require repair or are way past overdue for maintenance, creating a
time bomb. Because THAT is why much of the old installed capacity is
now unavailable.
This also creates the paradox that, since it increases costs on
both PREPA and distribution operator LUMA, it means consumers see the
bills go UP, when they're NOT getting electricity. Four years after
Hurricane Maria, 1 year since the obligation of over $10 billion in
different funds to build a better grid, 3 months after a much-
proclaimed contract for Transmission and Distribution, this has ended
the people's patience.
How long is this going to go on? LUMA and PREPA must answer that;
explain what is happening; what is going to be done short term and long
term; how are they preparing to build back better.
The people of Puerto Rico want their power to be on, today, the
cost to stop rising, and accountability for what happens. Not just
great plans, we want to see service improve. If anyone is objectively
failing, then take the needed steps provided under the law and
contracts to rectify that.
It worries me if this hearing, instead, revolves around an
ideological position of blaming privatization itself. That it will be
based on a demand that contracts must be reverted just because they
should be, and that we should take the FEMA rebuilding funds and forbid
them from being used for anything other than our favored alternative.
We support having community renewables and distributed generation
microgrids in Puerto Rico's recovery: these are tools for resiliency
and self-reliance. Puerto Rico's renewable energy plan is already
ambitious with goals of 50% by 2030 and 100% by 2050. If that is
achievable under current parameters, great; if not, we must discuss
what are the necessary steps to get there.
However, we must first and foremost provide the people of Puerto
Rico NOW an energy supply that is affordable to the consumer, reliable
for both base loads and peak loads, resilient in case of natural
disasters or infrastructure mishap, and compliant with all
environmental and public health requirements. We cannot do that if we
exclude up front resources like LNG or if we rush plant closings that
are already programmed to happen before the new grid is really ready.
I hope this hearing provides better guidance to all of us in
addressing these issues. Thank you, I yield back.

______

The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back, thank you.
And the Full Committee Ranking Member, Mr. Westerman, do
you wish to make a statement?
[No response.]
The Chairman. Hearing no response, let me say my opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

The Chairman. The Committee is meeting today to hear from a
number of witnesses regarding the status of the privatization
of management of Puerto Rico's electric grid from the Puerto
Rico Electric Power Authority, PREPA, to LUMA Energy.
We will also hear about the authority's plans to spend an
estimated $9.5 billion of Federal cost-share for the
reconstruction of the island's electrical infrastructure, which
was destroyed by Hurricanes Irma and Maria almost exactly 4
years ago.
This hearing is indeed timely, as Representative Gonzalez-
Colon mentioned and said in her statement, in part because of
the recent changes that have taken place at PREPA, with the
resignation of the PREPA Chair, as well as the utility's
Executive Director.
It is more likely the case than not that these changes in
PREPA's leadership were due to a recent spate of widespread
power outages on the island that has understandably left the
island residents very angry, especially since the LUMA contract
was supposed to improve service.
Why are so many power outages happening now, and what are
their causes? Are they because of lack of maintenance at the
power generation plants or because of poor vegetation control
and lack of proper consultation with PREPA by LUMA on proper
load management? Do these and other problems stem from the
shortage of experienced workers at LUMA who know the system and
can anticipate where the hiccups are likely to occur?
We intend to receive answers to these and other questions.
I am hopeful that many of them can be answered today from our
diverse group of witnesses, including a representative of the
Puerto Rico Energy Bureau, which is tasked by law with
overseeing operations at PREPA, including the LUMA-managed
transmission and distribution system.
The last time this Committee held a hearing on PREPA, I
said that my primary goal was to determine the best way to
guarantee that PREPA can be rebuilt so that it withstands
future extreme weather, provides the people of Puerto Rico with
reliable and inexpensive power, and prevents the displacement
of its workers. In many ways, this remains my chief concern as
we convene this hearing today.
When I visited Puerto Rico 2 years ago and met with PREPA
officials, I raised with them a number of concerns I had at the
time about their privatization plan. These concerns, which I
also heard from various stakeholders on the island, were that
their plan lacked transparency and stringent contract
monitoring and oversight requirements, which are needed to
instill confidence in the process. In many ways, I am still
hearing those same concerns expressed today.
Finally, I must repeat my many calls, as echoed by the
PREPA Integrated Resource Plan and Act 17, for renewables to
quickly become the energy source for the island, so that the
cost of producing power, and its reliability, can be reduced
for the ratepayers.
Even though Puerto Rico Act 17 calls for PREPA to increase
its renewable portfolio by 40 percent by 2025, 60 percent by
2040, and 100 percent by 2050, ongoing foot-dragging in the
implementation of the law, as well as the IRP, make it unlikely
that these renewable energy goals will be met.
PREPA and LUMA need to move more aggressively to comply
with the IRP and Puerto Rico law. If they don't, the people of
Puerto Rico are going to pay the price.
I regret that LUMA backed out at the last minute from our
oversight hearing on the coal power plant on the island a few
months ago. Attending today was the right decision.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here. I look
forward to hearing the testimony and I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chair, Committee on
Natural Resources
The Committee is meeting today to hear from a number of witnesses
regarding the status of the privatization of management of Puerto
Rico's electric grid from the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, or
PREPA, to LUMA Energy. We will also hear about the authority's plans to
spend the estimated $9.5 billion of the Federal cost-share for the
reconstruction of the island's electrical infrastructure which was
destroyed by Hurricanes Irma and Maria almost exactly 4 years ago.
This hearing is indeed timely in part because of recent changes
that have taken place at PREPA, with the resignation of the PREPA Board
Chair as well as the utility's Executive Director.
It is more likely the case than not, that these changes in PREPA's
leadership were due to the recent spate of widespread power outages on
the island that has understandably left the island residents very
angry; especially since the LUMA contract was supposed to improve
service.
Why are there so many power outages happening now and what are
their causes? Are they because of lack of maintenance at the power
generation plants or because of poor vegetation control and lack of
proper consultation with PREPA by LUMA on proper load management? Do
these and other problems stem from a shortage of experienced workers at
LUMA who know the system and can anticipate when and where hiccups are
likely to occur?
We intend to receive answers to these and other questions. I am
hopeful that many of them can be answered today from our diverse group
of witnesses including a representative of the Puerto Rico Energy
Bureau which is tasked by law with overseeing operations at PREPA
including the LUMA-managed transmission and distribution system.
The last time this Committee held a hearing on PREPA, I said that
my primary goal was to determine the best way to guarantee that PREPA
can be rebuilt so that it can withstand future extreme weather, provide
the people of Puerto Rico with reliable, inexpensive power and prevent
the displacement of its workers.

In many ways, this remains my chief concern as we convene this
hearing today.

When I visited Puerto Rico 2 years ago and met with PREPA
officials, I raised with them a number of concerns I had at the time
about their then privatization plan. These concerns, which I had also
heard from various stakeholders on the island, were that their plan
lacked transparency and stringent contract monitoring and oversight
requirements which are needed to instill confidence in the process.

In many ways, I am still hearing those same concerns expressed
today.

Finally, I must repeat my many calls, as echoed by the PREPA
Integrated Resource Plan or (IRP) and Act 17, for renewables to quickly
become the energy source for the island so that the cost of producing
power--and its reliability--will be reduced for ratepayers.
Even though Puerto Rico Act 17 calls for PREPA to increase its
renewable portfolio to 40 percent by 2025, 60 percent by 2040, and 100
percent by 2050, ongoing foot dragging in the implementation of the law
as well as the IRP make it unlikely that these renewable energy goals
will be met.
PREPA and LUMA need to move more aggressively to comply with the
IRP and Puerto Rico law. If they don't, the people of Puerto Rico will
pay the price.
I regret that LUMA backed out at the last minute from our oversight
hearing on the coal power plant on the island a few months ago.
Attending today was the right decision. I want to thank all our
witnesses for being here and I look forward to hearing your testimony.

______

The Chairman. Let me now turn to our witnesses. Before I
introduce each witness, let me remind the witnesses that, under
our Committee Rules, they must limit their oral statements to 5
minutes, but their entire statement will appear in the hearing
record.
When you begin, the timer will begin, and it will turn
orange when you have 1 minute remaining. I recommend that
Members and witnesses joining remotely use the grid view, so
that they may pin the timer to their screen.
After your testimony is complete, please remember to mute
yourself to avoid any inadvertent background noise. I will also
allow the entire panel to testify before questioning begins.
The Chair now recognizes our first witness, Mr. Fernando
Gil, President of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority,
PREPA, Governing Board.
Mr. Gil, welcome, and the time is yours.
You are recognized, Mr. Gil for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF FERNANDO GIL, PRESIDENT, PUERTO RICO ELECTRIC
POWER AUTHORITY (PREPA) GOVERNING BOARD, SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO

Mr. Gil. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Grijalva,
Ranking Member Westerman, and members of the Committee, and to
our Resident Commissioner, Congresswoman Gonzalez. Thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
status of the ongoing transformation of the Puerto Rico
Electric Power Authority and Puerto Rico electric grid.
My name is Fernando Gil, and I am recently appointed
Chairman of PREPA Governing Board, alongside engineer Josue
Colon Ortiz, who was appointed Executive Director on September
29, 2020.
PREPA continues to face difficult challenges. Nonetheless,
it is undergoing a fundamental transformation, as required by
Puerto Rico law, conducting the most ambitious program to
procure renewable resources currently being pursued anywhere in
the United States.
At the same time, PREPA has transitioned to its management
agent, LUMA, the responsibility for operation and maintenance
of its transmission and distribution systems, in accordance
with the mandates of Act 17. We are making changes intended to
improve our performance. And among these are senior-level
management changes, power plants needs assessments, and asset
management strategies, among others.
The recent transition of PREPA's transmission and
distribution system to LUMA was complex. It required the
transfer of a large number of employees from PREPA to LUMA, and
the cutover of billing systems and call centers.
LUMA took over the transmission and distribution system,
along with the generation dispatch, on June 1, according to
plan. Unfortunately, there have been system problems since the
transfer. Among these were substation fires, caused by failure
of outmoded equipment, and other customer outages that were not
related to the transition.
I should stress that no PREPA employee who was in good
standing as of June 1 was terminated because of the transition.
All PREPA employees whose functions were being transferred to
LUMA under the agreement were either given the opportunity to
move to LUMA or to stay in agencies in the Government of Puerto
Rico.
Prior to the transition, PREPA had 5,321 employees. As of
June 8, LUMA recruited around 1,190 PREPA employees, and
currently PREPA staff is 1,260.
PREPA's generating fleet is old, outmoded, inefficient, and
expensive to run. Under PREPA's Integrated Resource Plan, most
of the fleet will be retired over the next 10 years as we
transition to renewable generation and energy storage, per
public policy mandate.
PREPA suffered a large number of generating facilities
outages in late August and through September. They had a
variety of causes, but many had to do with the advanced age of
our fleet. PREPA's base load units are 25 years old, and the
rest average over 40 years old. PREPA's ability to expend funds
on maintenance and upgrades has been constrained by the debt
restructuring process, as Title III of PROMESA, liquidity
challenges, and the need to address damages resulting from
hurricanes and earthquakes. The execution of maintenance and
repair work has also been affected by the measures required in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The most significant outage involved a generating station
on August 22. A transmission line fault led to voltage
fluctuations that affected generating facilities in the south,
including Costa Sur. Those fluctuations forced Costa Sur Unit 6
off-line and damaged a steam turbine rotor. Repairs will take
several months. Costa Sur Unit 5 suffered a rupture in its
boiler and was taken out of service on September 13 for
repairs. Welding work to repair a subsequent steam line failure
was completed earlier this week.
The Palo Seco Generating Station has experienced several
events. Unit 3 suffered boiler ruptures on August 31 and
September 6, and was limited over the September 25-26 weekend,
due to the malfunction of the cooling tower system. This unit
tripped again on September 27, due to a broken economizer. The
Unit 3 repairs have been completed. Palo Seco Unit 4 was off-
line on September 11 and 12 because of water chemistry issues,
and was again off-line on September 28 because of a turbine
lubricating oil leak. These units should be repaired and back
in service by the end of this week.
PREPA's Aguirre Station has suffered a variety of failures.
Recently, Unit 1 tripped off-line, due to a blockage in the
cooling water intake system, and Unit 2 was limited, due to the
same event as well as by issues with a regulator valve.
In 2019, PREPA installed combustion turbines at Palo Seco
that were briefly operated under a temporary emergency waiver
granted by the Environmental Quality Board following the
January 2020 earthquakes. Unfortunately, PREPA could not run
those turbines last month to make up for the loss of other
units, because it awaits a clearance from the Environmental
Protection Agency, and we can't stress enough the need for the
EPA to act soon on this.
Fortunately, during late August and September, private
operating facilities were generally available.
As required by FEMA and Puerto Rico's Central Office for
Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resiliency or COR3, PREPA and
LUMA have developed an updated 10-year plan for the repairs and
renewal of Puerto Rico's electric grid, as well as damaged
generation, dams, and irrigation facilities. The first version
of this plan was submitted on December 7, 2020. Updated
versions will be submitted every 3 years.
Over the past 5 months, PREPA has advanced a large number
of projects through the early stages of FEMA and COR3 review
and through the required Puerto Rico Energy Bureau approval
process. With these approvals in hand, PREPA and LUMA can begin
architectural and engineering design work that will feed into
project approval submittals.
Of the roughly $10.7 billion that has been obligated under
FEMA programs, PREPA is responsible for generation, dams,
hydroelectric, and irrigation projects involving investment of
around $2.5 billion. Around $900 million has been identified
for generation projects, and nearly $1.6 billion for dams,
hydro, and irrigation projects.
The Chairman. Mr. Gil, you are a minute over. If you could,
wrap up, if you don't mind, sir.
Mr. Gil. Sure, I will, sir.
PREPA continues to work with LUMA to implement the
agreement, and to support efforts to transform the Puerto Rico
transmission and distribution grid. We have the goal of making
our system more reliable, cleaner, affordable, and more
customer-centric.
PREPA is taking a proactive approach to address and resolve
the problems that have led to an unacceptable number of outages
due to its generation fleet. We are making progress in securing
Federal funding to support----
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Gil.
Mr. Gil. Sorry.
The Chairman. No, that is OK. As I said earlier, I hope the
witnesses understand 5 minutes. We have a lot of witnesses, and
we have Members that have questions. So, anything within your
power to try to limit that would be great.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Gil follows:]
Prepared Statement of Fernando Gil Ensenat, Chairman, Governing Board
and Josue A. Colon Ortiz, Executive Director
Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority
Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the current status and ongoing transformation of the Puerto
Rico Electric Power Authority and Puerto Rico's electric grid. My name
Fernando Gil Ensenat. I am the Chairman of PREPA's Governing Board.
With me is Josue A. Colon Ortiz; he was appointed PREPA's Executive
Director on September 29, 2021.
PREPA appreciates the interest the Committee has expressed in
progress PREPA has made in implementing the June 22, 2020 Operation and
Maintenance Agreement with LUMA Energy. I will address this subject
first, and will also address questions I understand the Committee may
have concerning the status of former PREPA employees following the LUMA
transition. I will then describe recent generation outages and what
PREPA has done and is doing in response. I will offer a brief update as
to where we stand in taking advantage of federal funding for the
restoration of facilities for which PREPA remains responsible. I will
also offer an update on PREPA's progress in advancing its renewable
energy generation and energy storage procurement program.
I want to start by acknowledging that PREPA continues to face
difficult challenges on a number of fronts. These include a PROMESA
Title III restructuring process that has been underway since July 2017,
and serious liquidity constraints. Added to this have been several
severe weather events, including Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017,
which destroyed or severely damaged much of PREPA's transmission and
distribution system. Then came earthquakes in December 2019 and January
2020, which did serious damage to the Costa Sur Generating Station, one
of PREPA's largest, and led to limits on the amount of liquified
natural gas that can be stored at the EcoElectrica facility for use in
generating power. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected and continues to
affect every aspect of life in Puerto Rico, including the pace at which
repairs on the T&D system and PREPA generating facilities can be
completed. Most recently, failures at a number of PREPA's generating
facilities have required rotating load shedding to balance available
electricity supply with demand.
To complicate these challenges, the Authority is undergoing a
fundamental transformation, as required by Puerto Rico law. It is
conducting perhaps the most ambitious program to procure renewable
generation and energy storage resources currently being pursued
anywhere in the U.S. At the same time, PREPA has transitioned
responsibility for operation and maintenance of its transmission and
distribution system, in what was the largest transaction of its type
ever completed in the United States. PREPA is evaluating a similar
transition of responsibility for the operation, maintenance and
decommissioning of its generating fleet to third parties. The PREPA
organization has become much smaller than it was even a year ago, and
significant changes in senior management have been made in the past 10
days.
PREPA's handling of these challenges has been uneven. We have made
mistakes. We are making changes intended to benefit from lessons we
have learned and to improve our performance. Among these are very
recent senior level changes, including my appointment as Chairman of
PREPA's Governing Board and Josue Colon's appointment as Executive
Director. The purpose of these changes, and others we will be making,
is to position PREPA to achieve the goals established in recent laws
and the approved Integrated Resource Plan.
We take our obligations to the people of Puerto Rico seriously, and
are working to address the many challenges I have just described. We
remain committed to the transformation of PREPA and Puerto Rico's
electric system to one that is reliable, resilient, efficient, clean
and customer-centric.
Status of the LUMA Transition
The recent transition of the transmission and distribution system
to LUMA was complex. The transition required the transfer on June 1,
2021 of large numbers of employees from PREPA to LUMA, the cutover of
billing systems, and the transfer of responsibility for call centers,
all effective on June 1. At the same time, PREPA and LUMA had to manage
the handover of responsibility for dispatching generation, responding
to outages and performing day-to-day transmission and distribution
system maintenance. The transfer of responsibility for running the
system took place as scheduled on June 1, and the preparations PREPA
and LUMA had made leading up to that date were equal to the challenge.
LUMA succeeded in taking over the T&D system and the dispatch of
generation on June 1, as scheduled, with minimal disruption. There were
some significant problems following the transfer. Among these were a
substation fire, which was caused by the failure of outmoded equipment,
not anything specifically related to the transition. And there were
customer outages that were unrelated to the transition.
Since the June 1 transition, PREPA and LUMA have been adjusting to
their new roles, with PREPA now solely responsible for the operation
and maintenance of its generating assets and LUMA responsible for the
operation and maintenance of the T&D system and generation dispatch.
Our organizations are committed to the transformation of Puerto Rico's
electric sector.
I should stress that no PREPA employee who was in good standing as
of June 1 was terminated as a result of the transition. All PREPA
employees whose functions were being transferred to LUMA under the O&M
Agreement were either given the opportunity to move to LUMA, at
salaries comparable to their pre-existing salaries, or to take
positions with Puerto Rico government agencies. Just prior to the June
1 transition, PREPA had 5,321 employees. As of June 8, LUMA had
recruited 1,190 PREPA employees. Currently, PREPA has 1,260 active
employees.
Recent Generation Outages
PREPA's fleet of generating facilities is old, outmoded,
inefficient and expensive to run. PREPA's approved Integrated Resource
Plan envisions that most of these units will be retired over the next
10 years, in favor of new generation from renewable sources as well as
energy storage. The IRP also envisions the retirement of the AES
generating facility, as required by Puerto Rico law, by year-end 2027.
PREPA suffered a large number of generating facility outages in
late August and through September. They had a variety of causes, but
many had to do with the advanced age of PREPA's generating fleet.
PREPA's newest baseload units are 25 years old, and the rest average
over 40 years old. PREPA's ability to expend funds on maintenance and
upgrades has been constrained by the Title III process, liquidity
challenges and the need to address damage resulting from hurricanes and
earthquakes. The execution of maintenance and repair work has also been
affected by measures required in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Over the past 45 days, several of PREPA's largest steam generating
units were forced out of service. This, along with some faults in the
transmission system and the limited availability of backup generation,
meant that there was less generation available than was required to
meet demand during peak periods. To address the generation resource
shortfall, LUMA was required to shed load to allocate the limited
electricity supply.
The most significant generating unit outage involves the Costa Sur
generating station. On August 22, a transmission line fault led to loss
of two of the San Juan generating units and transmission system
fluctuations that affected generating facilities in the south,
including Costa Sur. Those fluctuations led to vibrations which
eventually forced Costa Sur Unit 6 offline and damaged the steam
turbine rotor. Repairs of that equipment will take several months. In
the meantime, a spare turbine rotor has been sent for repair in St.
Louis. That repair should be completed and Unit 6 back in service
within 4 months, subject to inspection results. Costa Sur Unit 5
suffered a rupture in its boiler and was taken out of service on
September 13 for repairs. A break in the main steam line prevented the
unit's return to service as scheduled on September 14. Welding work to
repair that break was completed at the beginning of this week. Costa
Sur's difficulties are particularly frustrating for PREPA, since
following the January 2020 earthquakes PREPA invested around $40
million to repair and restore both Costa Sur units and to eliminate a
maintenance backlog. These repairs were effective, but the Costa Sur
plant, being an old plant, remains vulnerable to age-related failures.
The Palo Seco Generating Station experienced several events
beginning August 31 that have limited its available capacity. Unit 3
suffered boiler ruptures on August 31, and again on September 6. Unit 3
was limited on the September 25-26 weekend due to sargassum clogging of
cooling water systems. This unit tripped again on September 27 due to a
broken economizer. Repairs have been completed. Palo Seco Unit 4 was
offline from September 11 to September 12 because of water chemistry
issues, and was again offline on September 28 because of a turbine
lubricating oil leak which burned a cable tray and affected a pump's
hydrogen seal and a motor turning gear. This unit should be repaired
and back in service by this weekend.
PREPA's Aguirre station, another large and old generating facility,
has suffered a variety of boiler and pump failures in recent weeks.
Most recently Unit 1 tripped offline because its cooling water intake
system became clogged by sargassum and Unit 2 was limited due to the
same event, as well by issues with a regulator valve.
In 2019, PREPA installed combustion turbines at its Palo Seco
generating station to provide backup generation and system support.
Those turbines were operated under temporary emergency waivers from the
Environmental Quality Board after the January 2020 earthquakes. PREPA
would have liked to have run those turbines last month to make up for
the loss of generation at other facilities, but could not because it
needs a clearance from the Environmental Protection Agency. So the new
Palo Seco combustion turbines have not been available during the recent
generation outage events. PREPA continues to seek the required air
permits, and is ready to commission the combustion turbines once it has
the necessary EPA authorization. We need EPA to act soon.
Fortunately, during late August and September, when several of
PREPA's generating units were forced offline, the AES generating
facility was consistently available. During that time the EcoElectrica
combined cycle generating facility was also generally available.
PREPA and its contractors are working hard to repair PREPA's
damaged generating facilities. And PREPA is actively in the market
seeking commitments from developers to add a large amount of renewable
generation and energy storage to replace its aging generating fleet, as
I will discuss.
Status of Federal Funding of Generation, Dam and Hydroelectric Projects
As required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Puerto
Rico's Central Office for Recovery, Reconstruction and Resiliency, or
COR3, PREPA has developed and has since updated a 10 Year Plan for the
repair and renewal of Puerto Rico's electric grid as well as damaged
generation, dam and irrigation facilities with federal support. The
first version of this Plan was submitted on December 7, 2020, and an
updated Plan will be submitted every 3 years. On September 21, 2021,
PREPA submitted a 90 Day Plan that addresses areas covered by the 10
Year Plan on which PREPA will be focusing and executing over the next
90 days. With the 10 Year Plan in place, and processes for project
review and approval by the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau, COR3 and FEMA now
established and well understood, PREPA is now in a position to begin to
advance repair and renewal projects eligible for FEMA funding that were
first identified 3 years ago, in the wake of Hurricane Maria.
Over the past 5 months PREPA has succeeded in advancing a large
number of projects through the early stages of the FEMA/COR3 process.
This has required the involvement of the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau,
which must approve T&D and generation projects, as well as the
Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico, whose sign-
off is also necessary. The process is complex, demanding and time
consuming. The first projects, which were jointly submitted for
approval by PREPA and LUMA, did not receive the required Energy Bureau
approvals until June 8, 2021. Now with these approvals in hand, PREPA
and LUMA can begin architectural and engineering design work that will
feed into project approval submittals to be made to COR3 and FEMA.
With the transfer to LUMA of responsibility for Puerto Rico's
transmission and distribution system, PREPA's efforts relating to FEMA
federal disaster relief funding are now focused on projects involving
generation, dams, hydroelectric facilities and irrigation. There are
currently 41 generation, dams and hydro projects for which PREPA
expects to receive FEMA funding. LUMA now has responsibility to secure
from the Energy Bureau and FEMA authorizations for projects involving
the transmission and distribution system. T&D system projects will
absorb most of the funding that FEMA has obligated for Puerto Rico
electrical infrastructure; generation projects for which PREPA remains
responsible are a small portion--under 10 percent--of the total.
Of the roughly $10.7 billion in funding that has been obligated for
investments in Puerto Rico electric and related infrastructure, PREPA
is now responsible for generation, dam, hydroelectric and irrigation
projects that as of today would involve investments of approximately
$2.5 billion under FEMA's 428 and 404 programs. This amount will change
as engineering analyses are performed and project scopes are more
clearly defined. Of this amount, approximately $900 million has been
identified for generation projects, and nearly $1.6 billion has been
identified for dams, hydro and irrigation projects. Some repairs have
been completed for which PREPA has sought or will seek reimbursement
through COR3 from FEMA. Early in September PREPA received Puerto Rico
Energy Bureau approval to proceed with 14 of 20 projects, and the other
6 projects were approved on September 28. PREPA submitted the first
group of 14 approved projects to COR3 and FEMA for the establishment of
required FEMA project numbers the same day the Energy Bureau approved
them.
Around 61% of all federally funded generation, dam, hydro and
irrigation projects have been started in the sense that a scope of work
is under development. To date PREPA has received around $500,000 in
federal reimbursements. We are in early days, so the dollar spend is
low, being focused on architectural and engineering design work. The
spend will ramp up as projects move from the design phase into
implementation.
Before project construction can commence, PREPA must submit
projects to the Energy Bureau for its approval and, having received
this, then must submit a scope of work to FEMA. That scope of work has
to be detailed enough to enable FEMA to evaluate the environmental and
historical resource impacts of the individual project. Depending on the
nature of the project, at least 30% of the project design work needs to
be completed in order to provide FEMA the information it needs, and for
projects that may have significant impacts, as much as 100% of the
project design work may need to be completed. The process takes a great
deal of time. It can be set back by delays, for example, in obtaining
FOMB approvals for renewal of professional services contracts for firms
assisting PREPA in complying with FEMA and COR3 requirements.
PREPA has recently submitted a request to COR3 for reimbursement of
$7.1 million for architectural and engineering work required in
connection with generation and dams, hydro and irrigation projects
identified for FEMA funding. Those funds should be disbursed to PREPA
this week. So we are making progress, slowly, in obtaining access to
the FEMA funds that have been identified for projects involving
generation, dams, hydro and irrigation.
Status of PREPA's Renewable Generation/Energy Storage Procurement
Process
As required by its approved Integrated Resource Plan and orders of
the Energy Bureau, PREPA has embarked on one of the most ambitious
efforts being undertaken anywhere in the United States to procure new
renewable generation and energy storage resources. Over the next 3
years, to comply with Energy Bureau directives, PREPA will seek
commitments from third party developers to permit, construct, own and
operate a total of 3,750 MW of renewable energy generation resources
and 1,500 MW of energy storage resources. PREPA issued a Request for
Proposals for renewable generation and energy storage systems on
February 22, 2021. This was Tranche 1 of 6 Tranches; in this first
Tranche, as the Energy Bureau directed, PREPA sought commitments to
develop at least 1,000 MW of renewable generation and to develop energy
storage systems having capacity of at least 500 MW.
The response to PREPA's first RFP has been encouraging. Quantities
of both renewable generation and energy storage offered were greater
than the targets PREPA identified for the first Tranche. Last Thursday
PREPA communicated to participants in the first Tranche PREPA's
decisions as to which proposals have been selected to advance to
``Phase III'' of the RFP process. More than three dozen project
proposals will be considered and given the opportunity to be awarded
contracts in this third and final Phase. This could result in over 40
individual contracts with generation, storage and virtual power plant
project developers. PREPA and its advisors will complete System Impact
Studies and Facility Studies addressing the interconnection of each
project to the transmission and distribution grid, and PREPA will make
interconnection cost estimates based on these studies available to each
project proponent. It will then invite each proponent to make its best
and final price offer. PREPA expects to commence the final contract
documentation process with individual project proponents in October,
and expects to complete this process in November and December of this
year. The Energy Bureau-mandated target is for the selected projects to
commence commercial operation within 24 months of contract execution.
PREPA will issue its Tranche 2 RFP by mid-October. In this second
Tranche, as the Energy Bureau has directed, PREPA will seek to procure
at least 500 MW of renewable generation capacity and at least 250 MW of
energy storage capacity. The remaining 4 Tranches will be issued at 6
month intervals over the next couple of years.
We are pleased with the interest we have seen among developers in
responding to Puerto Rico's urgent need to add clean and reliable
generating resources to the island's electric grid. PREPA is committed
to making its renewable procurement process a success, and to the goal
of transforming Puerto Rico's electric system to one that is reliable,
resilient, environmentally sustainable and customer-centric.
Conclusion
In compliance with the applicable laws and regulations, PREPA
continues to work with LUMA to implement the LUMA O&M Agreement and to
support LUMA in its efforts to transform the Puerto Rico transmission
and distribution grid. Our organizations share the goal of making the
grid more reliable, resilient, cleaner, affordable, and more customer-
centric. Our relationship is good and improving.
PREPA is doing all that it can to address and resolve the problems
that have led to an unacceptable number of outages in its aged and
inefficient generation fleet. Recent management changes at PREPA are
intended to reinforce the Authority's commitment to turning this
situation around.
PREPA is making progress in securing federal funding to support the
renewal of generation and hydro assets, though the process continues to
be complex and time-consuming. PREPA, the government of Puerto Rico,
and all the people of the island appreciate the federal funding that
will help us do this. It will make a huge difference for our people. I
want to thank Members of Congress for their support for the
transformation of the Puerto Rico Electric system through the federal
funding mechanisms they have established.
And finally, PREPA is focused intently on advancing its procurement
of new renewable and energy storage capacity as quickly as possible.
Initial indications on this front are positive. More generally, PREPA
remains fully committed to continuing on the path of transforming
Puerto Rico's electric sector and to a future in which energy is
cleanly and efficiently produced and reliably distributed to the people
of Puerto Rico at reasonable cost.

Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Fernando Gil-Ensenat, Chairman,
Governing Board, Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority

Questions Submitted by Representative Velazquez
Question 1. How is PREPA going to comply with the Renewable
Portfolio Standard to achieve a minimum of 40% of renewable energy on
or before 2025, if as of today Puerto Rico only generates 3% of
renewable energy?

Answer. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA) is
proceeding as required by its approved Integrated Resource Plan and
orders of the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau (PREB) to procure the
quantities of renewable generation and energy storage resources
required to satisfy Puerto Rico's Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS),
as established by Act 82-2010, as amended. The RPS contemplates that
40% of the energy distributed to Puerto Rico consumers be generated by
renewable resources, by 2025. As I testified to the Committee on
Natural Resources on October 6, 2021, to this end PREPA has embarked on
one of the most ambitious efforts to procure new renewable generation
and energy storage resources being undertaken anywhere in the United
States.
PREPA will seek commitments from third party developers to permit,
construct, own and operate a total of 3,750 MW of renewable energy
generation resources and 1,500 MW of energy storage resources. This
quantity is approximately equal to the amount of generation capacity
currently available from PREPA. In the first of what will be six
procurement Tranches, PREPA has sought commitments from third parties
to develop at least 1,000 MW of renewable generation and energy storage
systems having a capacity of at least 500 MW. These quantity thresholds
are consistent with those set out in PREPA's approved IRP and those the
Energy Bureau has determined are required to meet the 40% renewable
generation requirement, by 2025.
The response to the Tranche 1 RFP has been encouraging. The
renewable generation and energy storage resource capacity offered was
in the aggregate greater than the targets PREPA identified for that
first Tranche. PREPA representatives are currently engaged in efforts
to conclude the evaluation of more than 40 renewable generations,
energy storage and virtual power plant projects, and PREPA expects to
complete this process and the contracts approvals by all the external
stakeholders (Puerto Rico Energy Bureau and the Financial Oversight and
Management Board for Puerto Rico) by the end of this year.
By the end of this month, PREPA will issue its second Tranche RFP.
In this second Tranche, as the Energy Bureau has directed, PREPA will
seek to procure at least 500 MW of renewable generation capacity and at
least 250 MW of energy storage capacity. PREPA intends to request
Proponents to submit their Tranche 2 proposals in early January. The
remaining 4 RFP Tranches will be issued at 6 month intervals over the
next two years.
As of today, PREPA acquires only around 3% of the energy it
distributes from renewable resources. This percentage is lower than it
would have been if PREPA had been permitted to execute power purchase
and operating agreements with 16 ``shovel ready'' renewable generation
projects, representing 594 MW of capacity, which PREPA renegotiated
last year. Unfortunately, although the Energy Bureau authorized PREPA
to enter into those renegotiated agreements, on August 17, 2020 the
Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico notified PREPA
that it had concluded that the cost of energy to be purchased under
those contracts would be higher than those assumed under PREPA's Fiscal
Plan, and therefore permitted PREPA to procure only 150 MW of the
nearly 600 MW of renewable generating capacity it had set out to
acquire from the ``shovel ready'' projects.

Question 2. According to your testimony and the answer to my
question, Costa Sur's recent failure was due to issues with the
transmission. Could you please provide the pertaining documentation
regarding this incident and how a fault in transmission was
responsible?

Answer. On August 22, 2021, a transmission line, 38,900, suffered a
malfunction which led to the loss of two of the San Juan generating
units (Units 5 and 6), and Units 3 and 4 of Palo Seco Steam Plant. The
loss of these four units caused an automatic load shedding in the
electric system. As a result of those Units being forced off-line, the
transmission system experienced significant voltage fluctuations. Those
fluctuations may have affected generating facilities in the south,
including Costa Sur, as they attempted to compensate for voltage
excursions. Although further testing and evaluations would be needed to
establish this as a fact, the fluctuations could have technically led
to turbine vibrations which eventually forced Costa Sur Unit 6 off-line
and damaged that Unit's steam turbine rotor.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. Please provide us the latest generation report and the
tables/report on the condition of the generating fleet.

Answer----
Latest reports follow:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsQuestion 2. Those reports are expected to show [t]here are
units both in PREPA and in the private generators that should have long
already been undergoing maintenance or upgrade but remain active so as
not to lose capacity.

(a) Can you identify critical units that absolutely must go offline
soon for maintenance?

Answer. The two units of EcoElectrica generating facility in
Penuelas need to be taken off-line for maintenance from November 6
until November 30, 2021, and Unit 2 of the AES generating facility in
Guayama needs to be taken off-line in January 2022 for approximately
four to six weeks.

(b) How will that leave us in reserve capacity?

Answer. The information that PREPA has available indicates that the
projected average of reserve capacity that PREPA will have available
with the EcoElectrica and AES units off-line is approximately 300 MW.
Provision of official information regarding the reserve capacity that
will be available for that period is the responsibility of LUMA
Energy's Dispatch Control Center.

Question 3. What do you answer to those who say we need not rebuild
or convert to new fuels any of the existing fleet, but just fix it to
keep running until the renewables come on-line?

Answer. PREPA anticipates that, even under optimal conditions, the
build-out of renewable generation and energy storage is likely to take
the better part of 10 years. As this build-out is being pursued, Puerto
Rico will need reliable conventional generation to meet system demand.
Accordingly, PREPA believes that it must take a balanced approach that
includes the repair of many of the generating facilities that are
currently unavailable, since their capacity will continue to be
required as renewable generation and energy storage is developed,
constructed and placed into service over the next several years.
In addition to repairing and improving the maintenance of existing
units, PREPA believes it will be necessary to add some new natural gas-
fired generating facilities, including a baseload unit in the San Juan
area, to provide more reliable capacity and to support system
operations, as renewable generation and storage are being added.
Experience in other jurisdictions, including California, Texas, Spain
and Germany, shows that some amount of fast-response rotating
generating equipment, generally in the form of natural gas-fired
combustion turbines, must continue to be available even in systems with
large amounts of renewable generation and storage to maintain system
voltage within acceptable levels, to compensate for the unavailability
of solar generation during certain times and to enable the system to
respond to weather events.

Question 4. How fast could the ``Virtual Power Plants'' be
established, from PREPA's perspective? Are they in the plans?

Answer. PREPA has sought to procure virtual power plant resources
in its Tranche 1 RFP, and VPPs are anticipated to be among the
resources that will be added quickly once PREPA is authorized to enter
into contracts with VPP Proponents. Three Proponents have come forward
in Tranche 1 with VPP project proposals. These Proponents have
indicated that some of the Participant resources they would aggregate
into a VPP are already interconnected with the Transmission and
Distribution System, and they have suggested that they could make some
capacity available from VPP resources within one year of their
execution of a Grid Services Agreement.
A major challenge for PREPA and LUMA Energy, the operator of the
T&D System, is that the Energy Management System that is currently
employed in the operation of the T&D System was not designed to
interface with VPPs, and until that system is replaced the ability to
dispatch and benefit from VPP resources is very limited. The
replacement of the Energy Management System is planned and will be
carried out by LUMA Energy. This project will be supported by funding
to be supplied by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. PREPA
understands that this replacement is unlikely to be completed before
2023.

Question 5. Palo Seco Station's three so-called ``portable'' 23 MW
generators--They were installed with a waiver for certain parameters
for emission control during the Maria emergency. They cannot be fully
used due to still to this date remaining non-compliant. What is the
status of progress?

Answer. PREPA is awaiting a required clearance from the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to perform the unit's operational
water injection system commissioning. This is required in the operation
of the emissions control systems in the Palo Seco portable combustion
turbine generators. PREPA will commission the combustion turbines once
it has the requested EPA authorization in hand. PREPA expects that such
authorization could be in place by the end of October 2021.

Question 6. Workforce matters: How many enterprise critical
positions are vacant?

Answer. There are approximately 122 vacant critical positions. In
addition to the aforementioned vacant positions, the Generation
Directorate has some employees in critical positions that are going to
retire in the near future.

Question 7. Future Generation:

(a) What is the status of the Renewables/Storage RFPs?

Answer. As I have testified, the Renewable Generation and Energy
Storage RFP process is well underway. See my response to Rep.
Velazquez's first question set forth above.
On September 30, 2021, PREPA communicated to Tranche 1 participants
its selection of proposals that will advance to ``Phase III'' of the
RFP process, in which contract documentation will be completed and
final costs of interconnection determined. More than three dozen
project proposals are being considered in this third Phase. PREPA and
LUMA will complete System Impact Studies and Facility Studies
addressing the interconnection of each generation and storage project
to the Transmission and Distribution System, and PREPA will make
interconnection cost estimates, based on these studies, available to
each project proponent.

(b) What is the status of proposals for privatizing the legacy
generation fleet?

Answer. This process is being managed by the Public-Private
Partnerships Authority (the ``P3A''), with the technical advice of
PREPA. We understand that several prospective respondents have
performed due diligence reviews and site visits focused on individual
generating facilities. We respectfully recommend that the Committee
request any additional information concerning this process from P3A,
which is in charge of the procurement process.

(i) Are proponents likely to take on plants nearing end-of-life?

Answer. PREPA understands that the operation and maintenance
agreement that would govern the relationship among PREPA, P3A and the
party or parties who contract to take on responsibility for the
operation, maintenance and retirement of legacy generating facilities
will require the successful bidders to assume the obligation to
decommission and dismantle the existing plants. The sites at which the
legacy generating facilities are located are likely to be valuable as
potential locations of new generating and energy storage facilities or
as industrial facilities, and therefore there will be substantial
incentives to make these sites ready for redevelopment. We respectfully
recommend that the Committee request any additional information from
P3A, which is in charge of the procurement process.

(ii) When are the older units scheduled for replacement?

Answer. PREPA's approved IRP assumes that the legacy baseload units
fired by heavy fuel oil will be retired over the next ten years.

Question 8. Permitting of LNG units:

(a) What's the status of the PREB/PREPA discussion on the
installation of LNG units that were not in the prior PREB-approved
resources plan?

Answer. See response immediately below.

(b) Does the renewables plan in any way forbid any further
installation of combustion units transitionally?

Answer. The Integrated Resource Plan, under which PREPA is
currently pursuing procurement of new renewable generation and energy
storage facilities, significantly limits PREPA's ability to pursue the
installation of new fossil-fired combustion turbine generating
facilities. But it does not entirely preclude the installation of such
facilities. PREPA continues to evaluate the possibility of installing
some new fossil-fueled generating facilities to support the ongoing
transition to a future state in which renewable generation and energy
storage dominate the resource mix supporting electric power supply in
Puerto Rico.
In its August 24, 2020 order in Case No. CEPR-AP-2018-0001,
approving in part and rejecting in part PREPA's IRP, the PREB declined
to authorize the inclusion of new gas-fired combustion turbine
generating units in the Modified Action Plan, pending further study.
The PREB also declined to approve the development of additional
liquefied natural gas infrastructure that would support the delivery of
natural gas to certain generating units. The PREB authorized PREPA to
commence preliminary design, economic analysis, engineering and site
selection work on a new fossil fuel-fired combined cycle generating
facility at Palo Seco or at another location in the San Juan area. The
purpose of such a facility would be to serve as a dependable source of
generating capacity, energy and ancillary services, permitting the
retirement of several existing, obsolete oil-fired generating units by
2025.
In January 2021, PREPA reported to the PREB that it is performing
planning and preliminary engineering studies which evaluate the
construction of a new dual-fuel combined cycle generating facility in
the San Juan area having a capacity of 300-400 MW. It also reported
that in October 2020, the Federal Emergency Management Agency had
obligated $13,507,500 of mitigation funds under Section 404 of the
Stafford Act, for the planning and design of a new combined cycle
facility in the San Juan area. If this new combined cycle facility were
to be built, it would be 100% federally funded. The Energy Bureau is
monitoring PREPA's development of preliminary studies for this new
combined-cycle generating facility in Case No. NEPR-MI-2021-0003 and
has required PREPA to file quarterly reports on the status of those
studies.
The PREB has directed PREPA to evaluate the replacement of only a
small amount of the gas combustion turbine generating capacity that is
installed, though generally unavailable, around the Island. At the same
time, FEMA has approved Section 404 hazard mitigation funding in the
amount of $280.7 million to cover the costs of replacing 11 Frame 5
combustion turbine units to minimize the risk that Puerto Rico's
recovery could be hampered by the unavailability of generating units
capable of responding in an emergency. Moreover, the availability of
fossil fuel-fired generating facilities would mitigate risks of
increasing grid instability that could result as rotating generating
equipment is replaced by inverter-based generation and energy storage.
PREPA is continuing to engage with the PREB on the question of how much
gas-fired combustion turbine generating capacity should be included in
PREPA's going-forward resource procurement plans.

______

The Chairman. Let me now turn to the Chairman of the Puerto
Rico Energy Bureau, Mr. Edison Aviles-Deliz.
Sir, you are recognized. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF EDISON AVILES-DELIZ, CHAIRMAN, PUERTO RICO ENERGY
BUREAU (PREB), SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO

Mr. Aviles-Deliz. Good afternoon, Chairman Grijalva,
Ranking Member Westerman, Congresswoman Gonzalez-Colon, and
distinguished members of the Committee. My name is Edison
Aviles-Deliz, I am the Chair of the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau.
On behalf of the PREB, I appreciate the opportunity afforded to
present our views regarding the implementation of the LUMA
transmission and distribution contract.
The PREB was created in 2014 by Act 57, serving as a key
component for the full and transparent implementation of the
Act's energy reform goals. The PREB has a mandate to ensure
that electric service is safe, reliable, and affordable.
The T&D system in Puerto Rico is now operated and
maintained by LUMA under the operation and maintenance
agreement entered by PREPA, the P3, and LUMA, in accordance
with Act 120. The T&D agreement is implemented with the
oversight from the P3 authority, PREPA, and the PREB. Act 120
safeguards the powers of the Energy Bureau regarding energy
matters, as well as its authority to regulate, supervise, and
ensure compliance with the public energy policy of Puerto Rico,
including, but not limited to, matters related to the T&D
agreement.
Since the last time the PREB testified before this
Committee, the PREB has undertaken an extensive review of the
plan proposed by LUMA, the PREB's responsibilities to ensure
these plans improve the delivery of electric service and
increase the resilience of the electric infrastructure against
future weather events.
PREB is working to ensure the use of the Federal
reconstruction dollars assigned to Puerto Rico is aligned with
the requirements and targets imposed by our energy public
policies. During the front end transition period of the T&D
agreement, the PREB extensively evaluates LUMA's plan that
included opportunity for public participation and wide
dissemination through the PREB's YouTube channel. This
evaluation resulted in approval that carries specific
conditions that LUMA needs to satisfy at determined intervals
within LUMA's contract period.
LUMA is a certified electric service company within the
PREB's regulatory jurisdiction. During the interim service
period, the electric utility maintenance and operation are
shared by LUMA and PREPA, where LUMA is responsible for
planning, operating, and maintaining the T&D system, and PREPA
is in charge of the operation and maintenance of the generation
system.
PREB has strong oversight of LUMA and the electric industry
in Puerto Rico, as demonstrated by the extensive range of
proceedings currently underway. The PREB is working over 25
proceedings that address the significant components of LUMA's
responsibilities. The responsibilities in operating includes
improving system reliability, achieving sustainability, and
preserving the cost effectiveness of the electric services.
The Federal funding made available to Puerto Rico in
response to the disasters arising from Hurricane Maria is a
major enabler of the rebuild of the electric grid, in which a
system that meets industry standard is modern and flexible, and
able to integrate renewable generation with future resilience
required to better withstand a future weather event.
The PREB has already evaluated and approved around 250
electric system reconstruction projects that amount to $8.29
billion. Any permanent work proposed for the electric
infrastructure needs approval from the PREB before it can move
forward to the receiving of the Federal funding.
The PREB is the entity vested in Puerto Rico with ensuring
that the investment made on the electric infrastructure is
consistent with the energy public policy. In addition, to
ensure that adequate controls are in place for the efficient
use of public funds, the PREB is currently evaluating LUMA's
procurement processes.
I am pleased to represent before you here today the public
interest of the people through the legal mandate that has been
bestowed upon the PREB, to provide strong leadership and
oversight of the recovery and revitalization of the Puerto Rico
electric grid. I look forward to your questions and remain
committed to continue building up the working relationship with
the Committee for the benefit of Puerto Rico. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Aviles-Deliz follows:]
Prepared Statement of Edison Aviles-Deliz, P.E., Esq., Chair,
Puerto Rico Energy Bureau

I. INTRODUCTION

Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, Congresswoman
Gonzalez-Colon, and distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Puerto
Rico Energy and Power Authority (PREPA) Post Implementation of the LUMA
Transmission and Distribution Contract.
My name is Edison Aviles-Deliz, and I am the Chair of the Energy
Bureau of the Puerto Rico Public Service Regulatory Board
(``PREB'').\1\ The PREB is an independent, regulatory body consisting
of five (5) commissioners that regulate the electric utility serving
the Island and functions similarly to the Public Utilities Commissions
(``PUC'') found across the mainland. The Commissioners have equal
voting powers. The PREB has a mandate to implement and enforce the
energy public policy enacted in Puerto Rico, as well as to adopt the
regulations necessary for such implementation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Formerly known as the Puerto Rico Energy Commission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Having a strong and effective regulator is crucial to the
development of a stable and robust electric delivery system and the
transformation of the Puerto Rico electric system. The PREB is an
independent regulator that is subject to judicial review. This
stability fosters an environment where long-term plans and strategies
can succeed. Since the last time the PREB testified before this
Committee,\2\ the PREB has undertaken an extensive review of the plans
proposed by the private Transmission and Distribution System (``T&D'')
Operator, LUMA,\3\ to ensure that these plans are conducive to
improving the delivery of electric service and increasing the
resilience of the electric infrastructure against future weather events
by making smart use of the federal reconstruction dollars available to
the Island, and ensuring that the shift toward 100% renewable
generation is aligned with the targets imposed by our energy public
policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Transformation of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority
(PREPA), July 23, 2020.
\3\ LUMA Energy, LLC and LUMA Energy ServCo, LLC (jointly
``LUMA'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The T&D system in Puerto Rico is now operated and maintained by
LUMA with extensive oversight from the Puerto Rico Public Private
Partnership Authority (``P3 Authority''), PREPA and the PREB.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ LUMA Energy, LLC is a certified electric service company that
operates under the jurisdiction of the PREB, Certification Number:
NEPR-CT-2020-0008. LUMA Energy ServCo, LLC is a certified electric
service company that operates under the jurisdiction of the PREB,
Certification Number: NEPR-CT-2020-0007.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

II. THE PREB--OVERVIEW

The PREB was created in 2014 by the Puerto Rico Energy
Transformation and RELIEF Act \5\ serving as a key component for the
full and transparent implementation of the Act's energy reform goals.
Specifically, the PREB has the responsibility to regulate, monitor and
enforce the energy public policy of the Government of Puerto Rico. PREB
has a mandate to ensure electric service is safe, reliable, and
affordable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Act 57-2014, as amended.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Expertise
1. Commissioners

By statute,\6\ PREB Commissioners have diverse professional
backgrounds. The current Bureau features exceptionally qualified
commissioners in its ranks. Currently, three commissioners hold dual
degrees in engineering and law, one commissioner is a seasoned energy,
land use, and environmental attorney who serves in the National
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (``NARUC'') Board of
Directors, and one commissioner is a licensed engineer specialized in
the design of electrical power systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Section 6.6 of Act 57-2014, as amended.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. PREB is supported by Nationally Recognized Technical Resources

PREB relies on recognized experts in the utility regulatory field
to assist its informed and grounded regulatory development. These
resources include former commissioners and staff from multiple U.S.
Public Utility Commissions (``PUCs''), some with first-hand experience
dealing with the current arrangement found in Puerto Rico: a private
operator running the T&D system for the public electric utility. The
PREB is also advised by experts in the areas of energy regulatory
affairs, economics, engineering, energy efficiency and resource/system/
operations planning, among others. These experts also provide
consulting services throughout the US and other international
jurisdictions.

III. PREB'S OVERSIGHT OF THE ELECTRIC INFRASTRUCTURE RECONSTRUCTION,
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

Puerto Rico suffers from an inherently deficient electric system, a
condition that has been exacerbated after the impact of hurricanes Irma
and Maria. In particular, the planning, design, and operation of an
isolated island-based electricity system imposes on PREPA, and Puerto
Rico as a whole, significant challenges regarding power system
stability and reliability. Act 120-2018 \7\ establishes the legal
framework for the transformation of the electric power system in Puerto
Rico.\8\ It empowers PREPA to sell its assets related to electric power
generation and transfer or delegate any of its operations, functions,
or services.\9\ However, any agreement arising from Act 120-2018 shall
be entered into under the legal and administrative framework
established in Act 29-2009 \10\ which regulates Public-Private
Partnerships.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Known as the ``Puerto Rico Electric Power System Transformation
Act'', as amended (``Act 120-2018'').
\8\ See generally, Statements of Motives, Act-120-2018, pp 3-5.
\9\ Id.
\10\ Known as ``Public-Private Partnership Act'', as amended (``Act
29-2009'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Act 120-2018 safeguards the powers of the Energy Bureau regarding
energy matters, as well as its authority to regulate, supervise, and
ensure compliance with the public energy policy of Puerto Rico. In
other words, regarding any agreement entered pursuant to Act 120-2018,
the Energy Bureau retains its powers, responsibilities, and duties to
establish and implement the regulatory actions necessary to guarantee
the capacity, reliability, security, efficiency, and reasonableness of
the system rates.
After a comprehensive competitive process, the P3 Authority
selected a third-party operator for the PREPA Transmission and
Distribution System (``T&D System''). On June 22, 2020, PREPA, P3
Authority, LUMA Energy, LLC \11\ as ManagementCo, and LUMA Energy
ServCo, LLC \12\ as ServCo entered into an Operation and Maintenance
Agreement (``T&D OMA'') under which LUMA will manage the T&D System. It
is worth mentioning that under the T&D OMA, LUMA, in coordination with
PREPA, the P3 Authority and the COR3, manages federal recovery funds
intended to reconstruct the electric system and improving its
resiliency. It is expected that the comprehensive O&M Services provided
by LUMA will benefit PREPA by (i) transforming the T&D System into a
modern, sustainable, reliable, efficient, cost-effective, and resilient
electric system consistent with prudent utility practices to increase
electric service quality; (ii) enabling delivery of low-cost
electricity to ratepayers of Puerto Rico; (iii) increasing T&D System
resiliency and reliability; (iv) deploying new technologies; and (iv)
implementing industry best practices and operational excellence through
managerial continuity and long-term planning.\13\ Therefore, the
contractual accountability of LUMA under the T&D OMA and its
independent regulatory oversight by the PREB are critical to ensure
that performance incentives align with the public interest.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See In re: Request for Certification LUMA Energy, LLC, Case
No. NEPR-CT-2020-0008.
\12\ See In re: Request for Certification LUMA Energy ServCo, LLC,
Case No. NEPR-CT-2020-0007.
\13\ See Partnership Committee Report, Puerto Rico Public-Private
Partnership for the Electric Power Transmission and Distribution
System, dated May 15, 2020 (``Report''), p. 27, included as Exhibit 1
to Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnership s Authority's Request for
Issuance of Certificate of Energy Compliance and Request for
Confidential Treatment of Documents Submitted to PREB, dated May 18,
2020, In re Certificate of Energy Compliance, Case No.: NEPR-AP-2020-
0002.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Transmission and Distribution System Operation and Maintenance
Agreement (``T&D OMA'')--Front-End-Transition

During the Front-End-Transition period of the T&D OMA, the PREB
conducted extensive evaluations, that included opportunities for public
participation \14\ of key LUMA's utility plans. These evaluations
resulted on approvals that carry specific conditions that LUMA needs to
satisfy at determined intervals during LUMA's contracted period. PREB
evaluations have included:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ The PREB sought public input through written commentary and
public hearings. The public hearings are archived in the PREB's You
Tube channel. https://www.youtube.com/c/NegociadodeEnerg%C3%ADaenvivo/
videos.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. LUMA's Initial Budgets \15\

\15\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0004.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREB approved with conditions LUMA's budgets for fiscal year 2022.
Approval conditions include:

LUMA shall maintain detailed accounting of annual expenses
for FY 2022 and FY 2023 and account for the use of funds
within the budget for that timeframe. LUMA is to explain
annually any differences between account expenses and
approved budgets, and request approval for cost recovery of
any uncollected funds.

LUMA shall provide quarterly reports to the Energy Bureau
detailing Initial Budget spending amounts, broken out by
spending initiative, and detailing any differences from the
approved Initial Budget. These reports should also include
detail allowing the Energy Bureau to assess funding,
withdrawals and outstanding balances in the Operating
Budget, the Capital Budget, and the Generation Budget
Accounts outlined in the T&D OMA.

LUMA shall submit to the Energy Bureau, on a quarterly
basis, summary reports outlining federal funding activity.
These summary reports shall include aggregated information
showing the cumulative amount of federal funding applied
for by LUMA and/or PREPA, broken out by the source of such
funding, the incremental amount of federal funding applied
for in the reporting quarter, and both the cumulative and
quarterly amount of federal funding received.

LUMA shall provide annual reports on the implementation of
improved efficiencies and quantification of resulting
savings.

Not later than April 1, 2022, LUMA shall submit to the
Energy Bureau the Fiscal Year 2023 proposed budgets
following the annual budget examination process delineated
in the 2017 Rate Order.

Not later than August 1, 2023, LUMA shall file a formal
rate review for rates effective July 1, 2024, utilizing the
most recent historic test year in accordance with the
requirements set in the 2017 Rate Order. During these
proceedings LUMA must demonstrate and quantify the
projected operational efficiencies claimed in its petition
for Initial Budgets approval; these efficiencies are
expected to favorably impact customer rates.

2. LUMA's System Operation Principles (``SOP'') \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0001.

PREB approved with conditions LUMA's SOP. Approval conditions
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
include:

On or before thirty (30) days from the notification of the
SOP's Approval Resolution, LUMA shall file with the Energy
Bureau a detailed updated timeline for the completion of
any other procedure, protocol, manual or document necessary
for the operation of the system in accordance with prudent
industry practices, standards, and local laws and
regulations, including but not limited to the draft
procedures filed on May 19, 2021. The timeline shall be
provided in a Gant Chart format with detailed information,
including but not limited to, the party responsible for
each task (i.e., name and position of LUMA personnel and/or
consultants), any precursor tasks or events, and the
estimated date for the completion of preparation and
finalization of drafts. The total timeline shall not exceed
five (5) months.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ LUMA submitted a request for the Energy Bureau to reconsider
four (4) of the five (5) conditions the Energy Bureau established for
the approval of LUMA's SOP. With regard to this condition, the Energy
Bureau deferred its determination of whether the Gantt Chart complies
with Condition No. 1 of the May 31 Resolution until after the September
17, 2021 Compliance Hearing.

On or before thirty (30) days from the notification of the
SOP's Approval Resolution, LUMA shall file with the Energy
Bureau enhancements to the Energy Dispatch principles
included in SOP 5.1 and 5.2 that shall fully incorporate
capabilities found in Distributed Energy Resources (DERs)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
into system planning and operations.

In response to LUMA's request for Clarifications and/or
Reconsideration, PREB ordered LUMA to file with the Energy
Bureau final versions of its Load Forecasting Procedures
that include the methodologies used to incorporate power
meter load data, load management, load forecast, DER
adoption models, weather normalization and peak allocation.

Starting on July 5, 2021, LUMA shall file with the Energy
Bureau a series of monthly progress reports on the status
of the implementation of the timeline required on the
conditions imposed in the SOP's Approval Resolution.

The Energy Bureau will hold periodic compliance hearings
to monitor the progress toward compliance with the
conditions hereby established. LUMA and the relevant
personnel and consultants shall appear before the Energy
Bureau fully prepared to answer the questions that the
Energy Bureau Commissioner and staff may have.

3. LUMA's System Remediation Plan (``SRP'') \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0019.

PREB approved with conditions LUMA's SRP. Approval conditions
include the requirement that reports be submitted quarterly, not later
than thirty (30) days after the close of the reporting quarter,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
comprising the following:

Actual spending amounts, broken down by spending
initiative/portfolio, and reflecting in detail any
differences from the System Remediation Plan.

A detailed timeline per portfolio with sufficient detail
to allow the Energy Bureau to assess project status for
System Remediation Plan capital expenditures and
operational initiatives.

Any capital expenditure or operational initiatives that
are behind schedule, compared to the initial System
Remediation Plan timeframe and a detailed explanation as to
the cause of the delay and the corrective actions
implemented to prevent further delays, as applicable.

Periodic compliance hearings are to take place to monitor
the status of these conditions.

4. Utility Performance Incentive Mechanisms \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0007.

PREB is currently developing the framework for the performance
incentive mechanisms to be applied to the electric utility. The PREB is
also establishing the performance targets that will apply to LUMA to
determine incentives \20\ during the contract period where payments
\21\ are permitted to enhance the T&D Operator's yearly fees during the
service period. This incentivizes the Operator to improve compliance
with performance requirements, and fines \22\ can incentivize the
Operator to improve compliance with performance requirements. Fines
will be paid directly by the T&D Operator and not passed to customers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-ap-2020-0025.
\21\ See Section 7.1 (c) and Annexes VII, IX and X of the Puerto
Rico Transmission and Distribution System Operation and Maintenance
Agreement, https://www.p3.pr.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/executed-
consolidated-om-agreement-td.pdf.
\22\ Id. Section 7.6 (a)(ii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Transmission and Distribution System Operation and Maintenance
Agreement (``T&D OMA'')--Interim Service Period \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ As a result of PREPA not having exited Title III, LUMA is
operating under the Supplemental Agreement of the T&D OMA since June 1,
2021. Supplemental Agreement and O&M Agreement shall automatically
terminate if Service Commencement Date does not occur within 18 months
after the Supplemental Agreement Effective Date, unless extended prior
to termination upon mutual agreement of the Parties and upon request by
the P3 Authority. (SA 7.1).

The electric utility maintenance and operations are currently
shared by LUMA and PREPA.\24\ LUMA is in charge of operating and
maintaining the electric transmission and distribution system. The LUMA
implementation team also includes Innovative Emergency Management, Inc.
(North Carolina) (``IEM'') as a prime subcontractor. IEM offers
comprehensive emergency management and disaster recovery services,
including obtaining, managing, and retaining federal funds, and
implementing disaster recovery programs funded through government
sources. PREPA is still in charge of maintaining and operating the
generation fleet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority is a certified
electric service company that operates under the jurisdiction of the
PREB, Certification Number: CEPR-CT-2016-0018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUMA has responsibility for long-term plans and strategies to
expand and upgrade the Island's grid, proposals for resilience buildup
of the electric infrastructure, and management of federal recovery
funding. Emphasis is being placed on rebuilding the electric system to
meet current national codes and standards and to integrate electric
industry best practices to facilitate Mutual Aid efforts with other
U.S. utilities during emergency response events. It is important to
highlight that even though system plans may have existed or may still
exist for the electric grid in Puerto Rico, all T&D system planning and
operations are now the responsibility of the T&D Operator, who is
subject to the full oversight of the PREB. The PREB is to ensure that
LUMA, as the T&D Operator, will implement well-studied long-term
strategies to improve grid reliability that assures federal recovery
funding is effectively and efficiently invested to build up the
resilience of the Island's electric network system.
1. LUMA is subject to PREB's oversight

LUMA is a certified electric service company within the PREB's
regulatory jurisdiction. For regulatory purposes, LUMA, as agent of
PREPA, stands in PREPA's shoes for all aspects of electric transmission
and distribution. The arrangement of the T&D OMA places a private
operator to manage PREPA's electric grid. This operator is the single
entity charged with orchestrating the long-term plans and strategies
for the electric T&D system.
2. PREB's oversight efforts \25\ of LUMA's T&D O&M functions
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See Attachment on page 13 for a list PREB open proceedings
providing oversight to the LUMA/PREPA arrangement.

The PREB's strong oversight of LUMA in fulfilling its
responsibility to guide and oversee the statutory transformation of the
electric industry in Puerto Rico, is demonstrated by the extensive
range of proceedings summarized below. The PREB is working more than 25
dockets that address the significant components of LUMA's
responsibilities as system operator, in particular, with respect to the
transformational goals of system reliability, sustainability and cost
effectiveness. The transparency of these proceedings is of paramount
importance to the PREB. PREB's YouTube channel streams live and then
archives these proceedings for public access. Most of these hearings/
workshops are live streamed in Spanish/English.
The PREB provides extensive opportunity for public input in its
proceedings through public hearings and the opportunity for written
comment. Utility filings are carefully reviewed by the PREB and its
consultants before the PREB decides.
By way of example, the original Initial Budgets filing was found to
be incomplete by the PREB and additional material was requested. The
filing was subjected to a three-day technical conference, in which PREB
Commissioners and the PREB's consultant questioned LUMA extensively
with respect to its filing and LUMA provided additional supporting
material. Numerous reporting requirements for LUMA going forward were
incorporated in the PREB's approval. The entire record of a proceeding
is taken into account by the PREB in making its decision.
C. FEMA PA DR-4339-PR \26\ Project Evaluation and Progression Status--
PREB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ https://www.fema.gov/disaster/4339.

FEMA Public Assistance (``PA'') Permanent Work Stafford Act Section
428 (disaster-related repair/restoration/replacement) has made
available to PREPA up to $9.4599bn \27\ that when combined with
Stafford Act Section 406 (mitigation activities) and Stafford Section
404 (state hazard mitigation program) funding are destined to increase
the resiliency of the electric grid against future weather events. PREB
highlights that the fatalities experienced during Hurricane Maria
(2017) were mainly associated with the loss of medical services
resulting from the lack of electricity.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Actual FEMA funding available to PREPA under DR-4339-PR
amounts to $9.459B after deducting private insurance payments and 10%
state matching requirement. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
Puerto Rico Hurricane Maria (DR-4339-PR).
\28\ https://www.npr.org/2019/02/21/696769824/problems-with-health-
care-contributed-to-hurricane-maria-death-toll-in-puerto-ri.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Infrastructure sought for upgrades consistent with increasing
resiliency and improving emergency readiness follows:

a.  T&D Lines

i.  Transmission Centers

ii.  Distribution Poles

iii.  Transformers

iv.  Undergrounding

b.  Generation Facilities

c.  Substations

d.  Cleanup Hydroelectric Generation Dams

e.  IT Infrastructure--System Operations

f.  DER Integration for Resilience

2. PREB's evaluation of permanent work of the electric infrastructure

Any permanent work proposed for the electric infrastructure needs
approval from the PREB before it can move to the recipient of the FEMA
DR-4339-PR grant, COR3, for further commitment. The PREB is the entity
vested in Puerto Rico with ensuring that investments made on the
electric infrastructure are consistent with the enacted energy public
policy.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Act 17-2019.

Table 1

PREB's Approvals of Electric Infrastructure Permanent Work through
September 30, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsD. Pending LUMA/PREPA Transition Matters
1. PREPA's Reorganization [T&D OMA, 4.5(q)]

PREPA is a corporation created by virtue of Act 83 on 1941, as
amended. In its current form, Act 83 defines PREPA's faculties and
powers in section 5 of said Act. The aforementioned Section was amended
by Act 17-2019 to include, among other powers, the capacity to, with
prior approval from PREB, divide and separate into one or more
subsidiaries: the generation, transmission, and distribution functions
of PREPA.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Sec 5(u)(i) of Act 83 of May 2, 1941 as of May 25, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREPA's Reorganization proposal is due to the Financial Oversight
and Management Board for Puerto Rico (``FOMB'') on September 30,
2021.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ https://drive.google.com/file/d/
1pHlwrqYrjypE80yv9x05bQ_n5RLKz-C7/view?usp=sharing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREPA's reorganization into GridCo, GenCo, and HoldCo requires
approval from the PREB.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Sec 5(u) of Act 83 of May 2, 1941 as of May 25, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. GridCo-GenCo Purchase Power Operating Agreement (PPOA) [T&D OMA,
Exhibit H]

A power purchase and operating agreement between GridCo
and GenCo requires PREPA to corporately reorganize itself.

PPOA's require PREB's approval.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ PREB's Regulation 8815, https://energia.pr.gov/regulations-
dockets/?docket=8815.

IV. PREB'S STRONG ENFORCEMENT CAPABILITY

The previous notable proceedings demonstrate the strong
comprehensive regulatory landscape created by Act 57-2014 and Act 17-
2019. More significantly, this landscape includes an enforcement
infrastructure for compelling compliance with the statutory
transformational measures to develop a reliable and sustainable
electric system.
A. PREB's Enforcement Mechanisms--Real Incentives/Real Penalties

The recently adjudicated T&D OMA provides the PREB with real teeth
for enforcement. The private T&D Operator has a financial incentive
\34\ to improve system performance according to metrics approved by the
PREB.\35\ The PREB can also fine the T&D Operator for noncompliance
with its regulations.\36\ In the past, imposing fines on PREPA
effectively meant fining the Puerto Rico government, thus negatively
impacting the people of Puerto Rico twice. Third-party accountability
means that any potential penalties imposed on the private T&D Operator
will erode its fixed fee payments under the contract. Having this
regulatory tool available to the PREB is nothing short of
transformational.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ See Annex IX and X of the Puerto Rico Transmission and
Distribution System Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
\35\ Id. Section 4.2(f).
\36\ OMA Section 7.6 (a)(ii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Independent Office of Consumer Protection (IOCP)

The electric regulatory landscape in Puerto Rico is well supported
by a strong legal framework that directs the IOCP to represent and
defend, among others, the energy services customer in all matters in
front of the PREB, including the IRP, rate revisions, electric utility
bill disputes and disputes originating from customer dealings with
electric service companies.

V. CONCLUSION

The PREB is an independent electric utility regulator authorized by
statute to impose penalties on the contracted T&D Operator for
regulation non-compliance that will not be borne by consumers.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ OMA Section 7.6 (a)(ii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In accordance with PREB's authority pursuant to the Puerto Rico
Energy Public Policy Act--Act 17-2019 and Puerto Rico Electric Power
Transformation Act--Act 120-2018, I am pleased to represent before you
here today, the public interest of the people through the legal mandate
that has been bestowed upon the PREB, to provide strong leadership and
oversight of the recovery and revitalization of the Puerto Rico's
electric grid, to yield a dependable, resilient, clean and efficient
electrical infrastructure for our people, and to oversee Puerto Rico's
transmission and distribution system operator, LUMA.
I look forward to your questions and remain committed to continue
strengthening the working relationship with the Committee for the
benefit of the people.

*****

ATTACHMENT

Current PREB proceedings overseeing the LUMA/PREPA arrangement

A. PREB's Oversight of LUMA's Front-End-Transition (FET)

PREB's oversight of LUMA's front-end transition period provides
transparency to the transition process by making available to the
public key FET LUMA reporting.

1. NEPR-MI-2020-0008 \38\ [LUMA Monthly Status Reports for Front-End
Transition Services]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0008.

The PREB made LUMA's monthly reports and FET invoices available to
the public, it also requested LUMA to submit additional information
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
concerning certain FET activities.

B. PREB's evaluation of LUMA's proposed plans for the operation and
maintenance of the T&D system and use of federal funding for
the reconstruction of the grid

During the course of the front-end transition period, the PREB
initiated additional proceedings to evaluate LUMA's proposed plans for
the T&D system.

2. NEPR-MI-2021-0007 \39\ [LUMA's Liability Waiver], denied in part and
approved in part with modifications by PREB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0007.

LUMA requested to be released from liability in the event of
defective electric service due to released parties' control, ordinary
negligence, gross negligence, or willful misconduct; PREB denied this
request and granted a waiver where customer protections were expanded
from LUMA's original petition.
3. NEPR-MI-2021-0004 \40\ [LUMA's Initial Budgets], approved with
conditions by PREB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0004.

The PREB approved LUMA's budget for fiscal year 2022. LUMA
presented to the PREB the budget for the entire utility operations that
included the budget for the maintenance and operation of PREPA's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
generation fleet.

Review LUMA's Budgets on a yearly basis

Ensure LUMA's transactions are kept at arm's length from
its subsidiaries--Evaluation of LUMA's Procurement Manual

4. NEPR-MI-2021-0001 \41\ [LUMA's System Operation Principles],
approved with conditions by PREB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0001.

The PREB is currently having LUMA submit for evaluation key
procedures and methodologies that will support the improvements of how
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
energy is dispatched across the Island and how capacity is planned.

Follow up of established SOP's approval conditions

Compliance hearing streamed and archived in PREB's YouTube
channel on Friday, September 17, 2021.

Oversee the establishment of Long and Short Range
Transmission and Distribution Planning Analysis and
Forecasts

Proceeding addresses rolling blackout challenges

5. NEPR-MI-2020-0019 \42\ [LUMA's System Remediation Plan], approved
with conditions by PREB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0019.

The PREB is currently having LUMA submit rebuild projects moving
down the pipeline to ensure alignment with reconstruction and
mitigation activities that will result on efficient use of federal
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
funding available to increase system resilience.

C. Significant Open Dockets Relating to the Oversight of LUMA

6. NEPR-MI-2021-0002 \43\ [10-Yr Infrastructure Plan]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0002.

PREB has provided guidance to LUMA and PREPA to avoid duplication
of efforts that could have led to unnecessary expenses resulting from
Front-End Transition contracting.
LUMA \44\ and PREPA \45\ are currently filing for PREB's evaluation
proposed reconstruction projects that are to employ funding from the
obligation under the FEMA DR-4339-PR \46\ grant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ LUMA formulates projects addressing the needs of the
Transmission and Distribution system.
\45\ PREPA currently formulates the projects addressing the needs
of the Generation system.
\46\ Actual FEMA funding available to PREPA under DR-4339-PR
amounts to $9.459B after deducting private insurance payments and 10%
state matching requirement. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
Puerto Rico Hurricane Maria (DR-4339-PR), https://www.fema. gov/
disaster/4339. In addition to the Public Assistance permanent work
proposals, LUMA and PREPA are also putting forward projects that fall
under the Hazard Mitigation program of the Stafford Act sections 404
and 406.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maximizes federal funding

Ensures adherence with public energy policy

Ensures adherence to IRP

Projects are then forwarded by the utility to COR3, FEMA
for consideration.

7. NEPR-AP-2020-00025 \47\ [Establishment of Performance Targets for
LUMA Energy ServCo, LLC]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-ap-2020-0025.

Establishment of Performance Targets for LUMA's incentive
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
payments and potential penalties

Establishment of Framework to update LUMA's Performance
Targets

Development of Yearly Incentive Fee Report

8. NEPR-MI-2019-0007 \48\ [Establishment of Performance Incentive
Framework for the Electric Utility]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0007.

Establishment of indicator/metrics to gauge the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
performance of the electric utility

9. NEPR-MI-2021-0004 \49\ [LUMA's Initial Budgets]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0004.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Review LUMA's Budgets on a yearly basis

Ensure LUMA's transactions are kept at arm's length from
its subsidiaries--Evaluation of LUMA's Procurement Manual

Monitor GenCo Shared Services Agreement

10. NEPR-MI-2019-0005 \50\ [Vegetation Management]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\50\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0005.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Review LUMA's Vegetation Management Plan

LUMA has submitted a comprehensive plan consistent with
the approved Initial Budgets

11. NEPR-MI-2019-0006 \51\ [Emergency Response Plan (``ERP'')]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\51\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0006.

PREB is conducting a review of PREPA and LUMA's ERP for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
potential modifications

Last Technical Conference was held on September 2, 2021
and LUMA was directed to provide additional information by
September 17, 2021

Virtual Public Hearing was held on September 27, 2021 with
written comments accepted until September 30, 2021

12. NEPR-MI-2020-0017 \52\ [LUMA's Data (Cyber) Security Plan]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0017.

Evaluation of LUMA's data (cyber) security plan, includes
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IT/OT (LUMA's website, payment processor, billing)

13. NEPR-MI-2020-0018 \53\ [LUMA's Physical Security Plan]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0018.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evaluation of LUMA's Physical Security Plan

Conduct field visits to gauge current capabilities

14. NEPR-MI-2020-0019 \54\ [LUMA's System Remediation Plan]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0019.

Seek to maximize opportunities to increase system
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
resilience

Ensure adherence to Integrated Resource Plan (``IRP'')
15. NEPR-MI-2020-0001 \55\ [Quarterly Adjustments: Fuel Purchase FCA,
Energy Purchase PPCA, Fuel Oil Subsidy FOS]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\55\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nerp-mi-2020-0001.

LUMA functions as PREPA's representative before the PREB
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and reports on:

-- Fuel

-- Purchased Power

-- Fuel subsidies

16. NEPR-MI-2019-0009 \56\ [T&D Interconnection Regulation]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\56\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0009.

Regulations that seek to leverage Distributed Energy
Resource (DER) interconnection and interoperability
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
standards, e.g., IEEE-1547-2018

Emphasis on DER interoperability and integration to system
planning and operations

17. NEPR-MI-2019-0011 \57\ [Integrated Electric Distribution Planning]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\57\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0011.

Development of Hosting Capacity capabilities that will
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
facilitate Renewable Generation Interconnection

Integrated Planning approach where System Operator fully
maximizes technical functionalities found in Distributed
Energy Resources (DER)

18. NEPR-MI-2019-0015 \58\ [Energy Efficiency and Demand Response
Regulation]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\58\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2019-0015.

Cost effective and environmentally friendly alternative to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
buildup of generation

System resilience considerations

19. NEPR-MI-2021-0009 \59\ [Puerto Rico Test for Demand Response and
Energy Efficiency]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\59\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0009.

Pilot plans for cost-effective and environmentally
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
friendly alternative to buildup of generation

Increase system resilience and stability

20. NEPR-MI-2021-0008 \60\ [Review of LUMA's Bill]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\60\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0008.

IOCP \61\ providing significant input on behalf of the
consumer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\61\ The Independent Office of Consumer Protection (IOCP) of the
Public Regulatory Service Board represents and defends the energy
services customer in all matters in front of the PREB, including the
IRP, rate revisions, electric utility bill disputes and disputes
originating from customer dealings with electric service companies. It
also educates, offers guidance, assists, and represents customers of
energy, telecommunications, and transportation services.

21. NEPR-MI-2021-0013 \62\ [Electric Vehicle (EV) Infrastructure]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\62\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0013.

Seeks to identify required generation and T&D investments
to support wide adoption of Electric Vehicles (EV) in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Puerto Rico.

22. NEPR-MI-2020-0016 \63\ [Optimization Proceeding--Minigrid
Transmission and Distribution Investments]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\63\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2020-0016.

Seeks to investigate further proposed minigrid
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
capabilities that were included in the latest IRP.

23. NEPR-MI-2021-0011 \64\ [Regulation Renewable Portfolio Standard
Compliance, Renewable Energy Credits]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\64\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0011.

Regulation establishing compliance mechanisms with the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Renewable Portfolio Standard

D. Ongoing LUMA/PREPA investigations

24. NEPR-MI-2021-001465 \65\ [PREPA Generation Maintenance and Repair
Management Program--Managed Load Shed Events of August 30-31,
2021]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\65\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-mi-2021-0014.

Consideration of PREPA assertion that maintenance budget
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
for generation is adequate

Investigation of the load shedding events experienced
during August 30-31, 2021.

Adequacy of Supply implications

Revision of ACTUAL PREPA Generation Maintenance Expenses

Hearing streamed on September 3, 2021 (English/Spanish)
and archived \66\ in the PREB's YouTube channel
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\66\ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ECegoQtTy9E.

25. NEPR-IN-2021-0002 \67\ [June 10, 2021 Monacillos Incident]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\67\ https://energia.pr.gov/en/dockets/?docket=nepr-in-2021-0002.

Investigation of the outage failure experienced in
Monacillos where LUMA was already in charge of the ECC
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Energy Control Center).

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Edison Aviles-Deliz, P.E., Esq.,
Chair, Puerto Rico Energy Bureau

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. Does PREB feel the laws ruling it provide you enough
flexibility to adapt their plan approvals to changing realities on the
ground, and to be able to get the end goal through different routes if
necessary?

Answer. An Integrated Resources Plan (IRP) is an electric power
utility's guidebook for providing least-cost electric service over the
planning horizon. Its purpose is to develop a plan for the least costly
options to serve customer demand, considering other important policy
objectives such as resiliency, reliability, and the goals of the
utility, the government, society, and the environment.\1\ Least-cost
refers to the least-cost-net-present value of revenue requirements
taken at present value from the present day to the end of the analysis
period.\2\ As part of the IRP process, the utility assembles data on
its existing resources,\3\ historical customer demand \4\ and
electricity loads. It uses the minimization of revenue requirements as
its priority criterion, but also considers such factors as: system
reliability; short and long-term risks; environmental impacts;
transmission and distribution (T&D) needs and implications; financial
implications on the electric service company; and the public
interest.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, in general, Resolution and Order, In Re: Review of the
Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority Integrated Resource Plan, Case No.
CEPR-AP-2018-0001, August 24, 2020 (``IRP Final Resolution and
Order'').
\2\ Id.
\3\ Id. ``Resources'' includes generation, distribution,
transmission, energy efficiency programs, demand-response programs and
customer resources like distributed generation and microgrids.
\4\ Id. ``Customer Demand'' in this context means the amount of
electricity consumed at a given time in a utility's electric service
territory, measured in GWh.
\5\ See Sec. 2.03(H)(2)(d) of Regulation on the Integrated Resource
Plan for the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, April 24, 2018
(``Regulation 9021'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the context of the Puerto Rico Power and Electric Authority
(``PREPA''), an IRP considers all its reasonable resources to satisfy
the demand for electric power services during a twenty (20) year
period, including those relating to the offering of electric power,
whether existing, traditional, and/or new resources, and those relating
to energy demand such as energy conservation and efficiency or
distributed resources, as well as localized energy generation by the
customer.\6\ It is worth noting that an IRP shall incorporate the
obligation of PREPA to comply with the laws and regulations that
constrain resource selection.\7\ An IRP must be evaluated and approved
by the Energy Bureau of the Puerto Rico Public Service Regulatory Board
(``Energy Bureau'') and may not be eliminated or altered under any
circumstances, without first carrying out a review process before the
Energy Bureau.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Sec. 1.3 (II) of the Puerto Rico Energy Transformation and
RELIEF Act, as amended (``Act 57-2014'') and Sec. 1.08(B)(20) of
Regulation 9021.
\7\ Id.
\8\ See Sec. 1.9(4) of the Puerto Rico Energy Public Policy Act
(``Act 17-2019'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After the approval of an IRP, the Energy Bureau shall supervise and
oversee compliance with it. The IRP will be reviewed and updated every
three (3) years, in which case PREPA or the company responsible for the
operation of the Electric System (currently LUMA \9\) will present to
the Energy Bureau a proposal to modify and update the IRP.
Nevertheless, provided, that there is a substantial change in the
energy demand or in the set of resources necessary to meet the demand
for energy, the review process may be conducted before the three (3)
years period, to respond and mitigate changes in the energy demand or
in the set of resources necessary to meet the demand for energy.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ LUMA Energy, LLC and LUMA Energy ServCo, LLC are referred to
collectively as ``Luma''.
\10\ In general, a revision of an IRP should reflect changes in
energy market conditions, changes in technology, environmental
regulations, fuel prices, capital costs, incorporation of generation
based on renewable energy sources and components in the grid to comply
with the Renewable Energy Portfolio, distributed generation, energy
efficiency and other factors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREPA's Proposed IRP was evaluated by the Energy Bureau in an
adjudicative proceeding under Case No.: CEPR-AP-2018-0001. On August
24, 2020, the Energy Bureau issued a Final Resolution and Order,
approving in part and rejecting in part PREPA's Proposed IRP.\11\
Consequently, the Energy Bureau ordered the adoption of the Modified
Action Plan as set forth in the IRP Final Resolution and Order
(``PREPA's Approved IRP'').\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See Resolution and Order, In Re: Review of the Puerto Rico
Electric Power Authority Integrated Resource Plan, Case No. CEPR-AP-
2018-0001, August 24, 2020 (``IRP Final Resolution and Order'').
\12\ Id. Subsequently, on December 2, 2020, the Energy Bureau
issued the Final Resolution on Reconsiderations through which it
addressed several requests for reconsideration filed by certain
intervenors. See Final Resolution on Reconsiderations, In Re: Review of
the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority Integrated Resource Plan, Case
No. CEPR-AP-2018-0001, December 2, 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based on the foregoing, the applicable laws and regulations provide
a mechanism to modify or amend PREPA's Approved IRP at any time prior
to the three (3) years revision period set forth in the Act 57-2014,
provided, however, that there is a substantial change in the energy
demand or in the set of resources necessary to meet the demand for
energy. This modification shall be aimed to respond or mitigate the
effects of the changes in the energy demand or in the set of resources
necessary to meet the demand for energy. If the circumstances
anticipated by the law arises, PREPA (Luma) may present to the Energy
Bureau a proposal to modify the IRP. The Energy Bureau shall evaluate
and approve the proposed modification based on the energy public policy
and the applicable laws and regulations.

Question 2. Permitting of LNG units:

(a) What's the status of the PREB/PREPA discussion on the
installation of the LNG units that were not in the prior PRES-approved
resources plan?

Answer. We clarify that the process to evaluate and approve an IRP
and/or a modification thereof is adjudicative in nature. Therefore, the
Energy Bureau refrains from having ex parte communications and/or
discussions regarding matters related to the approval or modification
of an IRP with PREPA nor any intervenor.
We further clarify that currently there are no pending procedures
before the Energy Bureau for the modification of PREPA's Approved IRP.

(b) Does the renewables plan in any way forbid any further
installation of combustion units transitionally?

Answer. PREPA's Approved IRP provides a mix of generation resources
that reflects changes in Puerto Rico's public policy, notably the
obligations to substantially reduce energy supply costs and meet the
revised Renewable Portfolio Standard. The Renewable Portfolio Standard
is established to achieve a minimum of twenty percent (20%) by 2022,
forty percent (40%) on or before 2025; sixty percent (60%) on or before
2040; and one hundred percent (100%) on or before 2050.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Act 82-2010, known as the Puerto Rico Energy
Diversification Policy through Sustainable and Alternative Renewable
Energy Act, as amended, (``Act 82-2010'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The scheduled deployment of the Renewable Portfolio Standard (in
itself) does not forbid the use of thermal generation resources.
However, for the twenty (20) years planning horizon studied in the IRP
process, PREPA did not justify the use of additional thermal generation
resources.
It is important to note that changes in the assumptions used by
PREPA for the development of the IRP; the results that can be observed
from the implementation of the different phases of the Modified Action
Plan (5-years Plan); as well as other relevant circumstances, could
justify the need to modify the current mix of resources included in
PREPA's Approved IRP. If this occurs, then PREPA (Luma) could use the
mechanisms discussed in the response to Question 1 to seek
modifications to the PREPA's Approved IRP.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, sir. Let me now turn to
the President and Chief Executive Officer of LUMA Energy Puerto
Rico, Mr. Wayne Stensby.
Sir, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF WAYNE STENSBY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, LUMA ENERGY PUERTO RICO, SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO

Mr. Stensby. Thank you very much, Chairman Grijalva,
Ranking Member Westerman, Resident Commissioner Gonzalez-Colon,
and Committee members. Thank you for the opportunity to share
LUMA Energy's perspective, as we stand here barely 4 months
into this historic public-private partnership for the operation
of the transmission and distribution system of Puerto Rico.
This partnership is, indeed, a critical step in the overall
transformation of the electric system, but by no means is it
the only step. When we first began this operation in June, we
knew how difficult and what an important task we faced. Change
is hard, and change will inevitably take time, but change is
the reason that we are here today. The people of Puerto Rico
have been demanding it for years.
The responsibility that comes with providing electricity to
customers is a serious one, and we do not take it lightly.
As this Committee knows well, the Puerto Rico electric
system is arguably the worst in the United States, and has been
for a very long time, even prior to the devastating hurricanes
of 2017. In order to move forward, we are focusing on creating
change, change of the physical infrastructure, but also
business processes, and the creation of our very own company
culture.
I would like to start by stating how proud I am of the team
here at LUMA. Today, we are more than 3,000 employees strong,
and many of those were hired from PREPA. They embrace the
change that they knew was needed. Those that did join LUMA did
so under extraordinary circumstances, in many cases defying
their friends, facing threats from those claiming to share
their interests, and even being the targets of terrible and
unspeakable acts of vandalism and intimidation. They did,
however, get to work on June 1, and immediately they faced
significant adversity again.
First, access to equipment, tools, fleet, and roads, as
well as warehouses to restore electricity were so limited that
it was only able to be remediated through a court-ordered
restraining order. Within our first 2 weeks of operation, LUMA
and its customers faced targeted denial of service attacks,
disrupting information, and then, unfortunately, a fire at the
Monacillo substation, disrupting service to approximately
800,000 customers.
Thanks to the heroic efforts of the LUMA team, nearly all
of those customers were restored within 24 hours, which is an
unprecedented response here in Puerto Rico.
Our team continues to grow, and today we have received more
than 100,000 job applications from all across Puerto Rico: a
strong endorsement of our mission. As part of our continued
efforts to build a modern, world-class workforce, we have
recently come to terms on a collective bargaining agreement
with the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, or
IBEW, who has recently amalgamated with one of the larger PREPA
legacy unions. This represents the first newly negotiated
agreement for labor at the electric utility in over a decade.
As part of our commitment to Puerto Rico, LUMA's parent
companies are actively investing in economic and workforce
development. The new LUMA College for Technical Training in
Canovanas represents an investment of more than $10 million by
our parent companies, and will bring in world-class training
and workforce development for technical trades, all through an
accredited education program. Our first class of lineworkers
will be graduating from this program later this month, and we
look forward to seeing the impact that this will have in our
utility in the coming years.
While the transformation is in its early days, we have many
reasons to be optimistic. We are seeing the impact of the
changes as we implement them. For example, customers are seeing
the impact of solar on the rooftops. We have increased the
processing speed of this application process by nearly seven
times, and we have cleared half the backlog that we inherited
in June. Some of those customers have been waiting for as long
as 2 years. We will be through this entire backlog in queue by
the end of this year. We recently published queuing information
on our website to improve the transparency of this
interconnection process.
We are not just focusing our efforts on outages, but we are
focusing on fixing the infrastructure, so that we can prevent
the outages in the first place. Our rate of pole replacement
over our first 4 months is more than twice what PREPA had
historically managed, and we have reconnected and replaced a
large number of substations and lines, many of which had not
been operational since Hurricane Maria.
Still, there is a lot to be done. We are heavily focused on
accelerating the major capital projects that we will be
managing on behalf of PREPA. There are currently about 65
projects, representing nearly $2.8 billion, that have recently
been approved through initial statements of work, and are going
through various stages of engineering and environmental
assessments today. Many of these projects require close
collaboration with PREPA as a sub-grantee, as well as COR3,
FEMA, and also experts from the Department of Energy and
national labs to ensure that they are compliant and are a
prudent use of Federal funds.
With that, I would like to thank the Committee for its time
and its dedication to this very important topic. As we continue
to emphasize, LUMA is here to be a transparent, accountable
partner that will deliver improved customer service, increased
emergency preparedness, and a safer, more effective workforce
supporting the overall economic recovery and growth of Puerto
Rico. We have just begun, and we remain committed to playing
our role in transforming the electric system.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stensby follows:]
Prepared Statement of Wayne Stensby, President & Chief Executive
Officer, LUMA Energy Puerto Rico
Thank you for the opportunity to share LUMA Energy's perspective as
we stand here 4 months into the historic public-private partnership to
operate the transmission and distribution system of Puerto Rico. This
partnership is a critical step in the overall transformation of the
electric system, but by no means is it the only one.
When we first began operations this June, we knew how difficult and
important a task we face. Change is hard and it takes time. But, change
is the reason we are here today--the people of Puerto Rico have been
demanding it for years. The responsibility that comes with providing
electricity to customers is a serious one, and we do not take it
lightly. As this committee knows well, the Puerto Rico electric system
is arguably the worst in the U.S., and has been for some time, even
prior to the tragic hurricanes of 2017. For context, the frequency and
duration of outages is more than twice the next worst performer in the
U.S., customer service scores are 50% worse than the average electric
utility, and OSHA safety recordable incidents were approximately 5
times the industry average. To move forward, we are focused on creating
change--change of the physical infrastructure, but also of the business
processes and of the company culture.
I should first state how proud we are of the team we are building.
We are more than 3,000 employees strong with many of those hired from
PREPA (Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority), embracing the change they
knew would be needed. Those that joined LUMA did so under extraordinary
circumstances--in some cases defying their friends, facing threats from
those claiming to sharing their interests, and even being the targets
of terrible acts vandalism and intimidation. They got to work on June
1st and immediately faced significant adversity. First, access to
certain equipment, tools, and roads needed to restore power were so
limited that it could only be remedied through a restraining order.
Within our first 2 weeks of operation, LUMA and its customers suffered,
a targeted distributed denial of service attack, disrupting access to
information. Then, a fire at the Monacillo substation, a central node
in the electric system, disrupted power to approximately 800,000
customers. Thanks to the heroic efforts of our team, nearly all of
those customers were restored in 24 hours--an unprecedented response
time.
Our team continues to grow, and we have received more than 100,000
job applications from across Puerto Rico--a strong endorsement of our
mission. As part of our continued efforts to build a modern, world
class workforce, we recently came to terms on a collective bargaining
agreement with the IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers), who recently amalgamated with one of the larger local unions
at the utility. This represents the first newly negotiated agreement
for labor at the electric utility in over a decade.
LUMA is not here for the short term. We are here to modernize the
electric transmission and distribution system, to perform based on
thoughtful data-based, long-term planning, and to execute these plans
which have been developed by engineers, subject to the approval and
oversight of the corresponding government entities in accordance with
law and policy.
As part of our commitment to Puerto Rico, LUMA's parent companies
are actively investing in economic and workforce development. The new
LUMA College for Technical Training in Canovanas represents an
investment of more than $10 million dollars by LUMA's parent companies
and will bring world class training and development for the technical
trades, all provided through an accredited education program. Our first
class of lineworkers will be graduating from this program later this
month, and we are looking forward to seeing the impact this can have in
the coming years.
While this transformation is in its early days, we do have reason
to be optimistic about the future. We are starting to see the impact of
the changes we implement. For example, for customers seeking to put
solar on their rooftops, we have increased the processing speed of this
application process by nearly 7 times, and cleared nearly half of the
backlog we inherited. Some of those customers had been waiting as long
as 2 years. We aim to clear this queue entirely by the end of this year
and have begun publishing the connection queue information on our
website to improve the transparency of the process. Our operational
efforts are focused not just on restoring outages, but fixing
infrastructure so we can prevent the outages in the first place. Our
rate of pole replacement has nearly doubled, and we've re-connected or
replaced a number of substations and lines--some of which had not been
operational since Hurricane Maria.
Still, there is a lot of work to be done. We have been heavily
focused on accelerating the major capital projects to be executed under
the various federal grant programs, which we will manage on PREPA's
behalf. There are currently about 65 projects representing nearly $2.8
billion dollars of work that have received approved initial Statements
of Work and are going through various stages of engineering and
environmental assessments today. An additional $3.7 billion of projects
has been vetted by PREB, and the initial Statements of Work have been
submitted to FEMA. These investments are all tied to disaster recovery
linked to Hurricanes Irma and Maria from 2017, and are critical to
making the electric infrastructure sustainable and resilient. For these
efforts, we are working collaboratively with PREPA as the subgrantee,
as well as COR3 (Central Office for Recovery, Reconstruction, and
Resiliency), FEMA, and experts from the Department of Energy and the
national labs, to ensure that these programs are both compliant and are
a prudent and effective use of federal funds. This is a unique
opportunity to build back better, and doing so efficiently will be
critical. Recognizing that the annual construction efforts work will be
multiples above today's activity, we have also signed a Project Labor
Agreement with the IBEW. This PLA ensures that the workers on the
electric system will be safe, fairly compensated, and well trained.
This PLA also enables access to high quality, craft skilled labor,
mitigating the risk of delays to the electric infrastructure rebuild
that Puerto Rico so desperately needs.
We thank this committee for its time and dedication to this
important topic. As we continue to emphasize, LUMA is here to be a
transparent, accountable partner that will deliver improved customer
service, increased emergency preparedness, and a safer, more effective
workforce, supporting the overall economic recovery and growth of the
island. We have just begun and we remain committed to playing our
critical role in transforming the electrical system in Puerto Rico.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Wayne Stensby, President & Chief
Executive Officer, LUMA Energy Puerto Rico

Questions Submitted by Representative Porter

Question 1. PREPA's testimony validates a rumor we heard about the
real reason for one of the bigger blackouts--a transmission line
failure that was managed by LUMA. Specifically: ``The most significant
generating unit outage involves the Costa Sur generating station. On
August 22, a transmission line fault led to loss of two of the San Juan
generating units and transmission system fluctuations that affected
generating facilities in the south, including Costa Sur. Those
fluctuations led to vibrations which eventually forced Costa Sur Unit 6
offline and damaged the steam turbine rotor.''
According to PREPA's testimony, one of the biggest blackouts since
LUMA took over was because of a failure of a transmission line that
broke a turbine at the Costa Sur power plant.

Answer. To be very clear, transmission line failures do not damage
or break steam turbine rotors.

The facts related to this event are as follows:

Transmission line 38900, on the north side of the island
suffered a phase to phase fault and tripped at
approximately 12:25 on August 22. This transmission line
connects two transmission substations and does not have a
direct connection to a generating station. This trip caused
a transmission system disturbance which was exacerbated by
San Juan generating Units 5 & 6 tripping and also Palo Seco
generating Unit 3 tripping. Throughout this event, Costa
Sur Unit's 5 & 6 showed expected operation and were
witnessed as operating normally.

A separate and wholly unrelated event occurred at
approximately 19:25 (7 hours later) on August 22 when the
generation output of Costa Sur 6 was manually decreased by
Costa Sur operating staff. There were no transmission
outages at or through this period. At 22:30 of August 22,
Costa Sur 6 was tripped via plant operating staff.

(a) Is that line under the management of LUMA?

Answer. Yes, transmission line 38900 is operated by LUMA. Costa Sur
generating plant is operated by PREPA.

(b) Did that outage contribute to the increased use of more
expensive generating plants, possibly including peaker plants, to
maintain sufficient supply of electricity?

Answer. The transmission outage early in the day is not related to
the Costa Sur 6 outage.

LUMA dispatches energy based on availability and according to
security-constrained economic principles to meet demand. Less expensive
resources are generally dispatched first--these include available
renewables and base load units. When base load capacity is insufficient
to meet demand, LUMA shifts to other available sources--including
peakers. The Costa Sur outage was one of many other unplanned outages
that required the use of all available sources of generation in order
to meet demand. Given the large shortfall of generation, caused by
multiple unplanned outages across many PREPA generating units, there
were many periods of insufficient supply of electricity which is what
caused load shedding across Puerto Rico.

(c) Was the increased use of more expensive power plants a primary
justification for LUMA's proposed rate increase?

Answer. The reduced availability (unplanned outages) of multiple
lower cost plants in addition to rising global fuel prices led to the
variation which prompted the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau (PREB) to issue
a determination to revise and adjust the FCA factor to recover fuel
costs. LUMA is required, on behalf of PREPA, to submit calculations for
the component of tariffs used to recover fuel cost on a quarterly
basis. When actuals vary materially from forecasts, that deficit or
credit is applied to the forward-looking rates designed to recover fuel
costs incurred by PREPA. LUMA does not set rates, nor does LUMA benefit
when rates increase. All changes to electricity rates are adjudicated
by the PREB.

(d) What was the cause of the failure of the transmission line?

Answer. Line 38900 suffered a phase to phase fault due to a faulty
insulator.

(e) If the transmission line failure is determined to be the fault
of LUMA's mismanagement, will LUMA be responsible for the costs or does
LUMA intend on asking the ratepayers to pay for its mistakes?

Answer. The entire electricity system, both generation and
transmission & distribution in Puerto Rico is in a very poor state.
It's been well documented that this state of disrepair did not occur
overnight, it occurred across more than a decade. The repair and
restoration of the electricity system is exactly why Puerto Rico
created Act 120 and then ultimate selected LUMA as the T&D operator.
This is why LUMA exists.
LUMA did not cause the transmission fault, however we did respond
and restore the line to service. This transmission failure is unrelated
to the Costa Sur 6 failure.
Similar to other utilities in other jurisdictions, LUMA has
operational liabilities established in the contract.

Questions Submitted by Representative Velazquez

Question 1. When LUMA and the government of Puerto Rico executed
the agreement for the operation and management of the grid, LUMA made
certain representations about hiring a firm that specialized in the
management of Federal funds.

(a) Has such firm been hired? If so, at what cost?

Answer. As per the LUMA proposal to the Partnership Committee, IEM,
an experienced and well-regarded federal funds manager, is indeed part
of the LUMA team and is compensated on a time and materials basis for
work actually performed. IEM's rates for LUMA are comparable to IEM's
negotiated rates on other contracts with the U.S. Government. IEM costs
are paid by federal funds through FEMA's public assistance
administration fees, which are capped by Congress at 5% of the project
value.

Question 2. Please provide in writing how many of LUMA's VPs make
more than $200k a year and how many make more than $500k a year.

Answer. LUMA's Executive Leadership Team consists of highly
qualified, skilled professionals with years of experience in leading
high performing teams within the industry. LUMA has a compensation
philosophy that aligns with paying its employees market based rates,
which includes a total compensation package over $200,000 annually for
five Vice President roles.
As per our contract, six senior executives, including the CEO are
paid for by the owners of LUMA at no cost to customers. Only the CEO is
paid more than $500,000 per year.
Historically, PREPA's executive leaders also received total
compensation in excess of $200,000.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. Can you please provide us a specific timeline for LUMA
submitting project Scope of Work documentation for FEMA/COR3 projects?

Answer. The FEMA process consist of several steps with respect to
the submission of project Scope of Work (SOW) documents. In Puerto
Rico, the regulator has added an additional step wherein the regulator
has directed proponents to submit any SOW for review and approval by
the regulator prior to submitting to FEMA. The SOWs at this stage are
high-level Initial SOWs. Once approved by the regulator, the Initial
SOWs are submitted to FEMA for its review. At this point, FEMA provides
a FEMA project number which initiates preliminary work by proponents
toward the development of Detailed SOWs for issuance to FEMA for
approval. In effect, it's a two-step SOW process. Upon receipt of the
approval of the Detailed SOW, the proponent can then undertake final
design work and ultimately construction activities.
To date, LUMA has received approval from the regulator for 132
Initial SOWs, of which 65 have received FEMA project numbers with the
remaining 67 projects are expected to be processed shortly by FEMA.
This step of the process enables LUMA to undertake the necessary work
to develop the Detailed SOWs.
The timeline for the Detailed SOW submissions ranges from the end
of October 2021 through 2022 and 2023, depending on the complexity of
the project and sequencing consideration. Initial projects whose
detailed SOWs are being completed at this time will be utilized to work
through and establish processes/procedures for future submission.

Question 2. At last month's meeting in Puerto Rico, it was said
that 37 PREPA projects totaling $1 billion have already been placed in
the hands of LUMA.

(a) You can tell us what they are and what the status is?

Answer. As noted in response (1) above, the 65 projects noted have
received FEMA project numbers based on LUMA's Initial SOWs submission.
These projects are now at various steps in the development phase toward
completing Detailed SOWs for submission to FEMA. This work involves
preliminary engineering work, environmental and historic preservation
assessment work, and hazard mitigation work toward the potential for
additional FEMA funding.

(b) If any of these projects have been awarded, who are the
contractors, builders?

Answer. There are no projects that have been awarded for
construction activities. As noted above the projects are at preliminary
engineering, environmental and historic preservation assessment, and
hazard mitigation assessment stage of development.

(c) Were any of those T&D projects that were already designed under
PREPA, and can LUMA change the project design and specifications?

Answer. As of June 1, there was only one project that had material
early engineering work underway. All other projects required LUMA to
initiate preliminary engineering activities.
The one project in question has been progressed further including
modifications based on direction received from FEMA. This is the
project that is targeted for an October 2021 submission of its Detailed
SOW to FEMA (refer to Q1 above).

Question 3. Is a grid that supports these community distributed
renewables be incompatible with one that supports central power plants,
or just more complicated?

Answer. These two ideas are not opposed, but rather complementary.
Community distributed renewables requires a strong and well constructed
basic electricity grid. The integration of distributed energy resources
does require more complexity in terms of control systems and
operational intelligence but this is overlaid or on top of the basic
electricity system backbone.

(a) What support will LUMA provide to these initiatives?

Answer. LUMA is supporting these initiatives with the following
current and future activities:

LUMA is actively connecting distributed renewables as we
speak. There was a significant backlog when we commenced
operation and we are presently connecting new customers at
a pace that will clear the backlog by year end.

Operate, maintain and restore the basic infrastructure
(poles, wires, transformers, protective devices, etc.)

Install and operate the more complex operating control
system and field devices to implement a smart grid capable
of incorporating community distributed renewables and
optimizing the load and generation on the system.

Replacement of current meters with smart meters (Advanced
Metering Infrastructure--AMI) to allow consumers to become
prosumers.

Question 4. Labor Issue:

(a) It was mentioned, that LUMA has required of its contractors and
subcontractors a Project Labor Agreement modeled after its agreement
with International Brotherhood Electrical Workers (IBEW) Local 222 of
Tampa, FL. This has raised the following constituent concerns, for
which we need clear Yes or No answers:

(i) Whether this means ALL electrical contractors/builders in PR
who may want to do business with LUMA, will have to place ALL
employees, not just who do line or substation construction work for
LUMA, under the agreement.

Answer. No. LUMA will not require all employees of contractors
doing work for LUMA to fall under the PLA. LUMA's priority is the
safety and well-being of its employees and anyone working on the
property. The PLA specifically outlines the scope of the agreement
between LUMA, the IBEW and its contractors and it covers personnel
directly working on electrical apparatus.
Safety is dependent on highly skilled trained workers. LUMA
recognizes the necessity of improving safety through offering
additional evaluation, education, and training of workers.
Of note, the parent companies of LUMA created the LUMA College for
Technical Training at their own expense in order to train and develop
skilled workers.
LUMA is actively working to train its own workforce, but it would
be atypical and impractical for LUMA to do the same for the outside
workforce. Therefore, to gain the highest standards of safety and
skilled workers, LUMA requires contractors working on the electrical
system to follow the Project Labor Agreement or PLA.

(ii) Whether in effect you are requiring anyone wishing to do this
work with LUMA to become an IBEW Union Shop.

Answer. No. LUMA is not requiring any contractor to become an IBEW
Union Shop.

(iii) Whether this means they would then become bound to follow the
IBEW rates even when doing work for private entities that are NOT LUMA.

Answer. No. Contractors are able to do as they wish when working
for other entities or customers. The PLA only applies to the Puerto
Rico Transmission and Distribution system.

(iv) Does this conflict with observing prevailing market wages--
where the market is Puerto Rico?

Answer. No. There are only three published wage determinations for
Puerto Rico and all set out the minimum amounts that contractors must
pay. The PLA enables all contractors to comply with this minimum.

(b) Was there any open-door public participation process, in
leading to this PLA decision, and supporting this requirement? Were P3
or PREPA involved or consulted?

Answer. This was a labor strategy decision to ensure a safe,
trained workforce and is typical for this quantity of work in other
parts of the United States. Labor negotiations are historically private
between the company and the employee's representative.

(c) What plans do you have to employ and use local contractors and
suppliers? We note that FEMA funded PREPA's reconstruction of grid
maintenance and repairs.

Answer. We plan to maximize the use of local contractors and
suppliers. Given the magnitude of the reconstruction work necessary,
labor will be in high demand and short supply. We will use all of the
local contractors and suppliers who are able to comply with labor and
procurement rules, policies and practices.

(d) What Federal mandates impact your use of local contractors?

Answer. While the Federal Government provides provisions within
Appendix II to 2 CFR Part 200 restricting contractors from receiving
contract awards for Debarment or Suspension as well as requiring
compliance with a number of other mandates such as Equal Employment
Opportunity, Davis Bacon Act, Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment and others,
these Federal mandates do not address the use of local contractors.

(e) In hiring of personnel from outside of Puerto Rico, what
provisions are in place for compliance with Puerto Rico laws that
requires some occupations to be locally licensed and certified? What
provisions if any are there regarding when to outsource?

Answer. LUMA is actively recruiting in Puerto Rico. We strive to
hire experienced workers on island and ensure that those workers that
are non-residents to Puerto Rico are meeting both federal and
commonwealth employment regulations. Outsourcing contractors has been
limited to primarily on island contractors to date.

(f) How do you respond to the statements by the Puerto Rico's
Manufacturers, small business groups and the local Chamber of Commerce
earlier this week accusing LUMA of coercing or forcing out local
contractors to bring in a single union shop from outside Puerto Rico
with higher costs?

Answer. We were disappointed to hear the views of the groups
opposed to the PLA. There is no coercion involved here. We will be
working with them to better explain the PLA, how it works, and how it
can benefit all. PLAs are common elsewhere across North America, but
have not been used before in Puerto Rico--we will continue to work and
communicate with stakeholders directly. The volume of project work that
is in the FEMA funded pipeline is unprecedented for Puerto Rico and so
the approaches taken to effectively manage this work must consider
this.
In order to ensure the large amount of work gets completed in a
timely manner, it is important to have an agreement that prevents labor
slowdowns and strikes. The PLA provides for the arbitration of any
labor issues without resulting in strikes and walkouts. It puts
customers first.

Question 5. Are there provisions in place governing competition and
award of projects where the LUMA parent companies or other corporate
affiliates within Quanta and ATCO would participate?

Answer. The T&D O&M Agreement requires that LUMA, with input from
PREPA P3A, and COR3, prepare a manual to govern the procurement of any
contract involving federal funding, as well a manual to govern non-
federally funded capital improvements. Among other requirements, the
manuals must address employee and organizational conflicts of interest
(``OCI'').
To this end, the Procurement Manual (``PM'') was prepared by LUMA
and approved by the P3A and COR3, as well as acknowledged by PREPA's
Governing Board. The PM requires that LUMA implement a plan to
identify, avoid or mitigate actual or potential OCI concerns and issues
as early in the procurement process as possible, including the
participation of a LUMA parent company, covered affiliate or
subsidiary, in accordance with 2 CFR Part 200 (the Uniform Rules) and
other applicable laws and regulations (``OCI Plan'').
LUMA is in the process of developing and submitting for P3A and
COR3 approval an OCI Plan which will include the engagement of an
independent third-party to undertake key stages of the procurement
process when a LUMA parent, covered affiliate, or subsidiary
participates in the process. The independent third-party is expected
to, among other responsibilities, review and approve the scope of work,
requirements, and other bid documents, lead the RFP process whenever
there's a covered affiliate participation, as well as issue a
recommendation for award of the contract. The P3A and COR3 are also
expected to play a key role in the process.

(a) What is the LUMA company policy regarding procurement directed
by LUMA staff, to businesses owned by LUMA shareholders and employees?

Answer. LUMA's company policy regarding the participation of
businesses owned by LUMA shareholders in procurements conducted by LUMA
is that such participation implies an OCI concern which requires the
engagement of an independent third-party, as described above.
Businesses owned by LUMA shareholders may not participate in any
procurement conducted by LUMA in which an independent third-party has
not been engaged.
LUMA's company policy regarding the participation of businesses
owned by LUMA employees in procurements conducted by LUMA is that such
a situation has the potential to constitute a conflict of interest
under LUMA's Conflict of Interest Policy. LUMA's employees are
prohibited from entering or continuing to participate in a situation
that involves a conflict of interest unless it has been properly
disclosed and approved in writing by LUMA's Director of Compliance and
its Chief Executive Officer.

(b) Does your contract permit contracting your corporate parents or
related companies?

Answer. As explained above, the T&D O&M Agreement requires the
implementation of procurement manuals which address OCI. In accordance
with federal funding requirements, the PM does not prohibit that LUMA
contract corporate parents or related companies but does require the
avoidance or mitigation of the OCI that such situation may entail,
including the engagement of an independent third-party to undertake key
aspects of the procurement process.

Question 6. As a contractor of the Puerto Rico government, under an
exclusive contract enabled by the Puerto Rico Legislature, and
performing projects financed with federal funds, to what extent is LUMA
accountable to disclose information to the Puerto Rico Legislature or
Congress regarding activities in which public funds were or will or may
be used?

Answer. Under the Operation and Maintenance Agreement, LUMA is
designated agent of PREPA for certain key functions, such as collection
of System Revenues (defined term). System Revenues collected by LUMA
are the property of PREPA as Owner. LUMA collects such revenues as an
agent of PREPA. Thus, any System Revenues can be categorized as public
funds as they continue to belong to PREPA per the OMA. In connection
with System Revenues, LUMA appreciates that it is subject to all
applicable law on public funds, including the jurisdiction under
Applicable Law of Governmental Bodies such as the U.S. Congress and the
Puerto Rico Legislative Assembly.
LUMA's role pursuant to the OMA regarding public funds is subject
to oversight under Applicable Law. However, not all funds received or
managed by LUMA are public funds under the definition of the Puerto
Rico Government Accounting Act. Payments made to LUMA in payment for
the services rendered, like with any other contractor to the
government, they become private funds of LUMA. With regard to LUMA's
private funds, LUMA is not subject to disclosure requirements
applicable to public funds.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields,
and I appreciate your testimony.
Let me now invite the Executive Director of the Puerto Rico
Public-Private Partnership Authority, P3A, Mr. Fermin Fontanes.
Sir, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF FERMIN FONTANES, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PUERTO RICO
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP AUTHORITY (P3A), SANTURCE, PUERTO
RICO

Mr. Fontanes. Good afternoon, Chairman Grijalva, Ranking
Member Westerman, Congresswoman Gonzalez-Colon, and Committee
members. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you. My
name is Fermin Fontanes and I am the Executive Director of the
Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority, an entity
created pursuant to Act 29, and the government entity charged
with transforming Puerto Rico's electricity system by securing
private-sector partners to improve power generation,
transmission, and distribution for Puerto Rico.
The P3 Authority is leading the efforts toward the
transformation, and recently oversaw the process that resulted
in the transfer of operations of the Puerto Rico Electric Power
Authority's transmission and distribution system to LUMA. Under
the agreement, LUMA will operate, maintain, and modernize
Puerto Rico's transmission and distribution system for a 15-
year term.
My testimony today will cover the following topics: the
delineation of responsibilities within the government agencies;
the P3 authority's role as a party to the agreement; and the
next steps in the transformation of Puerto Rico's electrical
system.
Responsibilities under the agreement are as follows: the P3
Authority is charged with overseeing the operators and PREPA's
compliance with the terms of the agreement; the Energy Bureau
is responsible for regulating, overseeing, and ensuring the
operator's compliance with applicable law and public policy;
the Energy Bureau oversees all operational and technical
aspects of LUMA's performance; PREPA remains the owner of the
system, and cooperates with the operator and the P3, so that it
can perform its obligations under the agreement.
As the government agency responsible for overseeing the
implementation of all public-private partnerships, the P3
Authority is committed to the success of the project, and fully
focused on exercising its contractual oversight functions.
During the transition period, the P3 Authority played a
pivotal role in ensuring that the operator was able to begin
operating the system within the agreed time frame. The P3
authority was responsible for assisting in reviewing and/or
approving plans, manuals, and budgets submitted by the
operator.
Throughout their agreement, the P3 Authority is charged
with reviewing and approving annual budgets, as well as the
incentive fee, and exercising oversight in relation to the
operator's compliance with budgets, its obligations under the
agreement.
In order to ensure that the P3 Authority is able to
properly execute its mandate, the operator is required to
deliver monthly reports to the P3 Authority. As part of its
oversight functions, the P3 Authority also reviews the
operator's performance metrics file on a quarterly basis, with
the Energy Bureau. In this first metrics report, it includes
data collected by the operator for the first 3 months since it
commenced operations.
In the 4 months since LUMA began performance under the
agreement, outages continued to be a problem, and in some cases
appeared to have worsened. However, during each outage, the P3
Authority has been in constant communication with LUMA and
PREPA, leading to better alignment and delineation of
corrective actions.
The next step in the transformation is the procurement of
one or more private operators to assume the operation and
maintenance functions of Puerto Rico legacy electrical
generation facilities. LUMA and the selected operators will be
legally bound to comply with applicable law, including the
mandates of Act 17 for the integration of renewable energy.
Puerto Rico's electrical system transformation will not be
accomplished in the span of 4 months. However, with the
government's oversight, we are confident that the operator will
be able to achieve our goals. Transforming Puerto Rico's
electric system is a process that will take time and effort. It
is true that the outages continue to affect the residents of
Puerto Rico, but we must not continue to come up with temporary
solutions to a permanent problem.
The Government of Puerto Rico remains confident that the
agreement is key to Puerto Rico's transition to a modern,
affordable, resilient, and reliable system that will serve as a
driver of economic recovery and growth.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Fontanes follows:]
Prepared Statement of Fermin Fontanes Gomez, Executive Director,
Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority

Introduction

Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Bruce Westerman, Congresswomen
Jennifer Gonzalez Colon and Committee Members, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the status of the
Puerto Rico Energy and Power Authority (``PREPA'') post implementation
of the LUMA LUMA Energy LLC (``LUMA'' or the ``Operator'') Transmission
and Distribution Contract. My name is Fermin Fontanes Gomez and I am
the Executive Director of the Puerto Rico Public Private Partnership
Authority (the ``P3 Authority'').
The P3 Authority is a public corporation of the Government of
Puerto Rico created pursuant to the Public-Private Partnership
Authority Act, Act No. 29-2009 (as amended, ``Act 29''), and is the
government entity charged with transforming Puerto Rico's electrical
system by securing private sector partners to improve power generation,
transmission, and distribution for Puerto Rico. As Executive Director
of the P3 Authority, I am leading the efforts related to the
transformation, and I recently oversaw the process that resulted in the
transfer of operations of PREPA's transmission and distribution system
to LUMA. Under the agreement between the P3 Authority, PREPA and LUMA
(``the O&M Agreement''), LUMA will operate, maintain, and modernize
Puerto Rico's transmission and distribution for a 15-year term.
As you are aware, Puerto Rico's electrical system faces severe
challenges as a result of years of underfunding, lack of maintenance
and disrepair, the devastation caused by hurricanes Irma and Maria, and
a series of earthquakes that struck Puerto Rico in December 2019 and
January 2020. The transformation process has been further delayed by
strict shelter-in-place measures and other restrictions to prevent the
spread of COVID-19.
My testimony today will address the government framework for
oversight of the transformation process, and will cover the following
topics: (i) the regulatory background underlying the whole
transformation process; (ii) the delineation of responsibilities
between the government agencies tasked with effectuating the
transaction for the transformation of the transmission and distribution
system and the Operator; (iii) the status of the proposed
reorganization of PREPA, and (iv) the next steps in the transformation
of Puerto Rico's electrical system.
i. Regulatory Framework

The regulatory framework underlying the PREPA transformation rests
on three main pillars--the Puerto Rico Electric Power System
Transformation Act, Act No. 120-2018 (as amended, ``Act 120''). the
Puerto Rico Energy Public Policy Act, Act. No. 17-2019 (``Act 17'').
and the Puerto Rico Transformation and RELIEF Act, Act No. 57-2014 (as
amended, ``Act 57'').
The Government enacted Act 120 with the objective of transforming
Puerto Rico's electric system into one that is modern, sustainable,
reliable, efficient, cost-effective and resilient to natural disaster.
Further, to address the Legislative Assembly's concern that the
Commonwealth's electric power and generation and distribution system
was obsolete and hindered opportunities for economic development, Act
17 was enacted requiring PREPA to delegate or transfer operation of the
electric power generation, transmission and distribution,
commercialization, and operation systems through contracts awarded and
executed pursuant to Act 120 and Act 29, all to be done within certain
specific milestones.
Created pursuant to Act 57, the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau (the
``PREB'') is the government agency charged with regulating, overseeing
and ensuring compliance with the public policy on energy of the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The PREB has served, and continues to
serve, an important function in the transformation of PREPA, including
the approval of the energy compliance certificate assuring that the O&M
Agreement is consistent with Puerto Rico's energy public policy.
ii. Delineation of Responsibilities Among the Relevant Parties

The parties to the O&M Agreement specifically allocated
responsibilities among various Government agencies as required by the
underlying regulatory framework. Specifically:

the P3 Authority is charged with overseeing the Operator's
and PREPA's compliance with the terms of the O&M Agreement;

the PREB is responsible for regulating, overseeing, and
ensuring the Operator's compliance with applicable law and
public policy on energy. As the Island's independent
regulator for the energy sector, the PREB oversees all
operational and technical aspects of LUMA's performance as
operator of the transmission and distribution system; and

PREPA continues to own the transmission & distribution
system and is also required to reasonably cooperate with
the Operator so that it can perform its obligations under
the O&M Agreement.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Role of the Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority

The P3 Authority is charged with overseeing Operator's compliance
with the terms of the O&M Agreement. As the government agency
responsible for overseeing the implementation of all public-private
partnerships, the P3 Authority is committed to the success of the
project, and fully focused on exercising its contractual oversight
functions to achieve the Government's goals.
During the transition period leading to LUMA formally taking over
the operation of the transmission and distribution system, the P3
Authority played a pivotal role in ensuring that the Operator was able
to begin operation of the transmission and distribution system within
the agreed timeframe. The P3 Authority was responsible for assisting in
reviewing and/or approving the System Operation Principles, a System
Remediation Plan, Performance Metrics, Initial Budgets, and Procurement
Manuals, among others. The P3 Authority reviewed and commented on
various drafts of these operating plans, which were required for
handover, and participated in multiple working groups with the Operator
to refine such plans. In addition, the P3 Authority oversaw the
development and implementation of protocols for the review and
validation of the Operator's invoices during the front-end transition
period.
Throughout the term of the O&M Agreement, the P3 Authority is
charged with: (i) reviewing and approving the Operator's annual budgets
as well as any incentive fee payable to LUMA for achieving certain
performance metrics; (ii) exercising oversight in relation to the
Operator's compliance with budgets and its performance of its
obligations under the contract; and (iii) cooperating with the Operator
in its efforts to obtain and effectuate any required government
approvals. In order to ensure that the P3 Authority is able to properly
execute its mandate and contractual obligations, the Operator is
required to deliver monthly reports for the P3 Authority's review.
Finally, the P3 Authority holds regular meetings and proactively
engages in communication with LUMA in order to discuss matter
pertaining to day-to-day execution of the O&M Agreement.
b. Role of the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau

As the independent regulator of the energy system, the PREB has the
ultimate responsibility to regulate, monitor, and enforce the energy
public policy of the Government. As part of its statutory mandate, the
PREB is charged with ensuring that electric service in the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico is safe, reliable, and affordable. In accordance with
the regulatory framework established by Act 120, the PREB and the P3
Authority collaborate in supervising LUMA's performance of the O&M
Agreement. In addition, the P3 Authority and the PREB, together with
PREPA, continue to work on a work plan to oversee the transaction and
guarantee the optimum use of the resources of each entity without
unnecessary duplicity or overlapping. As such, the PREB has been tasked
with overseeing all technical and operational aspects of LUMA's
performance under the O&M Agreement.
As part of its technical oversight functions, the PREB issued a
Resolution and Order of May 21, 2021, directing the Operator to prepare
quarterly reports with respect to certain performance metrics,
including customer service metrics, customer average interruption
duration, operational and capital expenses, and certain generation
metrics. As further explained below, the first quarterly report
covering the period from June 2021 to August 2021 was recently filed
with the PREB on September 20th.
Among other responsibilities, PREB has the statutory responsibility
to oversee rates charged to consumers. The O&M Agreement specifically
states that nothing in the contract is intended to impair or restrict
the PREB's right to approve final rates and charges to customers in
accordance with applicable law. Therefore, the Operator is subject to
regulatory oversight by the PREB and cannot increase rates without
PREB's approval. No rate increases are contemplated in the Operator's
Initial Budget approved by the PREB for 2022-2024.
c. Role of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority

As of today, PREPA has two distinct roles with respect to Puerto
Rico's electric energy system: (i) it is the owner of the transmission
and distribution system and, as such, is charged with cooperating with
the Operator in its operation and management of the transmission and
distribution system; and (ii) it is the owner and operator of the
legacy base-load generation plants and gas turbine peaking plants
located throughout the island of Puerto Rico.
Pending the completion of the procurement process to delegate the
operation and maintenance functions of these generation facilities,
PREPA remains responsible for operating the same to generate the
electricity that is then transmitted and distributed by the Operator to
the people of Puerto Rico.
d. Role of the Private Operator

As required by law, the P3 Authority conducted a procurement
process that led to the signing of the O&M Agreement in June 2020, and
then oversaw a one-year-long transition of operations to LUMA. The
transition allowed the parties to prepare for the Operator's takeover
of the transmission and distribution system by (i) developing the
requisite operating plans, performance metrics, procedures and policies
needed for a successful transaction; (ii) hiring employees to operate
the transmission and distribution system; (iii) allowing the Operator
to establish a presence on the Island; and (iv) refining the
arrangements between LUMA as operator of the transmission and
distribution system and PREPA as operator of the electrical generation
facilities.
LUMA formally took over the operation of the transmission and
distribution system on June 1, 2021. As the operator, LUMA is
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the transmission and
distribution system, which includes, among other things: (i) electric
transmission, distribution and load servicing; (ii) asset management
and maintenance; (iii) public and employee safety; (iv) managing and
administering Federal funds; (v) human resources; (vi) information
technology; (vii) customer services and communicating with the public;
(viii) billing and collection; (ix) system planning and operations; (x)
implementation and planning of capital improvements; (xi) accounting
and financial services; (xii) communicating with, and appearing before,
the PREB; (xiii) preparation of the Integrated Resource Plan; (xiv)
emergency response; and (xv) communications with the Government,
community and the media.
LUMA's first Quarterly Performance Metrics Report filed with the
PREB includes data collected by the Operator for the first three months
since it commenced operation of the transmission and distribution
system on June 1st. The report includes an update on both transmission
and distribution metrics and those that involve PREPA's generation
using data that the Operator received from PREPA. Highlights from the
report as well as trends over the initial three-month period are as
follows:

Customer Service--

the percentage of calls answered improved substantially
from approximately 28% to 54% in comparison to PREPA's
historical Fiscal Year 2020 data (used as baseline).

the average wait time to answer calls improved
substantially from approximately 26 minutes to
approximately 9 minutes in comparison with PREPA's
baseline.

T&D Reliability--The initial operating months had significant
outages throughout all regions as the Operator worked to transition
operations. The August data reflected the significant lack of PREPA's
generation resulting in rotating load shedding by the Operator. With
regards to specific indicators, the report shows as follows:

SAIDI (System Average Interruption Duration Index)
decreased by 85 minutes. This is still worse than both
PREPA's baseline and the benchmark set by PREB in its May
2021 Resolution and Order.

SAIFI (System Average Interruption Frequency Index)
slightly increased. This is still better than both PREPA's
baseline and the benchmark set by PREB in its May 2021
Resolution and Order.

CAIDI (Customer Average Interruption Duration Index)
overall customer average interruption time improved,
although still worse than both PREPA's baseline and the
benchmark set by PREB in its May 2021 Resolution and Order.

Human Resources--

While absenteeism over the initial 3-month period of June-
August increased from 1.1% to 1.9%, it is significantly
better than PREPA's baseline of 13.1%. It is also better
than the benchmark of 2.4% set by PREB in its May 2021
Resolution and Order.

The OSHA Total Recordable Incident Rate (``TRIR'')
worsened during the initial period with injuries reported
in August being 8, which was up from 3 in June 2021. LUMA's
August TRIR of 2.9% is slightly worse than PREB's benchmark
of 2.3% but better that PREPA's baseline of 6.4%.

Power Generation--

Power plant unit availability worsened by 17% from June to
August for the larger base load power plant units.

Forced Outage Hours increased by over 20% in August versus
June 2021.

The lack of generation/resource adequacy situation led to
island-wide rotating load shedding in August and into
September. The lack of base load generation also led to
operating with the peakers units, which are less efficient
and also resulted in fuel cost ($74 million dollars over
projections)

As noted above, in the four months since LUMA began performance
under the O&M Agreement, outages continue to be a problem and, in some
cases, appear to have worsened. However, during each outage, the P3
Authority has been in constant communication with PREPA and the
Operator to seek explanations and facilitate dialogue to remedy the
situation as quickly and efficiently as possible. Communication with
all parties has been effective and has led to better alignment and
delineation of corrective actions.
Also, it is important to point out that the operation and
maintenance of the base-load generation plants and gas turbine peaking
plants located throughout the island of Puerto Rico remain the
responsibility of PREPA. Although the Operator is responsible for
cooperating with the generators of electric energy, LUMA is not
responsible for any of the operation, repair, replacement, maintenance
or improvement of the legacy electrical generating facilities.
iii. PREPA Reorganization

As part of the transformation process, PREPA is currently
undergoing a reorganization with the view toward creating two new
subsidiaries--GridCo and GenCo (the ``PREPA Reorganization''). Upon
completion of the PREPA Reorganization, ownership of PREPA's
transmission and distribution system will be transferred to GridCo and
ownership of PREPA's Legacy Generation Assets will be transferred to
GenCo. One of the goals of the PREPA Reorganization is to comply with
the public policy mandated in Act 17 which provides for the unbundling
of Puerto Rico's electrical system, the incorporation of the private
sector in the operation of assets and the rendering of electric power
services so to allow for the elimination of interventions fueled by
party politics.
iv. Next Steps in the PREPA's Transformation--Procurement of Generation
Operator

The next step in the transformation of PREPA is the procurement of
one or more private operators to assume the operation and maintenance
functions of Puerto Rico's legacy electrical generation facilities, as
required by Act 17.
Following that mandate, the P3 Authority commenced a procurement
process, which purpose is to delegate the operation and maintenance
functions of these facilities. The currently ongoing procurement
process began with the launch of a request for qualifications to which
15 private parties responded. In consultation with its financial,
technical and legal advisors, the P3 Authority evaluated the statements
of qualifications received from those private parties and submitted its
analyses to the partnership committee established to oversee the
process. The partnership committee short-listed eight private parties
with best-in-class expertise and experience to participate in the
request for proposals (``RFP'') phase.
On November 10, 2020, the P3 Authority launched the RFP phase with
the issuance of the RFPs to the eight qualified parties. Since the
issuance of the RFP, this process has advanced steadily. Currently,
interested parties are conducting site visits and continuing to conduct
due diligence and engage on the draft contract negotiations.
Upon award of the generation contract, the selected generation
operator(s) and LUMA will work in parallel to operate Puerto Rico's
electric energy system.
Both the Operator and the generation operator(s) to be selected as
part of this procurement process are and will be legally bound to
comply with PREB's regulations and orders and with the applicable legal
framework that regulates the energy industry in Puerto Rico, including
the mandates of Act 17 for the integration of renewable energy into the
grid. Renewable energy objectives are one of many goals set by the
Government to achieve the modernization of Puerto Rico's electric
system. The transformation is a multi-step process that will be
accomplished over multiple years. The O&M Agreement is but the first
step in this transformation and is aimed at repairing, remediating and
strengthening the transmission and distribution system. Without that,
Puerto Rico will never be able to develop a fully resilient energy
infrastructure. The Government of Puerto Rico is committed to ensuring
the creation on a sustainable electric system and creating the
transmission and distribution system more capable to manage and
incorporate cleaner sources of energy.

Conclusion

Puerto Rico's electrical system transformation will not be
accomplished in the span of four months. However, with the oversight of
the P3 Authority, we are confident that the Operator will be able to
achieve the goals the parties have set out to accomplish. Like any
transition and as was expected, there have been certain challenges.
From the moment the new transmission and distribution system operator
was announced, naysayers have engaged in a campaign of misinformation
aimed at frustrating and derailing the transaction. In addition to
this, the Operator inherited a very frail electrical system as a result
of years of lack of maintenance, underfunding and disrepair. Everyone
knows that transforming Puerto Rico's electric system is not going to
happen overnight--it is a process that will take time and effort. It is
true that outages continue to affect the residents of Puerto Rico but
we must not continue to come up with temporary solutions to a permanent
problem, and to that end, the Government of Puerto Rico is committed to
ensuring that the Operator addresses the issues faced by the
transmission and distribution system and brings it in line with
industry standards.
Notwithstanding the challenges faced in the last few months, the
Government of Puerto Rico remain confident that the O&M Agreement is an
important part of Puerto Rico's transition to a modern, affordable,
resilient, and reliable electric energy system that will serve as a
driver of economic recovery and growth.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Fermin Fontanes Gomez, Executive
Director of the Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority
Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan

Question 1. Can you describe the relationship and responsibilities
between PREPA and LUMA as defined in the existing contract? For
example, if the AES Coal Plant were to close before 2028, would LUMA
play a role in that decision? What changes to the contract, if any, do
you think are needed?

Answer----

PREPA and LUMA's Relationship and Responsibilities Under the O&M
Agreement

PREPA has two distinct roles with respect Puerto Rico's electric
energy system under the O&M Agreement: (i) as required by the Puerto
Rico Energy Policy Act of 2019, Act No. 17-2019 (``Act 17''), it is the
owner of Puerto Rico's transmission and distribution system (the ``T&D
System'') and, as such, is charged with cooperating with LUMA in its
operation and management of the T&D System; and (ii) it is the owner
and operator of the base-load generation plants and gas turbine peaking
plants located throughout Puerto Rico (the ``Legacy Generation
Assets''), pending the completion of the procurement process to
delegate its operation and maintenance responsibilities to one or more
private operators. Accordingly, PREPA continues to be responsible for
generating the electricity that is then transmitted and distributed by
LUMA to the people of Puerto Rico.
LUMA's role under the O&M Agreement is to act as the ``Operator''
of the T&D System. In its role as Operator, LUMA is responsible for the
day-to-day operation of the T&D System, which includes, among other
things: (i) electric transmission, distribution and load servicing;
(ii) asset management and maintenance; (iii) public and employee
safety; (iv) managing and administering Federal funds; (v) human
resources; (vi) information technology; (vii) customer services and
communicating with the public; (viii) billing and collection; (ix)
system planning and operations; (x) implementation and planning of
capital improvements; (xi) accounting and financial services; (xii)
communicating with, and appearing before, the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau
(the ``PREB''); (xiii) preparation of the Integrated Resource Plan (the
``IRP'') subject to approval by the PREB; (xiv) emergency response; and
(xv) communications with the Government of Puerto Rico (the
``Government''), community and the media (the ``O&M Services'').
Accordingly, LUMA is responsible for cooperating with PREPA (and, upon
completion of the ongoing procurement for the Legacy Generation Assets,
with operators of the Legacy Generation Assets) and the other
generators of electric energy on Puerto Rico, but it is not responsible
for any of the operation, repair, replacement, maintenance or
improvement of the Legacy Generation Assets or any other privately
owned generation asset.
In addition, under the O&M Agreement, prior to transferring to LUMA
the operation of the T&D System on June 1, 2021 (the ``Service
Commencement Date''), LUMA and PREPA, along with various other
government entities, including the P3 Authority, the Central Office for
Recovery, Reconstruction and Resiliency (``COR3'') and the PREB, were
required to work together to prepare for the transfer to LUMA of the
T&D System, including by collaborating to (i) develop the requisite
operating plans, performance metrics, procedures and policies needed
for a successful transaction; (ii) hire employees to operate the T&D
System; (iii) establish LUMA's presence on Puerto Rico; and (iv) refine
the arrangements between LUMA as operator of the T&D System and PREPA
as operator of the Legacy Generation Assets.
AES Coal Plant Hypothetical

Under the O&M Agreement, LUMA is responsible for (i) acting as
agent of PREPA in administering certain contracts relating to the
operation and maintenance of the T&D System (``System Contracts''),
including the power purchase and operating agreement (the ``AES PPOA'')
between PREPA and AES Puerto Rico (the ``AES Operator''), the private
operator of the AES Coal Plant, (ii) ensuring that the T&D System,
Legacy Generation Assets and all generation assets not owned by PREPA
operate in a reliable and economic fashion, and (iii) ensuring that
sufficient generation capacity is available and maintained to meet
resource adequacy goals (``Resource Adequacy'') in accordance with
Puerto Rico's energy public policy.
If the AES Coal Plant were to close before 2028, LUMA's role under
the O&M Agreement would be to prepare a risk assessment and analysis in
support of Resource Adequacy concluding that the AES Coal Plant can be
shut down at such time. In addition, prior to commencing any work in
furtherance of such determination, LUMA would be required to obtain the
PREB's approval to begin shutting down the AES Coal Plant.
Changes to the O&M Agreement

The P3 Authority is of the position that no changes to the O&M
Agreement are needed at this time.
First, the O&M Agreement is part of the Government's broader public
policy preference to depoliticize PREPA and incorporate the private
sector in the operation of assets and the rendering of electrical power
services. Such public policy aims to finance infrastructure projects
and provide public goods and services through public private
partnerships.
For years, Puerto Rico's dated and fragile electric system has
faced significant operational and reliability challenges. In 2017,
these challenges were both highlighted and significantly aggravated by
Hurricanes Irma and Maria, two devastating hurricanes which struck
Puerto Rico within two weeks of each other. The combined impact of Irma
and Maria led to a complete failure of the electrical grid, resulting
in the longest power outage in U.S. history. Irma left approximately
70% of Puerto Rico without power and, shortly thereafter, Maria, the
strongest hurricane to hit Puerto Rico in close to 100 years, made
landfall and left 100% of Puerto Rico's residents without power for
significant periods of time. On average, households went 84 days
without power, however it was approximately 11 months before power was
restored to 100% of Puerto Rico's residents.
Confronted with this reality, the Government determined that a
critical component of the transformation of Puerto Rico's energy sector
was to bring in private sector operators who would be able to bring to
bear their world-class expertise, experience, and know-how to execute
on the transformation of the island's electric system.
Second, the O&M Agreement is the result of a two-year-long robust
and transparent competitive procurement process, conducted pursuant to
and in compliance with the requirements of the Puerto Rico Electric
System Transformation Act, Act No. 120-2018, as amended (``Act 120''),
and the Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnership Authority Act, Act No.
29-2009 (``Act 29''). Over the course of these two years, multiple
drafts of the contract were distributed to the proponents, with each
new draft reflecting the comments from the proponents that the
partnership committee established for the O&M Agreement procurement
process (the ``Partnership Committee'') had accepted. Specifically, the
request for proposals required that each proponent (i) provide written
comments to and markups of three drafts of the contract and (ii) meet
with the P3 Authority and various other government entities, including
the FOMB, to walk through and discuss the proponent's comments to each
successive draft of the contract. In addition, there were over 700
diligence questions, more than 19 Partnership Committee meetings and
over 15 diligence meetings. Accordingly, each provision of the O&M
Agreement was carefully negotiated between the main stakeholders, which
resulted in the best market terms and conditions.
Finally, the Government cannot amend the O&M Agreement
unilaterally, as it can only be amended by written agreement between
LUMA, PREPA and the P3 Authority. Furthermore, amendments to the O&M
Agreement do not enter into effect until (i) the parties have obtained
approval from the PREB and the FOMB (if then in existence), to the
extent required by applicable law, and (ii) the P3 Authority has
received the relevant tax opinions providing that the amendment in
question does not jeopardize the tax-exempt status of the PREPA bonds.
In light of the above, it is not clear that reopening contract
negotiations with LUMA or re-starting a procurement process would
result in an agreement that is more favorable to the Government and the
people of Puerto Rico.

Questions Submitted by Representative Velazquez

Question 1. How many employees within the P3 Authority are charged
with providing oversight to the O&M Agreement?

Answer. It is important to point out that the PREB is the entity in
charge of overseeing all technical and operational aspects of LUMA's
performance under the O&M Agreement. The O&M Agreement acknowledges
PREB's authority in all matters under its jurisdiction. The P3
Authority has a very specific role as the Administrator to the O&M
Agreement, which is directed to making sure that LUMA complies with its
obligations thereunder. Specifically, the P3 Authority's
responsibilities as Administrator under the O&M Agreement are the
following: (i) review and approve LUMA's budgets to ensure compliance
with the rate orders issues by PREB from time to time; (ii) review and
approve the incentive fee payable to LUMA for a given contract year;
(iii) cooperate with LUMA such that budgets and funds are sufficient in
amount to enable LUMA to meet the Contract Standards and provide
reasonable opportunity for LUMA to achieve the Performance Metrics, as
both terms are defined by the O&M Agreement; (iv) exercise oversight in
relation to LUMA's compliance with the budgets approved by the PREB,
performance of its obligations under O&M Contract, and compliance with
federal funding requirements; (v) respond within 30 days to all
requests of LUMA with respect to matters requiring approval, review or
consent of Administrator under O&M Agreement; (vi) cooperate with LUMA
by providing information, data and assistance as may be reasonably
necessary; (vii) declare an event of default and exercise remedies
under O&M Agreement; (viii) coordinate any audits that the P3 Authority
is entitled to perform with any audits being undertaken by PREPA and
any other governmental body; and (ix) cooperate with LUMA to obtain and
effectuate approvals of any governmental body.
To achieve such purposes, the P3 Authority currently has six
employees responsible for overseeing LUMA and PREPA's performance of
its contractual obligations. Also, the P3 Authority team communicates
with LUMA on a daily basis, serving as liaison between Luma, other
stakeholders and governmental agencies. The P3 Authority is in the
process of interviewing candidates for the P3 Authority's office of
administration of the O&M Agreement, which recruitment process must
strictly comply with local administrative and human resources laws and
regulations. Specifically, under local law, the P3 Authority is
required to interview and give priority to all prospective candidates
within the Government before announcing any job openings to the public
and expanding its search beyond the Government.

Question 2. Did the P3 authority have to engage outside experts to
help with the oversight of the O&M Agreement?

Answer. Yes, the P3 Authority has engaged outside experts to help
with its oversight of the O&M Agreement.

Question 3. If so, can you share the names of those experts and the
agreements for the members of this Committee?

Answer. The outside experts hired by the P3 Authority to help
oversee the O&M Agreement are (i) FTI Consulting (``FTI''), (ii)
Ximmena, LLC (``Ximmena''), (iii) Eclipse Management, LLC
(``Eclipse''), and (iv) Scott Madden, LLC (``Scott Madden'').
FTI assists with overseeing LUMA's technical and financial
compliance with the O&M Agreement. Ximmena assists with overseeing the
technical and regulatory compliance with the O&M Agreement. Eclipse
Management assists with overseeing LUMA's compliance with certain
financial obligations under the O&M Agreement. Scott Madden was hired
to assist with the creation of the necessary administrative framework
required to oversee the O&M Agreement. Copy of the Agreements with the
named advisors are attached as Exhibit A herewith.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. Multiple groups like UPR Resiliency Law Center and even
Members of Congress have argued that:

The O&M Agreement should be canceled or amended.

That FEMA should condition its recovery funds to immediate
action being taken by the Puerto Rican Government, so a
thorough investigation and report is produced on the O&M
Agreement.

That Congress and FEMA should ensure that federal funds
are used to ``move away from fossil fuels, advancing the
use of renewable energy, protecting workers rights and
improving the health of people and the environment.''

(a) How do you answer to that?

(b) How much would that drag on the already painfully slow
recovery?

Answer----

Response to the Argument that the O&M Agreement Should be Canceled or
Amended:

The P3 Authority is of the position that the O&M Agreement should
not be canceled and does not require amendments. The O&M Agreement is
the result of a two-year-long robust competitive procurement process,
conducted pursuant to and in compliance with the requirements of Act
120 and Act 29. As such, the terms of the O&M Agreement were thoroughly
negotiated between key stakeholders and subject to multiple rounds of
the review and comment by, among others, technical experts, as well as
experts in local law, environmental law, federal funding requirements,
and the applicable regulatory framework which resulted in the best
market terms and conditions.
In addition, the O&M Agreement is part of the Government's broader
public policy preference to finance infrastructure projects and provide
public goods and services through public private partnerships.
Specifically, the O&M Agreement is the result of the Government's
determination that a critical component of the transformation of Puerto
Rico's energy sector would be to bring in a private sector operator who
would be able to bring to bear its world-class expertise, experience
and know-how to execute on the transformation.
Accordingly, it is not clear that reopening contract negotiations
with LUMA or restarting the procurement process would result in an
agreement that is more favorable to the Government and the people of
Puerto Rico. What is certain is that reopening contract negotiations
would result in further delays to Puerto Rico's recovery process, the
envisioned transformation of the electric grid and significant expenses
to the Government of Puerto Rico. Cancellation of the O&M Agreement
would also bring the threat of protracted litigation.
Response to the Argument that FEMA Should Condition Recovery Funds:

Any use by LUMA of FEMA recovery funds is, in fact, subject to a
number of terms and conditions. The O&M Agreement requires LUMA to
fully comply with State and Federal requirements and procedures that
govern FEMA recovery funds. Further, the specific projects to be built
using these funds must meet FEMA eligibility criteria, including the
environmental and historic preservation reviews that apply to any
facility built or repaired with federal funds. In light of this, LUMA
may only use FEMA funds as permitted by FEMA's Public Assistance
Program and in accordance with all statutory and regulatory
requirements applicable to projects funded by Public Assistance grants.
It is worth mentioning that FEMA does have the authority to impose
conditions on a grant award that require funds to be used for a
particular purpose or manner that is consistent with Federal statute,
regulation, or Executive Order (see 2 C.F.R. Sec. Sec. 200.100(a)(1)
and 200.211 for information on how agencies can impose conditions on
grant awards). Therefore, the applicable regulation provides for
sufficient Federal intervention with respect to the use of the grant
funds destined to Puerto Rico's power generation, transmission, and
distribution.
Furthermore, the O&M Agreement includes certain requirements
intended to provide additional assurance that any goods and services
acquired by LUMA for federally funded projects are properly procured
and administered. For example, under the O&M Agreement, prior to the
Service Commencement Date, LUMA was required to prepare a procurement
manual in collaboration with the P3 Authority and COR3 (the ``LUMA
Procurement Manual''), which LUMA must now use to manage the end-to-end
procurement or purchasing of any third-party goods and services in
connection with its performance of the O&M Services, including its
performance of any O&M Services related to FEMA funded projects. Of
note, the scope and contents of the Procurement Manual was the subject
of multiple discussions with FEMA and the OIG Office to assure
compliance with federal regulations.
Finally, because the argument that FEMA should condition its
recovery funds on the Government taking immediate action to conduct a
thorough O&M Agreement is similar to the Whitefish and Cobra contracts,
it is worth noting two critical differences between the O&M Agreement,
on the one hand, and the Whitefish and Cobra contracts, on the other.
First, unlike the Whitefish and Cobra contracts, each of which was the
result of a non-competitive procurement process for emergency
restoration services conducted in the immediate aftermath of Hurricanes
Irma and Maria, the O&M Agreement is the result of a two-year-long
robust competitive procurement process conducted pursuant to and in
compliance with the requirements of Act 120 and Act 29. Second, unlike
the Whitefish and Cobra contracts, which were paid for using FEMA
funds, the O&M Agreement is not a federally funded contract. Rather,
payments made to LUMA in exchange for the O&M Services come out of the
revenues from the tariff paid by PREPA's consumers.
Response to the Argument that Congress and FEMA Should Ensure Federal
Funds Are Used to Advance Renewable Energy:

The Government is committed to increasing renewable energy in
Puerto Rico. Act 17 establishes the Puerto Rico public policy for the
execution of the Renewable Portfolio Standard. The Renewable Portfolio
Standard requires, among other things, that the renewable portfolio for
the Puerto Rico energy system increase to 20% by 2022, 40% by 2025, 60%
by 2040 and 100% by 2050. Act 17 also requires that LUMA implement
energy efficiency programs to obtain 30% energy efficiency savings by
2040.
Under the O&M Agreement, LUMA's role is limited to the operation of
the T&D System and does not include power generation. In other words,
the O&M Agreement does not authorize LUMA to purchase or contract for
power generation. What is more, the O&M Agreement requires LUMA to
comply with Act 17 and to ensure Resource Adequacy in accordance with
the Puerto Rico energy public policy.
Given that the PREB is the public entity generally responsible for
the oversight and correct execution of Puerto Rico's energy public
policy, by making the PREB entity responsible for overseeing LUMA's
compliance with Puerto Rican law and public policy on energy, including
renewable energy policy such as the Renewable Portfolio Standard, the
O&M Agreement ensures that LUMA will perform the O&M Services in
furtherance of the Government's goals with respect to the advancement
of renewable energy in Puerto Rico.
Regarding the Impact on Puerto Rico's Already Painfully Slow Recovery
if the Government Were to Capitulate to Any of the Preceding
Three Arguments
Capitulating to any of the three arguments outlined above will
ultimately hurt the people of Puerto Rico by further delaying the
Government's mission to transform Puerto Rico's electric grid and
promote economic recovery and growth following the devastation caused
by Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria. Specifically, if the O&M
Agreement is terminated, the people of Puerto Rico will never be able
to reap the benefits of the significant amount of time and resources
that have already been invested into the transaction by the Government.
In addition, if Congress and/or FEMA were to take actions to further
delay the disbursement of federal funds to PREPA, Puerto Ricans who, at
this point, have been waiting for FEMA to approve a permanent power
grant for four years will have to continue waiting, which will, in
turn, foment further public distrust in both the Government and the
Federal Government.

Question 2. How much would it cost to rescind the O&M Agreement?
What would be the difference between doing it for cause, vs. as a
policy decision? What would be the impact on the recovery and
mitigation action plan for the electric system of a reset of the whole
process?

Answer----

Cost of Rescinding the O&M Agreement

The O&M Agreement can be terminated by LUMA and/or the Government
prior to the end of the term of the agreement under a number of
circumstances, including, among others, bankruptcy, failure to pay
undisputed amounts owed under the O&M Agreement and a representation
and warranty of a party being proved to be false or inaccurate in any
material respect when made and thereby materially and adversely affects
the legality of the O&M Agreement or LUMA's ability to carry out its
obligations. However, the O&M Agreement only requires the Government to
pay LUMA a termination fee (the ``Termination Fee'') in the event that
the O&M Agreement is terminated under certain limited circumstances not
due to LUMA's fault.
Specifically, the Government must pay the Termination Fee in the
event that the O&M Agreement is: (i) terminated, revoked, nullified,
canceled or otherwise rendered invalid by any duly enacted Puerto Rican
law, as determined by a final non-appealable judgment by a court of
competent jurisdiction; (ii) terminated by LUMA or the P3 Authority as
a result of the T&D System being sold, transferred or assigned, in
whole or in part, to a private entity; or (iii) terminated by LUMA as a
result of any change, amendment or modification to any applicable
Puerto Rican law or any adoption of, or change to, any administrative
or judicial interpretation (having the force of law) of any such law or
any regulation that (A) renders unenforceable or invalid, in whole or
in part, any right or privilege granted to LUMA under the O&M
Agreement, (B) subjects LUMA to rate or other substantive regulation by
the PREB in a manner that materially and adversely affects LUMA's
ability to perform its obligations under the O&M Agreement to the
extent not otherwise mitigated by the terms thereof, or that
constitutes a default by the FOMB under the terms of the FOMB Protocol
Agreement (as such term is defined by the O&M Agreement), subject to
certain exceptions, or (C) caps or has the effect of capping rates
charged to customers, other than a temporary cap on rates to address an
certain outage events.
The Termination Fee ranges between $158 million and $104 million,
depending on when in the 15-year term such termination occurs.
Accordingly, the Termination Fee is only payable to LUMA under certain
circumstances, which include termination on the basis of public policy
but exclude termination for cause.
Impact of Rescinding the O&M Agreement

Considering the Termination Fee described above, terminating the
O&M Agreement would not only be costly to the people of Puerto Rico,
but it would also deprive the people of Puerto Rico from being able to
reap the benefits of the significant amount of time and resources that
have been invested into the transformation of the electric grid by the
Government. This would ultimately hurt the people of Puerto Rico by
further delaying the Government's mission to transform Puerto Rico's
electric grid and promote economic recovery and growth following the
devastation caused by Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria.
In addition, it is worth noting that rescinding the O&M Agreement
would undo many of the benefits LUMA has been able to achieve to date
in its capacity as operator of the T&D System. For example, virtually
no permanent restoration projects had been submitted to FEMA before
LUMA undertook the operation of the T&D System. Since Commencement
Date, LUMA has successfully submitted more than 65 projects to FEMA.
Further, LUMA has another 29 projects in the pipeline that are expected
to be submitted to FEMA before 2022. Additionally, during their first
100 days, LUMA's Net Energy Metering Program and Distributed Generation
Interconnection teams processed over 23,000 applications, seven times
PREPA's historical monthly average. LUMA has also been able to make an
electric connection in a Culebra community that had been without
electric power for more than 15 years. These are just a few of the
multiple achievements LUMA has had since June 1, 2021.

Question 3. On the LUMA Project Labor Agreement issue that was
brought up, where LUMA has required of its contractors and
subcontractors a Project Labor Agreement (PLA) modeled after its
agreement with IBEW Union:

(a) Does P3 Authority have any involvement or authority in that
process and with its effect to consumers and ratepayers as well the
economic impact in the general reconstruction?

Answer. When the O&M Agreement was signed, LUMA stepped into
PREPA's position in negotiating collective bargaining agreements
including agreements with contractors and subcontractors for services
to be provided in connection with the O&M Services. As such, LUMA was
able to bring the experience and expertise of ATCO Ltd and Quanta
Services, Inc. in negotiating similar contracts with unions to bear in
its capacity as operator.
The P3 Authority was not involved in the negotiation between LUMA
and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local Union
222 (``IBEW'') regarding the Project Labor Agreement (``PLA''). Per
LUMA's representations to the P3 Authority and the Government of Puerto
Rico, the main purposes of the PLA are to (1) stabilize wages, hours
and working conditions to encourage close cooperation between the
parties; (2) enhance cooperative effort for the timely completion of
work without interruption or delay; (3) satisfy the need for a
substantial number of workers with craft possessing skills and
qualifications which are vital to succeed; (4) avoid undue delays in
the completion of the construction work as the Contractors agree to not
engage in lockout and IBEW agrees to not engage in strike, slow-down,
or other disruptions or interferences.

(b) If the answer [is] it does, is there any involvement in a prior
public participation process, or in reviewing impact on economic
development reconstruction of such company decisions? If the answer is
yes, then what would be the procedure for cases such as this?

Answer. See answer to 3(a) above.

(c) Has P3 reviewed the complaint of various private sector
organizations, that this Agreement in effect extends LUMA's labor terms
to the rest of the local private sector? Does that in any way violate
the letter or spirit of the agreement or of the enabling law?

Answer. The P3 Authority is aware of the complaints raised by
various sector organization and has met with their representatives in
order to discuss their concerns. Per LUMA's representations to the P3
Authority and the Government of Puerto Rico, the PLA will only apply to
new construction and maintenance of electrical transmission lines,
distribution lines, catenary and trolley facilities, switch yards and
substation in Puerto Rico on PREPA's property as specifically defined
in the PLA. Further, the PLA will only apply to the following category
of workers: general foreman, foreman, journeyman lineman, heavy
equipment operator, operator, cable splicer, groundman-truck driver,
and apprentice lineman.

Question 4. Future Generation:

(a) What is the current status of the Renewable Energy and Storage
RFPs?

Answer. The P3 Authority is not currently managing any RFPs for
Renewable Energy and Storage. Those RFPs are currently managed by
PREPA.

(b) What is the status of proposals for privatizing the legacy
generation fleet?

Answer. The currently ongoing procurement process to delegate the
operation and maintenance functions of the Legacy Generation Assets
began with the launch of a request for qualifications to which 15
private parties responded.
The P3 Authority evaluated the statements of qualifications
received from those private parties and submitted its analyses to the
partnership committee established to oversee the process. The
partnership committee short-listed eight private parties with best-in-
class expertise and experience (the ``Proponents'') to participate in
the request for proposals (``Generation RFP'') phase. On November 10,
2020, the P3 Authority launched the Generation RFP phase with the
issuance of the Generation RFPs to the Proponents.
Since the issuance of the Generation RFP, this process has advanced
steadily. The P3 Authority has shared with Proponents a draft operation
and maintenance agreement and held multiple videoconferences with
Proponents to clarify certain business and legal elements of the
agreement, as well as various regulatory features of the project in
general. Currently, interested Proponents are conducting due diligence
on the opportunity and engage on the draft contract.
The P3 Authority expects that a proponent will be selected by the
end of December 2021.

Question 5. Is there any entity in Puerto Rico that has the legal
power to unilaterally command the elimination or non-use of a system or
a power plant, NOT due to imminent security/safety problems or for
causes listed in the law and regulation, but simply as a matter of
choice or policy?

Answer. Ultimately, the decision to eliminate or cease use of a
system or power plant is a matter of public policy. As the island's
independent regulator, PREB is the entity with jurisdiction to
implement the public policy in the energy sector and approves the IRP
which establishes the energy generation sources. The O&M Agreement, in
conjunction with the Puerto Rico Power Authority Act of 1941, Act 83-
1941, requires that LUMA submit an IRP to the PREB, which must include,
among other things, an evaluation of the existing electric power plants
or facilities of PREPA that takes into account the improvements in the
operations efficiency of plants, the useful life of existing plants,
and the retirement date and decommissioning costs thereof. Once
received, the PREB reviews the submitted IRP and issues findings and
orders related to, among other things, the retirement date and
decommissioning costs of existing plants.

*****

The following document was submitted as an attachment to Mr. Fontanes'
responses. This document is part of the hearing record and is being
retained in the Committee's official files:

--Exhibit A: Agreements with Named Advisors

Available at page 12 in the following link:
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II00/20211006/114107/HHRG-117-II00-
Wstate-FontansF-20211006-SD001.pdf

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, sir.
And let me now ask the Executive Director of the Central
Office of Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resiliency, Mr. Manuel
Laboy, for your comment, sir.

STATEMENT OF MANUEL LABOY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTRAL OFFICE
OF RECOVERY, RECONSTRUCTION, AND RESILIENCY (COR3), SAN JUAN,
PUERTO RICO

Mr. Laboy. Thank you. In the interest of time, if I may, I
will skip several paragraphs of my written testimony.
Dear Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman,
Congresswoman Gonzalez, and Members of Congress, in Puerto
Rico, the devastation caused by Hurricanes Irma and Maria paved
the way for a historic obligation of Federal funds from the
public assistance program of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, FEMA, including approximately $10.5 billion destined
for permanent reconstruction work related to the Puerto Rico
Electric Power Authority, PREPA. We expect a significant amount
of funds from public assistance hazard mitigation measures and
FEMA's Hazard Mitigation Grant Program, a total allocation of
$4 billion in Federal funding, for mitigation measures related
to Hurricane Maria, of which about $1 billion are expected to
be assigned for PREPA projects.
As related to FEMA PA and hazard mitigation funding for
Hurricane Maria, it is very important to point out that non-
Federal cost share requirements will be covered by CDBG-DR or
CDBG-MIT.
To manage this enormous sum of Federal monies and ensure
not only adequate project execution, but full transparency,
accountability, and compliance with applicable laws and
regulations, the Government of Puerto Rico created the Central
Office for Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resiliency, COR3,
which, in turn, acts as the recipient of FEMA PA and hazard
mitigation monies.
Furthermore, COR3's Executive Director also serves as the
Governor's authorized representative. Accordingly, after the
occurrence of a major disaster and subsequent Presidential
declaration, FEMA awards PA and/or hazard mitigation funds to
COR3 as a recipient, while COR3 enters into subaward agreements
with subrecipients, and serves as a pass-through entity to
provide funding to carry out part of the PA or hazard
mitigation activities.
As recipient, COR3 is also responsible for providing
technical assistance, and ensuring that subrecipient activities
are carried out in full compliance with FEMA and other Federal,
state, and local requirements. On the other hand, subrecipients
are responsible for actual procurement and project execution,
pursuant to applicable Federal, state, and local regulations,
which in most cases mandate a full and open competition
process.
The fact that LUMA is an agent of PREPA for disaster
recovery has required for everyone involved to familiarize with
the basic terms of this transaction at the O&M contract.
The qualified O&M agreement, where PREPA's transmission and
distribution and other assets remain their own, is something
that was consulted with FEMA and carefully carved as part of
the P3 procurement and contracting process, inasmuch as they
had to remain as PREPA assets for purposes of receiving the
above-mentioned disaster recovery funding. Thus, PREPA remains
the applicant and subrecipient of Federal funds before FEMA and
COR3.
At this point, we are immersed in what is known as the
post-award process, which requires individual project
obligation before moving forward with actual construction work.
To comply with FEMA policies for PA projects obligated under
what is known as the FEMA Accelerated Award Strategy, or FAASt,
LUMA and PREPA filed a joint 90-day work plan, which covers
project execution for such period, and the work plan must be
updated and filed every 90 days before FEMA and COR3, and all
relevant parties frequently meet to discuss and resolve pending
issues.
Although the FAASt $10.5 billion obligation for PREPA
occurred on September 24, 2020, the reality is that it only
represents a fixed PREPA reconstruction work budget for said
amount. Currently, only funds for architectural and engineering
design services are authorized to be utilized for purposes of
submitting scopes of work for FEMA review and approval. The
aforementioned amount does not consider what could potentially
be millions of dollars in additional funding for hazard
mitigation measures, as allowed by the PA program under the
Stafford Act.
We are currently working with FEMA, PREPA, and LUMA to
address preconstruction disbursements, hazard mitigation
evaluation and budget allocation for PREPA projects under the
FAASt obligation, and several other issues surrounding this
post-award process, including those related to the evaluation
and compliance with FEMA Environmental and Historic
Preservation requirements, which, in turn, concerns several
Federal regulatory agencies.
At this stage, another key player, known as the Puerto Rico
Energy Bureau, our independent state regulator for all energy-
related matters, is deeply involved in the reconstruction
process, inasmuch prior approval of every single project in the
pipeline must be approved by the regulator to ensure
consistency with applicable state laws and regulations.
While most damages caused by Hurricane Maria were on the
transmission and distribution system, including buildings,
posts, substations, transmission lines, and other assets, which
is, in turn, represented in the distribution of the $10.5
billion FEMA obligation for permanent work, there are also
several projects to be funded under FEMA PA and hazard
mitigation programs that will impact generation assets.
Furthermore, yet-to-be-completed obligations related to the
2020 earthquake disaster are sure to positively impact the
generation side of PREPA's operations.
Our mission at COR3, as recipient and administrator of the
FEMA PA and hazard mitigation funds, and our inherent
responsibility over efficiency, compliance, and transparency of
the Federal funds flowing to the subrecipients, is to provide
all the technical assistance required for LUMA and PREPA, in
furtherance of the obligation and execution of their recovery
and reconstruction projects.
Current projections show that procurement and a number of
impactful projects shall begin during 2022. Moving forward, we
expect to continue improving disbursement processes and
collaborating with all relevant parties and other Federal
agencies to build back a better, more resilient Puerto Rico
energy infrastructure. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Laboy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Manuel A. Laboy Rivera, PE, MBA, COR3 Executive
Director, Governor's Authorized Representative

I. INTRODUCTION

This country is no stranger to natural disaster chaos, having
directly experienced massive storms such as Hurricane Katrina in 2005,
Hurricane Sandy in 2012, and most recently Hurricane Ida during the
summer of 2021, all of which impacted several jurisdictions in the
contiguous United States. In Puerto Rico, the devastation caused by
Hurricane Irma,\1\ and even more so, Hurricane Maria,\2\ both only a
couple of weeks apart in September 2017, paved the way for a historic
obligation of federal funds from the Public Assistance (PA) program of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), currently set at over
$24 billion,\3\ and approximately $9.5 billion of that amount is
destined for reconstruction works related to the Puerto Rico Electric
Power Authority (PREPA).\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The major disaster declaration for Hurricane Irma is identified
as FEMA-DR-4336-PR.
\2\ The major disaster declaration for Hurricane Maria is
identified as FEMA-DR-4339-PR.
\3\ The PA program is authorized by Sections 406 (traditional) and
428 (alternate procedures) of the Stafford Act, 42 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 5172 and 5189f. PREPA PA projects are covered under Section
428 as per FEMA requirements.
\4\ See Appendix 1. The federal cost share for Hurricane Maria
permanent work obligations under the FEMA PA program, including the
PREPA obligation, is set at 90%, and the corresponding non-federal cost
share is set at 10%. The total PREPA PA obligation, including federal
and non-federal share amounts, is set at $10.5 billion. As will be
discussed later on, the non-federal share for Hurricane Maria PA
projects shall also be covered by federal funding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The extent of federal aid being distributed to Puerto Rico, both
during the emergency period after the impact of Hurricane Maria, and
for purposes of permanent reconstruction work, is as historic as the
destruction that preceded it, and just as the amount of PA program
funding for Puerto Rico as a jurisdiction is the largest in the history
of FEMA, so is PREPA's individual subrecipient obligation of funds for
permanent work. We expect this amount to increase as hazard mitigation
measures under the PA program are incorporated into PREPA
reconstruction projects.
In addition to the abovementioned and yet to be seen hazard
mitigation funding under the PA program, we expect a significant amount
of funds from FEMA's Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP) total
allocation of $3 billion in federal funding for mitigation measures
related to Hurricane Maria,\5\ of which about $1 billion are expected
to be assigned for PREPA mitigation works, including energy generation
initiatives. It should be noted that while the PA program is focused on
attending to damages caused by a disaster, HMGP funding is used to
provide protection to undamaged parts of a facility or to prevent or
reduce damages caused by future disasters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ HMGP is authorized by Section 404 of the Stafford Act, 42
U.S.C. Sec. 5170c. Cost-share requirements for HMGP consists of a 75%
federal share and a 25% non-federal cost share. For Hurricane Maria,
HMGP non-federal cost share requirements will be covered by federal
funding, as further explained below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

II. THE NEED TO CREATE COR3 TO MANAGE THE RECOVERY PROCESS

To manage this enormous sum of federal moneys and ensure not only
adequate project execution, but full transparency, accountability and
compliance with applicable laws and regulations, the Government of
Puerto Rico created the Central Office for Recovery, Reconstruction and
Resiliency (COR3),\6\ which in turn acts as Recipient of FEMA PA and
HMGP moneys. Furthermore, COR3 Executive Director also serves as the
Governor's Authorized Representative for purposes of the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988 (Stafford
Act).\7\ Accordingly, COR3 has a prominent role in the recovery
process, along with FEMA and each subrecipient, including
municipalities, certain private non-profit entities, and state agencies
and public corporations and instrumentalities, such as PREPA. After the
occurrence of a major disaster and subsequent Presidential declaration,
FEMA awards PA and/or HMGP funds to COR3 as Recipient, while COR3
enters into subaward agreements with subrecipients and serves as pass-
through entity to provide funding to carry out part of the PA or HMGP
activities. As Recipient, COR3 is responsible for providing technical
assistance and ensuring that subrecipient activities are carried out in
full compliance with FEMA and other federal, state, and local
requirements. On the other hand, subrecipients are responsible for
actual procurement and project execution pursuant to applicable
federal, state and local regulations, which in most cases mandate a
full and open competitive process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ COR3 was created by Executive Order No. 2017-065, as
subsequently amended, as a division of the Puerto Rico Public-Private
Partnerships Authority (P3A).
\7\ Pub. L. No. 100-707, 102 Stat. 4689.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After its inception, and as required by the federal government,
COR3 contracted experienced disaster recovery professional firms to
ensure that it had all necessary resources to manage a very complex
recovery process, considering the magnitude of the damages caused by
Hurricane Maria. These firms assisted with the development of a long
list of policies and procedures that govern all of COR3's processes
related to FEMA awards, known as the COR3 Disaster Recovery Federal
Fund Management Guide, which is divided into 14 chapters and covers
everything related to the PA process, from initial inspections, damage
assessments, and project formulation and obligation, to reimbursement
processes, compliance, fraud prevention and subrecipient monitoring
procedures, appeals and arbitrations, and the project closeout process.
Notably, Chapter 7 of the Guide specifically covers the disbursement
process between COR3 and subrecipients under the PA program, which was
recently revisited to ensure a more streamlined and effective
reimbursement review and validation process, while still complying with
a 100% validation requirement as exclusively required by FEMA for
Puerto Rico disaster recovery activities, which we further explain
below. These policies and procedures were also required by the federal
government for purposes of eventually transferring related FEMA
processes to COR3.
Regarding disbursements, after Puerto Rico received a major
disaster declaration for Hurricane Maria, FEMA implemented a manual
drawdown process for eligible PA projects that restricted COR3 from
exercising the responsibilities normally authorized for Recipients
under the Stafford Act and the governing regulations.\8\ This was
highly unusual and is only authorized by the applicable regulation if a
Recipient is formally declared as high risk by FEMA, which was not the
case of Puerto Rico. The manual drawdown process, referred to as the
``270 process,'' required a detailed review by FEMA of the documents
provided in support of a request for reimbursement (``RFR'') prior to
disbursing funds to a subrecipient. During the manual drawdown process,
FEMA's validation review prior to reimbursement, entailed performing a
100% completeness review and a 20% compliance review prior to the
approval of any disbursement. Even though FEMA was not conducting a
100% validation (completeness and compliance review), in order to
eliminate the 270 process, which had proven to be lengthy and failed to
address the cash-flow needs of the subrecipients, FEMA required Puerto
Rico to implement a reimbursement process which required the
performance of a 100% validation review (100% completeness and 100%
compliance review) prior to any reimbursement. However, FEMA and COR3
came to an agreement that for low risk subrecipients Puerto Rico would
be able to perform a 100% completeness review and expedite disbursement
of no more than 75% of the RFR and then perform a 100% compliance
review prior to reimbursing the remaining 25% of the RFR. This
requirement was formalized in what was referred to as the 270 Agreement
or 2019 Agreement, which became effective on April 1, 2019. Prior to
this date, all reimbursements were reviewed and disbursed directly by
FEMA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See 44 C.F.R. Part 206 and 2 C.F.R. Part 200.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As such, on April 1, 2019, Puerto Rico began performing the
aforementioned review for low risk subrecipients. However, prior to
disbursing any funds to high risk subrecipients, COR3 would have to
perform a 100% validation review (100% completeness and 100% compliance
review) prior to the disbursement of any funds. Nonetheless, on July 1,
2021, COR3 implemented a revised reimbursement policy wherein the
completeness and compliance review are combined to be performed
simultaneously, thereby considerably reducing the review time and
therefore the rate in which funds are disbursed. Although this process
still requires the performance of a 100% validation review prior to any
disbursement, combining the completeness and compliance review has made
the process much more efficient. Furthermore, we note that FEMA
recently informed that the 2019 Agreement would be left without effect,
thus granting a related petition from the Government of Puerto Rico
requesting the same treatment as other U.S. jurisdictions and allowing
for additional revisions to speed up COR3's reimbursement process and
accelerate the reconstruction process.
For purposes of adequately tracking compliance with applicable
policies, laws and regulations, FEMA implemented the Validate As You Go
(``VAYGo'') pilot program to test PA and certain other disaster grant
expenditures for Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria in response to
appropriations act provisions and Office of Management and Budget
guidance that agencies implement additional measures to identify and
address improper payments for disaster programs expending more than $10
million in any one fiscal year. As part of VAYGo, FEMA reviews project
documentation for a sample of funds as they are drawn down by
recipients and conducts testing to verify whether the project funding
was appropriately expended by the subrecipient. One goal of VAYGo is to
identify potential problems earlier, allowing FEMA and recipients--
including PA recipients--to correct or mitigate issues earlier in the
process instead of waiting until grant closeout. As informed by the
FEMA, the primary goal of VAYGo is to test for ineligible costs, which
can serve as a gateway for the agency to be on notice of issues of
fraud, waste, or abuse in the PA program. FEMA's improper-payments-
testing methodology tests payments from FEMA to PA recipients and
recipients to subrecipients. VAYGo, however, looks to see whether the
subrecipient properly expended funds. For FEMA's VAYGo team to
successfully report a Recipient's expenditure of Federal funding has
been proper, all documentation associated with the expended amount must
be available for review by the VAYGO team.
In 2019, FEMA implemented the VAYGo program in Puerto Rico. To
date, we have participated in two (2) VAYGo reviews for fiscal years
2018 and 2019 and have taken significant strides with subrecipients to
validate most of the sampled disbursements. It should be noted that
VAYGo audits for fiscal year 2019 mostly correspond to disbursements
done directly by FEMA (as per the manual drawdown process that was
previously discussed), while the entirety of the 2020 VAYGo process and
any future audit will take into account that COR3 manages the
reimbursement process. FEMA has informed that it intends for the VAYGo
process to occur on a quarterly basis.
In response to Presidentially declared disasters, Congress may
appropriate additional funding for the Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG) Program as Disaster Recovery grants to rebuild the
affected areas and provide crucial seed money to start the recovery
process. Since CDBG Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) assistance may fund a
broad range of recovery activities, the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) can help communities and neighborhoods that
otherwise might not recover due to limited resources. In Puerto Rico,
the Department of Housing is the Recipient of these funds. As related
to FEMA PA and HMGP funding for Hurricane Maria, it is very important
to point out that non-federal cost share requirements under both
programs, that is, the out-of-pocket money that the state and/or
subrecipient must provide to receive federal assistance, will be
covered by CDBG-DR or CDBG-MIT funds that had been previously allocated
by Congress, also because of Hurricane Maria, as allowed by HUD.

III. LUMA AS AGENT OF PREPA FOR DISASTER RECOVERY PURPOSES

The reconstruction process of an already ailing and fragile PREPA
electric power infrastructure, exacerbated by a government-wide
bankruptcy process under Title III of the Puerto Rico Oversight,
Management, and Economic Stability Act of 2016 (PROMESA),\9\ including
PREPA, and a profound financial and economic crisis and, of course, the
impact of devastating natural disasters, encompasses building back a
better and more resilient Puerto Rico by making use of existing FEMA
policies and procedures and the enactment of the Bipartisan Budget Act
of 2018 (BBA).\10\ As the federal government is well aware, four (4)
years after these disastrous hurricanes, these conditions not only
still exist but have been further aggravated by the passing of two (2)
additional Presidentially-declared major disasters, the 2020 seismic
activity hat impacted the southern region of Puerto Rico,\11\ including
important PREPA generation assets in the area where most of our
island's energy generation takes place, and the global pandemic, health
crisis and consequential economic issues caused by COVID-19.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 130 Stat. 549, 48 U.S.C. Sec. 2101 et seq.
\10\ Pub. L. No. 115-123, 132 Stat. 64.
\11\ The major disaster declaration for the 2020 earthquakes
identified as FEMA-DR-4473-PR.
\12\ The major disaster declaration for COVID-19 is identified as
FEMA-DR-4493-PR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The above-mentioned numbers and the unsurmountable federal support
received by our island are certainly significant, but the execution of
reconstruction works that will benefit the over 3 million American
citizens living in Puerto Rico are not without challenges that are also
significant in nature. One of these challenges--although a positive one
in terms of what the island needs for its short, medium and long-term
recovery and sustainability of its energy infrastructure--is the
public-private partnership (P3) transaction for the Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) of PREPA's Transmission and Distribution (T&D) assets
and other customer-centric services between the Government of Puerto
Rico,\13\ through the Puerto Rico Public Private-Partnerships Authority
(P3A), PREPA, and a consortium of two well-known and reputable
companies who are experts in the energy sector, known as LUMA Energy
LLC.\14\ Although more details of the O&M transaction, including its
robust procurement process, and how it affects the daily operations of
PREPA and its long list of residential and commercial customers, will
be shared by P3A's Executive Director for the benefit of this
Committee, it is important to mention that for matters covered in the
qualified O&M agreement--which includes managing a capital improvement
plan and budget funded with disaster recovery moneys--and before FEMA
and COR3, LUMA acts as an agent, on behalf of PREPA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ We note that a separate competitive process is currently being
conducted by P3A for a similar transaction concerning PREPA's energy
generation assets and operation.
\14\ LUMA is a joint venture between U.S. based Quanta Services,
Inc., and ATCO Ltd., which is based in Canada. In addition, and
Innovative Emergency Management, Inc. (IEM), an expert in disaster
recovery, serves as LUMA contractor for such purposes and appeared as
part of the consortium during the competitive process for the T&D O&M
contract.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fact that LUMA is an agent of PREPA for disaster recovery
purposes is a novelty and has required for everyone involved in the
reconstruction process to familiarize with the basic terms of the O&M
transaction, even before LUMA took over as PREPA's T&D operations on
June 1, 2021. The qualified O&M agreement, where PREPA's T&D and other
assets remain their own, is something that was consulted with FEMA and
carefully carved as part of the P3 procurement and contracting process
inasmuch they had to remain as PREPA assets for purposes of receiving
the above-mentioned disaster recovery funding. Thus, even now, PREPA
remains the applicant and subrecipient of FEMA funds before said
federal entity and COR3.
Among other conditions precedent prior to formally commencing
operations on such date, LUMA had to prepare a procurement manual for
all purchases to be made by LUMA as agent of PREPA, including those to
be made with federal funds, which in turn had to be approved by P3A and
COR3, and consequently acknowledged by the PREPA Board of Directors.
Although not a party to the O&M agreement, FEMA and the Office of the
Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security also reviewed
the procurement manual for consistency with federal procurement
standards. After June 1, 2021, and LUMA having formally entered the
playing field as agent of PREPA, the private consortium is now
responsible for planning and executing recovery and reconstruction
projects on behalf of PREPA as subrecipient, and LUMA's Manual will
govern the procurement processes for FEMA-funded projects carried out
by LUMA in accordance with its responsibilities as operator of the T&D
system under the O&M agreement. A crucial part of the procurement
manual effectively attends to any actual or potential conflict of
interest when a LUMA affiliate company participates in any procurement
process. In these cases, procurement must be done externally, and P3A
and COR3 intervene to make sure guidelines are followed and potential
organizational conflicts of interest are avoided.

IV. STATUS OF LUMA/PREPA RECOVERY PROJECTS

At this point, we are immersed on what is known as the post-award
process, which requires individual project obligation before moving
forward with actual construction work. In order to comply with FEMA
policies for PA projects obligated under what is known was the FEMA
Accelerated Award Strategy (FAASt), LUMA and PREPA filed a joint 90-day
Workplan which covers project execution for such period, and the
workplan must be updated and filed every 90 days before FEMA and
COR3.\15\ In addition, to comply with FAASt project guidelines, LUMA,
PREPA, COR3 and FEMA hold weekly and monthly meetings at all levels of
their respective organizations, for purposes of ensuring alignment,
identifying and resolving issues, and overall speeding the recovery of
our energy system.\16\ Furthermore, the government parties are
constantly involved in productive discussions with LUMA executives and
other state entities as part of the Steering Committee created by
Governor Pedro R. Pierluisi under Executive Order No. 2021-012 to
ensure the successful implementation of the O&M agreement and
transition of T&D, customer support and other services from PREPA to
LUMA. Also, relevant state entities, including COR3, P3A and PREPA,
continuously hold meetings with Governor Pierluisi regarding
reconstruction works, and with other members of the cabinet and the
Office of the Governor, as part of the Reconstruction Council created
by the Governor under Executive Order No. 2021-011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ In addition, and although not required by FEMA nor COR3, PREPA
presented a 10-year Infrastructure Plan, which was last updated as of
June 2021. We further note that although IEM is a COR3 contractor for
HMGP projects, we use a separate contractor for matters related to
PREPA as to avoid any potential or actual conflict of interest.
\16\ As to the recurrence of the meetings, we note that on July 29,
2021, COR3 sent a letter to FEMA leadership suggesting rethinking the
schedule to promote more efficient discussions and avoid work
interruption and discussing other concerns regarding the FAASt post-
obligation process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As would have been the case even if LUMA were not in the equation,
at COR3 we are fully focused on project obligation and execution.
However, LUMA and their T&D expertise, along with disaster recovery in-
house and contractor support, are poised to smooth the edges of an
incredibly complex and long-term project. Although the FAASt $10.5
billion obligation for PREPA occurred on September 24, 2020,\17\ the
reality is that it only represents a fixed PREPA reconstruction work
budget for said amount based on an innovative statistical sampling
method. Currently, only funds for architecture and engineering design
services (A&E) are authorized to be utilized, for purposes of
submitting a Scope of Work (SOW) for FEMA review and approval. Notably,
the aforementioned amount does not consider what could potentially be
millions of dollars in additional funding for hazard mitigation
measures as allowed by the PA program under the Stafford Act, and such
measures will be part of each project SOW to be developed. Accordingly,
we are currently working with FEMA, PREPA and LUMA to address
preconstruction disbursements, hazard mitigation evaluation and budget
allocation for PREPA projects under FAASt, and several other issues
surrounding the FAASt post-award process and what is known as the FEMA
Post-Fixed Cost Estimate Obligation Course of Action Guide, which
hinder program and project execution, such as meeting necessity and
recurrence, concerns regarding evaluation and compliance with
Environmental and Historic Preservation (EHP) (which involves various
federal agencies), subrecipient identification of all locally adopted
construction codes and standards and/or FEMA-approved industry
standards instead of allowing design firms to provide said information,
A&E reimbursement processes, and flooding zone code requirements in
light of the fixed budget.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Project Worksheet No. 6099 under FEMA-DR-4339-PR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fourth and latest iteration of the 90-day Workplan was
submitted by LUMA and PREPA on September 23, 2021. While PREPA is still
in charge of recovery projects in the Generation and Dams, Hydro, and
Irrigation asset categories, LUMA is responsible for projects in the
Transmission, Distribution, Substations, IT/Telecom, Buildings, and
Environmental asset categories (T&D Projects). Firms that will provide
A&E have already been procured and selected, and LUMA and PREPA are
working on the SOWs to be submitted for COR3 and FEMA review, a process
that has been continuously emphasized by COR3 and FEMA leadership in
order to move forward with projects.
Furthermore, at this stage another key player, known as the Puerto
Rico Energy Bureau (PREB), our state (and PREPA's) regulator for all
energy-related matters, is deeply involved in the reconstruction
process inasmuch prior approval of every single project in the pipeline
must be approved by the regulator to ensure consistency with applicable
laws and regulations, most notably the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP)
and its clean and renewable energy targets, prior to formally
submitting each project to COR3 and FEMA for obligation.\18\ Certainly,
prior PREB approval is also relevant for HMGP projects. As such,
careful coordination must take place between LUMA, PREPA, COR3 and the
PREB to ensure that projects are compliant from an IRP and regulatory
perspective and expeditiously approved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ PREB approves projects via resolutions & orders that are
publicly available on the internet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As of today, the PREB has approved 112 projects, for an amount of
over $8 billion, while 9 other projects representing an amount of $100
million are currently submitted and remain under PREB evaluation.\19\
On the other hand, there is currently another batch of 45 projects that
will be soon submitted by LUMA/PREPA to the PREB, totaling $800
million. In addition, there are several projects in A&E development,
including 15 T&D projects, and another 18 T&D projects are projected to
kick-off development in mid-October; 2 water asset projects; and 2
generation projects. While most the damages caused by Hurricane Maria
were to the T&D system--including buildings, posts, substations,
transmission lines, and other assets--which is in turn represented in
the distribution of the $10.5 billion FAASt obligation for permanent
work, there are also several projects to be funded under FEMA PA and
HMGP programs that will impact generation assets. Furthermore, yet to
be completed project formulation and obligations related to the 2020
earthquakes disaster and the damages caused to the important PREPA
generation plant known as Costa Sur are sure to positively impact the
generation-side of PREPA's operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See Appendix 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specifically, as to projects to be funded under the HMGP, we are
currently working with PREPA, FEMA and the PREB to develop two
generation projects (San Juan area Generation and Simple Cycle
Turbines) that had already been approved by FEMA but are still facing
some regulatory concerns, and other projects such as seismic retrofit
for and Early Warning System for PREPA-owned dams, as well as a number
of alternate project submissions in the pipeline. In relation to the
foregoing, the U.S. Department of Energy is currently conducting a
technical study for purposes of assisting Puerto Rico's clean and
renewable energy efforts, with a focus on resiliency and hurricane
preparedness, which will help align HMGP projects with federal and
state regulations. The current deadline to submit HMGP proposals
related to Hurricane Maria is October 31, 2021, but the Government of
Puerto Rico requested a time extension to allow for the DOE study to be
completed and taken into account for energy related HMGP projects and
to ensure that available funding is maximized.

V. NEXT STEPS FOR THE PREPA RECOVERY PROCESS

Our mission at COR3, as Recipient of FEMA PA and HMGP funds and our
inherent responsibility over compliance and transparency of the federal
funds flowing to subrecipients, is to provide all required technical
assistance to LUMA and PREPA in furtherance of the obligation and
execution of their recovery and reconstruction projects, which will
allow for a better, more resilient Puerto Rico, a stable energy system,
and the opportunity to lower dependency on fossil fuels, reduce costs
and create better economic opportunities for our citizens, all of which
are goals that we are confident are shared by FEMA, this Congress, and
the rest of the federal government.
Current projections show that procurement and a number of impactful
projects should begin during 2022. Moving forward, we expect to
continue improving disbursement processes and collaborating with all
relevant parties and other federal agencies to build back a better,
more resilient Puerto Rico critical energy infrastructure. As
authorized by the BBA, we expect LUMA and PREPA to use available FEMA
tools such as Improved, Alternate and Consolidated Projects, which will
allow LUMA and PREPA to maximize available PA funding and invest in
projects that are forward-looking and which effectively mitigate any
future disasters, are more efficient and environmentally and climate
change conscious, and allow for long-term economic growth and job
creation.
On behalf of the entire COR3 team, we thank Congress and the U.S.
Government for their continued support toward a better life for
everyone in Puerto Rico.

*****

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Questions Submitted for the Record to Manuel A. Laboy Rivera, PE, MBA,
COR3 Executive Director, Governor's Authorized Representative

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. About FEMA Projects:

(a) What have been the major problems with getting FEMA obligations
flowing?

(i) Has there been any special difficulty or challenge with knowing
what FEMA considers a completed Scope of Work submission?

(ii) How does the status of PREPA projects compare with that of
COR3-related projects in general?

(iii) Are there any actions you would recommend to accelerate FEMA
project approval?

(b) Do we know and can you provide us what are the current
timelines for submitting project Scope of Work documentation to FEMA?

Answer. The Public Assistance (``PA'') program of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (``FEMA'') works on a reimbursement basis.
Ordinarily, once a project has gone through all steps of the FEMA
National Delivery Model and is thus considered as ``obligated'' by
FEMA, the subrecipient may present a Request for Reimbursement
(``RFR'') before COR3 in relation to non-federal funds that have
already been expended by the subrecipient with regards to the obligated
project. Thereafter, after a comprehensive evaluation of compliance
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations,
COR3 approves, partially approves, denies, or requests additional
information to validate the RFR, as the case may be.
In the case of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority
(``PREPA''), as related to the damages caused by Hurricane Maria in
2017 (identified as FEMA-DR-4339-PR) and subsequent presidential major
disaster declaration, an initial project obligation was made using an
innovative statistical sampling method known as the FEMA Accelerated
Award Strategy (``FAASt''). The purpose of the FAASt initiative was to
allow PREPA and other subrecipients \1\ to perform a thorough
evaluation of their facilities and develop a master plan to rebuild
while better addressing the needs of the people of Puerto Rico, instead
of just restoring them to pre-disaster conditions. Given that PREPA
provides critical services as defined in Section 406(a)(3)(B) of the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988
(``Stafford Act''),\2\ projects are meant to include the disaster-
damaged components to restore the function of the facility or system to
industry standards, without regard to its pre-disaster condition, and
to restore components not damaged by the disaster when necessary, as
authorized by Section 20601 of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018
(``BBA'').\3\ Furthermore, the FAASt strategy was meant to reduce the
administrative burden on all parties and expedite the FEMA project
formulation process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The other subrecipients under the FAASt initiative are the
Puerto Rico Department of Education (PRDE), and the Puerto Rico
Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA).
\2\ Pub. L. No. 100-707, 102 Stat. 4689.
\3\ Pub. L. No. 115-123, 132 Stat. 64. See also FEMA Recovery
Policy FP-104-009-5 Version 2 (BBA), Implementing Section 20601 of the
2018 Bipartisan Budget Act through the Public Assistance Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To execute the FAASt strategy, FEMA established that its Cost and
Analysis Validation team (``CAV Team'') would be in charge of
developing the Statistical Sampling Methodology (``SSM'') to reduce the
number of sites requiring inspections, Damage, Description and
Dimensions (``DDD''), scopes of work (``SOW''), and cost estimates, all
of which are traditional components of a FEMA PA Project Worksheet. The
SSM provided FEMA with a robust statistical approach to expeditiously
generate reliable cost estimates for entire sample populations, to
formulate the fixed cost estimate (``FCE'') required under Section 428
(Alternative Procedures) of the Stafford Act and the master recovery
budget for PREPA.\4\ As with other Section 428 projects, PREPA projects
under FAASt can be used toward a Consolidated Project, an Improved
Project or an Alternate Project as allowed under applicable FEMA
policies and procedures. In the case of Alternate Projects, they must
still include a critical service and must be constructed to an approved
industry standard. FEMA will evaluate the proposed use for
reasonableness to ensure funds are used in an appropriate manner, and
with the intent to improve the resiliency of such critical services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The PA program is authorized by Sections 406 (traditional) and
428 (alternate procedures) of the Stafford Act, 42 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 5172 and 5189f. PREPA PA projects are covered under Section
428 as per FEMA requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under the FAASt initiative, a main, single project obligation was
initially done by FEMA on September 24, 2020, based on the SSM of
damaged PREPA facilities throughout the island, which resulted in a
total, fixed project amount of approximately $10.5 billion, of which
$9.5 billion correspond to the federal share,\5\ with a $1 billion non-
federal cost share requirement.\6\ The foregoing amount allows PREPA to
repair damages related to the following types of facilities:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ PREPA allocated $193,746,436 of its anticipated insurance
proceeds as part of the permanent work Project Worksheet (PW) under the
FAASt strategy, amount which must be subtracted from the total fixed
cost estimate of $10,704,730,227.54 as per FEMA requirements.
Therefore, the exact amount of federal funding for PREPA under the PA
program, as per the FAASt obligation, is $9,459,885,412.39.
\6\ Notably, the non-federal cost share requirement for PA
permanent work related to Hurricane Maria, including PREPA, will be
covered by Community Development Block Grant--Disaster Recovery (CDBG-
DR) funds as allowed by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (``HUD''). The Puerto Rico Department of Housing
(``PRDOH'') is the recipient of CDBG-DR funds assigned to Puerto Rico
after Hurricane Maria.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

buildings (101)

substations/transmission centers (404)

distribution lines/conductors (3,249 miles overhead &
underground)

streetlights (342,569)

transmission lines (3,254 circuit miles)

poles and hardware (397,843)

transformers (18,812)

mega generators (4)

soil stabilization (708 locations)

telecommunications sites (49)

generation plants (9)

Black Start generators (4)

sediment removal (from 11 reservoirs)

hydroelectric power plants (10)

dams (19)

irrigation channels (9)

water conveyance systems (7)

telecommunications infrastructure

The cost estimate per sector is divided as follows:

1.  Buildings--$ 125,088,362.54

2.  Transmission--$ 2,642,131,654.47

3.  Substations--$ 781,890,093.70

4.  Telecommunications and Information Technology--$ 685,928,720.98

5.  Generation--$ 108,927,715.08

6.  Distribution--$ 5,499,837,404.90

7.  Water Assets--$ 860,926,275.87

Given that these categories are allocated in a single PW
obligation, LUMA/PREPA have the flexibility to use the funds as needed.
In other words, the funds can be transferred from one sector to
another, with prior approval from COR3 and/or FEMA, by using available
FEMA tools for Section 428 projects as outlined above.
FEMA established a period of performance for five (5) years from
the date of PW obligation, as set forth in 44 CFR 206.204(c). However,
unlike regular PA projects, FAASt projects would not be processed
through the FEMA National Delivery Model nor the Atlantic Consolidated
Resource Center (``CRC'') to develop the cost estimates. Thus, we are
currently immersed in what is known as the post-award process, which
requires individual subproject obligation under the FEMA National
Delivery Model before moving forward with actual construction work. In
order to obligate such individual projects, on November 18, 2020, FEMA
developed a Post-Fixed Cost Estimate Obligation Course of Action Guide
(COA Guide), for purposes of defining the procedures to develop
individual subprojects. Among other things, the COA Guide requires
PREPA to submit a 90-day Workplan--to be updated every 90-day period--
and to hold monthly meetings and weekly working sessions with FEMA,
COR3 and LUMA Energy, LLC (``LUMA''), to discuss the workplan and
subprojects in the pipeline. Furthermore, PREPA must specify locally
adopted construction codes and standards and/or FEMA-approved industry
standards to be used and describe how they are going to be incorporated
in the construction project.
In addition, the COA Guide requires subrecipients to submit a
proposed SOW for each facility, for the review of FEMA and COR3. This
is particularly important because SOWs for subprojects must be
submitted prior to commencing any construction works, to ensure that
there is sufficient time for FEMA to complete PA eligibility
assessments and Environmental and Historic Preservation (``EHP'')
compliance reviews. However, to prepare a SOW, architecture and
engineering (``A&E'') design services must be procured and relevant
studies and designs must be conducted for each subproject. At this
juncture we must note that the abovementioned $10.5 billion budget does
not take into account what could represent millions in potential
additional funding from mitigation measures under Section 406 of the
Stafford Act, inasmuch these measures would be part of the SOW of each
subproject. To date, we are working with FEMA to agree upon a standard
methodology to incorporate Section 406 mitigation works in proposed
SOWs.
As can be inferred from the discussion above, FAASt projects differ
from traditional PA project obligation in that the FAASt obligation
only represents a master recovery budget, as every subproject must be
thereafter obligated following FEMA's National Delivery Model and the
COA Guidelines. Furthermore, in the case of PREPA, the road to
subproject obligation has an additional complexity, that is, all
projects must count with prior approval from the Puerto Rico Energy
Bureau (``PREB''), our independent state energy industry regulator,
prior to submitting to FEMA and COR3. Among other things, the PREB
evaluates projects for compliance with what is known as the Integrated
Resource Plan (``IRP''), a comprehensive document that was approved by
the PREB pursuant to state Act No. 17-2019, as amended, known as the
Puerto Rico Energy Public Policy Act, with ample participation from the
public which sets forth a roadmap for meeting aggressive renewable
energy generation targets for the next couple of decades. Thus, proper
alignment must be found between all relevant parties--including FEMA,
COR3, PREB, PREPA, and as of June 1, 2021, LUMA--in order to move
forward with all necessary approvals and commencing the construction
phase of a specific PREPA subproject.
COR3 is engaged in continuous discussions with FEMA, PREPA, LUMA,
and the PREB for purposes of accelerating subproject formulation,
obligation and execution. On July 29, 2021, we sent a letter to FEMA
expressing various concerns with the FAASt post-obligation process and
the COA Guide.
Although FEMA has not yet responded, we have had multiple
discussions and have made progress after the July 29, 2021 letter, most
notably with the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (``PRASA'').
However, there is still areas of opportunity that are under discussion
with FEMA to continue improving the FAASt post-obligation process.
Considering all of the above, the process for formulating and
obligating each specific PREPA project under the general FAASt
obligation is as follows. The first step is for LUMA (as agent of PREPA
for Transmission & Distribution and related assets) or PREPA (for
generation-side assets) must first submit a project before the PREB.
After the PREB considers and approves a project, the project
description is submitted by LUMA/PREPA to COR3 and FEMA, and the
project is created and assigned a number on Grants Portal, FEMA's
proprietary digital system which must be used by subrecipients during
the project formulation process. Thereafter, project A&E development
starts, with support from COR3 and FEMA for purposes of policy and
program eligibility guidance. Once the minimum required A&E percentage
is met for a project, LUMA/PREPA may submit the ``Detailed SOW'' into
Grants Portal for Environmental and Historic Preservation (EHP); Cost
scoping; 406 Hazard Mitigation proposal; and Regular, Improved or
Alternate project review.
As soon as the steps outlined in the preceding paragraph are
completed, FEMA obligates the project, and only then is the
subrecipient authorized to initiate construction activities as per the
current COA Guide. As mentioned earlier, there are several issues
surrounding SOW development that have a significant impact on
subproject obligation, which in turn represent construction delays.
Notwithstanding the above, as of October 14, 2021, LUMA expects to
submit detailed SOWs before COR3 and FEMA as per the timeline set forth
in Appendix 1. As for PREPA, they expect to submit detailed SOWs as per
the timeline set forth in Appendix 2.

Question 2. While we work toward the 100% renewables target and
even once it is in effect, is it not true that on-demand base and peak
capacity is still necessary to have? Can storage batteries alone assure
this?

(a) Can the generation side provide resiliency in case of another
catastrophic hurricane, without installation of on-demand climate-
independent units such as LNG generators?

(b) FEMA funds include $2.4 Billion for Transmission and $4.9
Billion for Distribution.

(i) The recipient of these funds is PREPA as the public owner of
the assets, but LUMA is the operator of T&D: how is the process
expected to be managed to minimize bureaucratic steps?

(ii) Who is going to answer for maximizing the use of those funds
to build a system that people can trust?

Answer. As mentioned in our response to Question No. 1 above, the
PREB, as our state energy industry regulator, must evaluate and approve
each LUMA/PREPA subproject prior to submitting to FEMA and COR3. Among
other things, the PREB evaluates projects for compliance with the IRP
and state Act No. 17-2019 and the IRP, which set forth the mandate for
renewable energy targets.
As Recipient of FEMA PA and HMGP grants, COR3's responsibilities
are limited to providing technical assistance for ensuring that
subrecipient activities are carried out in full compliance with FEMA PA
and HMGP program requirements, and other federal, state, and local laws
and regulations. Any technical questions related to the on-demand base,
peak capacity, and battery storage, and any other similar questions of
technical nature, should be addressed by LUMA, PREPA, or any other
party with the required technical expertise in energy utilities and
projects.
A very relevant party with technical expertise in the energy sector
is the U.S. Department of Energy (``DOE''), who is currently working on
a study focused on feasible alternatives to the 400 MW Combined Cycle
HMGP project in Palo Seco, to serve load when cross-island transmission
lines are unavailable after a disaster or other event that compromises
the energy grid. This study encompasses three major efforts: defining
threats and needs; evaluating the capacity of potential for alternative
generation and creating candidate scenarios, including Liquified
Natural Gas (``LNG''); and finding optimized energy generation
portfolios which maximize priority metrics. Once this portfolio is
available, COR3 will be able to determine which alternatives comply
with HMGP requirements for resiliency, mitigating future blackouts in
the northern area of the island, and which has a Benefit-Cost Analysis
(BCA) greater than one (1).
As explained in our written statement and testimony, PREPA's
recovery process is unique in that additional key players are engaged
in the process. In addition to prior approval from the PREB, we must
also consider the particularities of the public-private partnership
(``P3'') transaction for the Operation and Maintenance (``O&M'') of
PREPA's Transmission and Distribution (T&D) assets and other customer-
centric services between the Government of Puerto Rico,\7\ through the
Puerto Rico Public Private-Partnerships Authority (``P3A''), PREPA, and
a consortium of two well-known and reputable companies who are experts
in the energy sector, known as LUMA Energy LLC.\8\ After June 1, 2021,
the date LUMA formally took over PREPA's T&D operations, the private
entity also acts as PREPA's agent for recovery purposes, including
those related to FEMA and COR3. As per the qualified O&M agreement,
PREPA's T&D and other assets remain their own, which is something that
was consulted with FEMA and carefully carved as part of the P3
procurement and contracting process inasmuch they had to remain as
PREPA assets for purposes of receiving PA and HMGP disaster recovery
funding from FEMA. Thus, even now, PREPA remains the applicant and
subrecipient of FEMA funds before said federal entity and COR3, even if
LUMA is an agent for T&D and other related non-generation assets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ We note that a separate competitive process is currently being
conducted by P3A for a similar transaction concerning PREPA's energy
generation assets and operation.
\8\ LUMA is a joint venture between U.S. based Quanta Services,
Inc., and ATCO Ltd., which is based in Canada. In addition, and
Innovative Emergency Management, Inc. (IEM), an expert in disaster
recovery, serves as LUMA contractor for such purposes and appeared as
part of the consortium during the competitive process for the T&D O&M
contract.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In relation to its responsibilities as agent of PREPA for recovery
purposes, LUMA had to prepare a procurement manual for all purchases to
be made by LUMA as agent of PREPA, including those to be made with
federal funds, which in turn had to be approved by P3A and COR3, and
consequently acknowledged by the PREPA Board of Directors. Although not
a party to the O&M agreement, FEMA and the Office of the Inspector
General of the Department of Homeland Security also reviewed the
procurement manual for consistency with federal procurement standards.
After June 1, 2021, and LUMA having formally entered the playing field
as agent of PREPA, the private consortium is now responsible for
planning and executing recovery and reconstruction projects on behalf
of PREPA as subrecipient, and LUMA's Manual will govern the procurement
processes for FEMA-funded projects carried out by LUMA in accordance
with its responsibilities as operator of the T&D system under the O&M
agreement. A crucial part of the procurement manual effectively attends
to any actual or potential organizational conflict of interest when a
LUMA affiliate company participates in any procurement process, and any
mitigation plans to avoid such conflicts must approved by P3A or COR3
prior to implementation.
It is important to note that all FEMA PA and HMGP requirements--
including FAASt requirements such as the 90-day workplan and frequent
meetings required under the COA Guidelines--are applicable to all
subrecipients, including PREPA, and regardless of whether LUMA is
involved in the equation or not. Therefore, when acting as agent of
PREPA for recovery purposes, LUMA must comply with every rule that
would otherwise be applicable to PREPA as subrecipient. In this sense,
the O&M transaction and LUMA's role as agent does not add any
additional bureaucracy to the recovery process. However, as outlined in
our response to Question No. 1 above, COR3 has identified several
issues surrounding the FAASt post application process, and is
continuously engaged with FEMA, PREPA, LUMA and the PREB to find
opportunities to make the recovery process more efficient and providing
technical assistance, while complying with applicable laws and
regulations, and promoting full accountability and transparency in the
use of federal funds.
COR3 was created after Hurricane Maria to manage FEMA PA and HMGP
moneys, and ensure not only adequate project execution, but full
transparency, accountability and compliance with applicable laws and
regulations \9\ Furthermore, COR3 Executive Director also serves as the
Governor's Authorized Representative for purposes of the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988 (Stafford
Act).\10\ Accordingly, COR3 has a prominent role in the recovery
process, along with FEMA and each subrecipient, including PREPA. After
the occurrence of a major disaster and subsequent Presidential
declaration, FEMA awards PA and/or HMGP funds to COR3 as Recipient,
while COR3 enters into subaward agreements with subrecipients and
serves as pass-through entity to provide funding to carry out part of
the PA or HMGP activities. As Recipient, COR3 is responsible for
providing technical assistance and ensuring that subrecipient
activities are carried out in full compliance with FEMA and other
federal, state, and local requirements. On the other hand,
subrecipients are responsible for actual procurement and project
execution pursuant to applicable federal, state and local regulations,
which in most cases mandate a full and open competitive process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ COR3 was created by Executive Order No. 2017-065, as
subsequently amended, as a division of the Puerto Rico Public-Private
Partnerships Authority (P3A).
\10\ Pub. L. No. 100-707, 102 Stat. 4689.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As Recipient and administrator of PA and HMGP grants, COR3 is
responsible for reimbursements and 100% validation (completeness and
compliance) thereof, audits (including FEMA Validate As You Go
(VAYGo)), subrecipient monitoring, and the closeout process. During all
of these steps, COR3 provides technical assistance to ensure
subrecipients are aware of and comply with all program requirements, to
minimize risk and avoid de-obligations.

Question 3. Do the terms for the Obligation of the FEMA funds in
any way compel any of the entities that they must or must not install
one or another form of generation? That is, does the FEMA funding in
any way mandate preference for installing renewables or LNG units, or
conversely or forbid it?

Answer. The FEMA funds under COR3's purview, specifically, funds
derived from the PA and HMGP programs, are different in nature. On one
hand, PA funds are tied to damages suffered by facilities of a
subrecipient as a consequence of a major disaster declaration. Thus,
generally, PA funds are used to restore damaged facilities to their
pre-disaster condition. In PREPA's case, since it provides critical
services as defined in the Stafford Act, the BBA authorizes PREPA (and
LUMA, as its agent) to include the disaster-damaged components of a
facility to restore the function of the facility or system to industry
standards, without regard to its pre-disaster condition, and to restore
components not damaged by the disaster when necessary. This way, and
through the use of FEMA tools available for projects formulated under
the Alternative Procedures set forth in Section 428 of the Stafford
Act, through careful planning PREPA can maximize available (and capped,
save for 406 hazard mitigation funding) PA funding under the FAASt
initiative by taking advantage of Improved, Alternate or Consolidated
project mechanisms, to effectively build back a better, more resilient
energy infrastructure for Puerto Rico. It should be noted that when
using these mechanisms, which imply redistribution of available capped
funds, PREPA must make sure that there is enough money left to attend
to all damaged facilities identified as part of the FAASt SSM, for
purposes of complying with FEMA requirements.
On the other hand, after the occurrence of a major disaster and
subsequent Presidential declaration, HMGP may be authorized under
Section 404 of the Stafford Act.\11\ Generally, while PA is tied to
damaged facilities, HGMP funds are used toward long-term and cost-
effective mitigation measures that reduce the risk of loss of life and
property from future disasters, regardless of whether the facility was
damaged or not.\12\ HMGP may fund projects for structure elevation,
floodwater prevention, structural and utility retrofits, slope
stabilizations, drainage improvements, construction of safe rooms, and
emergency power generators for critical facilities such as fire
stations, hospitals, and water and sewer treatment facilities, and
green infrastructure projects, among other mitigation measures as
allowed under applicable FEMA guidance and regulations. Specifically,
as to PREPA projects to be funded under the HMGP, we are currently
working with PREPA, FEMA and the PREB to develop two generation
projects (San Juan area Generation and Simple Cycle Turbines) that had
already been approved by FEMA but are still facing some regulatory
concerns, and other projects such as seismic retrofit for and Early
Warning System for PREPA-owned dams, as well as a number of alternate
project submissions in the pipeline. As with PA projects, all PREPA/
LUMA HMGP projects must also count with prior approval from the PREB
pursuant to Act No. 17-2019 and the IRP.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5170c. Current cost-share requirements for HMGP
consists of a 75% federal share and a 25% non-federal cost share. For
Hurricane Maria, HMGP non-federal cost share requirements will be
covered with CDBG-MIT funds through the Global Match Program.
\12\ Damaged facilities or components thereof should take advantage
of Section 406 Hazard Mitigation measures and funding. COR3 works with
PREPA and other subrecipients to maximize available funding under both
PA and HMGP.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With regards to implementation of renewable energy sources or
other, cleaner alternatives for our current diesel backed PREPA
generators, such as LNG, it is imperative to reiterate that state Act
No. 17-2019 and the IRP, which set forth the mandate for renewable
energy targets, are applicable to PREPA and, thus, also to LUMA. As
such, regardless of FEMA or other federal statues or regulations that
may be applicable, state law itself mandates PREPA to incorporate
renewables and meet aggressive targets toward a completely renewable
energy power grid by the year 2050. Precisely, this is the reason why
PREPA/LUMA recovery projects must first be approved by the PREB.
In addition, as mentioned before, the DOE is conducting a study
that shall, among other things, help PREPA and the PREB to determine
whether transitioning to LNG at this point in time would be beneficial
in the long run for renewable energy efforts, which would impact PA and
HMGP projects in the pipeline. The fact that the DOE is conducting this
study to help Puerto Rico in the reconstruction process while achieving
renewable energy targets should not surprise anyone, given the strong
public policy of President Biden's Administration toward renewable
energy and initiatives to tackle climate change.\13\ Furthermore, and
although not strictly required, FEMA fosters climate change adaptation
in their policies and procedures. These, tied with Act No. 17-2019, IRP
and other PREB requirements, make a strong case for renewable and clean
energy implementation during the PREPA recovery process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Executive Order 13990 of January 20, 2021, titled
``Protecting Public Health and the Environment and Restoring Science to
Tackle the Climate Crisis''; Executive Order 14007 of January 27, 2021,
titled ``President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology'';
Executive Order 14008 of January 27, 2021, titled ``Tackling the
Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad''; Executive Order 14027 of May 7,
2021, titled ``Establishment of the Climate Change Support Office'';
Executive Order 14030 of May 20, 2021, titled ``Climate-Related
Financial Risk''; H.R. 3684--Bipartisan infrastructure bill titled
``Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act'' (which is still pending
before Congress); and FEMA Press Release-Biden Administration Commits
Historic $3.46 Billion in Hazard Mitigation Funds to Reduce Effects of
Climate Change--August 5, 2021.

Question 4. Is LUMA expected or required to (and if so, have they)
provide you an estimated impact regarding increased labor cost from the
proposed PLA with the IBEW and how it affects the original
Reconstruction cost estimates prepared by PREPA as to skilled labor
infrastructure reconstruction and ability to comply with FEMA's
programs in place for revitalizing local enterprises post Hurricane
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maria?

Answer. PREB requires LUMA and PREPA to present cost estimates for
consideration and approval of projects. Furthermore, as per FEMA
requirements, SOW development must include cost estimates for each
subproject under the FAASt obligation, which we mentioned functions as
a fixed-cost estimate and budget for all PREPA projects under the PA
program. Certainly, the foregoing includes all T&D and related
infrastructure PA projects within the purview of LUMA as per the
qualified O&M agreement, as well as PREPA's generation-side PA
projects. On the other hand, as Recipient and subrecipient, COR3 and
PREPA are responsible for grant management and compliance with
applicable policies, procedures, laws, and regulations.
In any case, COR3 is not, and would not be a party to any Project
Labor Agreement (``PLA'') to be executed between LUMA, any other
contractor, and a labor union, and how PLAs may impact FCEs for Section
428 projects is yet to be seen. At this point, and recognizing
potential issues that may arise, COR3 continues to work with all
relevant parties, including FEMA, P3A as administrator of the qualified
O&M agreement, LUMA and PREPA in order to minimize any risks stemming
from PLA implementation or any other matter that may unexpectedly
increase cost estimates for capped projects or somehow impact local
businesses, while keeping in mind that all facilities identified in the
FAASt SSM as damaged need to be addressed in order to comply with FEMA
policies.

Question 5. What would be the impact on the recovery and mitigation
action plan to rescind the LUMA contract and reset the whole changes in
the electric system?

Answer. The administrator of the O&M agreement for PREPA's T&D
system is the P3A, and not COR3. Therefore, any contract-related
questions should be addressed by P3A. As we have reiterated, COR3 is
responsible, as Recipient of PA and HMGP grants, for managing funds
assigned to Puerto Rico after the devastation caused by Hurricane Irma,
Maria, the 2020 earthquakes, COVID-19, and other disasters, and
providing related technical assistance to PREPA and other subrecipients
to maximize available funding while ensuring compliance with applicable
laws and regulations and providing for full transparency and
accountability in the management of such federal funds.
Pursuant to the above, we respectfully ask the Committee to
redirect this question to the P3A.

Question 6. More in general terms, as a way of framing this in the
greater Puerto Rico scope--what is the status today of recovery
projects in general that have been approved by COR3 vs. how many
applications are still outstanding? How is going the progress on the
pace of reviewing and approving recovery projects that are shovel
ready, and which can take advantage of already appropriated money, but
that are awaiting COR3 approval? Is there a list or portal where that
can be accessed? What would help accelerate FEMA's project approval?

Answer. As of October 20, 2021, the PREB has approved 120 projects
related to the PREPA FAASt obligation and HMGP, for an amount of over
$8 billion. Of these, 118 projects are from the FAASt PA obligation, of
which 96 projects are related to T&D and managed by LUMA, which
represent an amount of almost $7 billion, while the other 22 projects
are generation and water assets managed by PREPA and represent an
amount of approximately $968 million. The remaining two (2) projects
approved by the PREB are PREPA generation side HMGP projects and
represent an amount of over $665 million.
Many of the above-mentioned projects are already in the A&E design
phase for the development of the detailed SOWs, which together sum 42
projects and a total project amount of over $1.8 billion. These include
37 T&D projects under FAASt (representing an amount of approximately $1
billion), 3 generation-side projects under FAASt (representing
approximately $138 million), and the 2 generation-side projects under
HMGP that were mentioned above. Notably, last week, COR3 disbursed an
initial $7.1 million for A&E work necessary to develop and submit SOWs
for four PREPA recovery projects. Current projections show that
procurement and/or initial construction for about 65 projects
representing an investment of $2.8 billion should occur during 2022.
So far, there have been a total of 89 projects submitted to FEMA
via Grants Portal, of which 73 are LUMA T&D related projects and 16 are
PREPA non-T&D projects. We note that these numbers differ from the PREB
total approved projects because PREB approves some projects as bundles
or programs.
While most the damages caused by Hurricane Maria were to the T&D
system--including buildings, posts, substations, transmission lines,
and other assets--which is in turn represented in the distribution of
the $10.5 billion FAASt obligation for permanent work, there are also
several projects to be funded under FEMA PA and HMGP programs that will
impact generation assets. Furthermore, yet to be completed project
formulation and obligations related to the 2020 earthquakes disaster
and the damages caused to the important PREPA generation plant known as
Costa Sur are sure to positively impact the generation-side of PREPA's
operations.
In general terms, since the beginning of the current term on
January 2021, COR3 has undertaken several initiatives to accelerate the
recovery process and take advantage of the incredible amount of federal
funding available for such purposes, specifically through the FEMA PA
and HMGP programs. The initiatives in COR3's strategic plan may be
summarized as follows:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsAs of October 18, 2021, the following represents general FEMA
PA obligation status, including emergency work (FEMA PA Categories A
and B for debris removal and emergency protective measures,
respectively, of which a large part was assigned for PREPA emergency
work), and permanent work obligations and disbursements. As for
permanent work, we note that this process is only just beginning, and
we expect disbursement to accelerate as more competitive processes, A&E
studies and SOW development are conducted, and construction work
initiates in 2022.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsAs for HMGP, current available funding and project status is
available below. It should be pointed out that the current deadline to
submit letters of intent for HMGP projects for the Hurricane Maria
grant is set to expire on October 31, 2021, but COR3 timely requested
an extension of time which is currently under FEMA's evaluation.
Although the time extension, if granted, would allow us to work with
applicants to provide more detailed LOIs, as well as additional time to
consider energy generation project alternatives which in turn take into
account the DOE study that was previously discussed, COR3 is ready to
submit remaining LOIs by the October 31 deadline if needed, for
purposes of securing available funding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsPlease refer to COR3's prior answers for additional information
and insight regarding the recovery process and our role in general.
Questions Submitted by Representative Moore

Question 1. You mentioned that Puerto Rico is the largest recipient
of FEMA disaster dollars. Can you describe for us how this funding is
being used to ensure resiliency so that future storms are not as
disruptive?

Answer. We respectfully direct this Committee to our answers to
Questions No. 1, 2, 3, and 6 from Rep. Gonzalez-Colon above, which
together we understand effectively answer this question from Rep. Blake
Moore. If needed, we can elaborate a separate, similar response for
purposes of meeting Committee requirements.

Question 2. Can you compare the effectiveness of renewables and
fossil fuels in the context of disaster preparedness and recovery?

Answer. As per Act No. 17-2019, public policy pertaining to the
energy sector is under the PREB's jurisdiction, and there is a state
law mandate to incorporate renewable energy generation for the next
couple of decades, which is reflected on the PREB's IRP. This, in turn,
is the reason why all PREPA/LUMA recovery projects must be approved by
the PREB prior to submitting before FEMA and COR3.
COR3 cannot comment or compare with regards to the effectiveness of
renewables and fossil fuels, as our role is limited to managing PA and
HMGP funds as Recipient, and assisting subrecipients, such as PREPA,
through the recovery process, while ensuring compliance with applicable
laws and regulations, in an accountable and transparent manner. As
such, technical questions related to energy sources should be directed
to the PREB, LUMA, PREPA, or any other party with technical expertise
on energy matters. We also reiterate that the DOE is currently
conducting a technical study that will help relevant parties implement
measures that resilient before future disasters, including whether or
not LNG implementation is viable at this point.
For additional information regarding this topic, please refer to
COR3's answers to Questions No. 1, 2 and 3 from Rep. Gonzalez-Colon.

Once again, we thank this Committee for the opportunity to comment
on this crucial issue for the people of Puerto Rico. We are available
to provide additional insight or discuss our previous answers at your
convenience.

*****

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you. And let me now recognize Ms. Ruth
Santiago, Community and Environmental Attorney.
The floor is yours. You are recognized, Ms. Santiago.
Ms. Santiago. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chair Grijalva and
all.
I am about to find my statement. OK, so sorry about this.
[Pause.]
Ms. Santiago. For some reason I can't find it. Sorry about
that.
The Chairman. Would you like us to go to another witness,
and come back to you?
Ms. Santiago. Sure, that would be great. Thank you.
The Chairman. OK, thank you. Let me now recognize Professor
Agustin Irizarry, Professor of Electrical Engineering at the
University of Puerto Rico.
Professor, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF AGUSTIN IRIZARRY, PROFESSOR OF ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING, UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO AT MAYAGUEZ (UPRM),
MAYAGUEZ, PUERTO RICO

Dr. Irizarry. Thank you. Chair Grijalva and members of the
House Committee on Natural Resources, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify and submit written comments on PREPA
post-implementation of the LUMA transmission and distribution
contract. I am Dr. Agustin Irizarry, and I have been studying
and working with electric power systems, in general, and the
Puerto Rico power system in particular, for over 25 years.
I believe LUMA Energy's operation of our electric system
has been detrimental to the well-being of hundreds of thousands
of residents of Puerto Rico. I will join Ruth Santiago's
message to this Committee to urge the Federal Government to
earmark the FEMA funds allocated for the Puerto Rico electric
system to be used for rooftop solar and battery systems, and
energy efficiency programs that will provide resilient electric
service, sustainability, and economic benefits to the residents
of Puerto Rico, as shown by many studies.
Under LUMA, we have experienced longer and more frequent
outages and widespread problems with severe voltage
fluctuations. LUMA publishes on its website, under service
interruption, a table indicating the number of clients without
service, updated every 10 minutes. Note that the client is a
meter, not a person. Thus, the number of people without
electricity is three to four times the numbers of clients
without electricity. After processing the data, we estimate
that the average number of clients without service at any
moment during September 2021 was 4,943. This estimate does not
include load shed days or outliers. The almost 5,000 average
clients without service is two to three times worse than it was
during 2012 and 2014, when I was an elected member of PREPA's
Governing Board. By then, the average number of clients without
service, on an ordinary day, was between 1,500 and 2,000.
And service is also much worse than it was compared to the
period directly prior to LUMA's takeover of the system.
According to reliability indices filed by LUMA with the Puerto
Rico Energy Bureau, the time it takes to restore electric
service after an interruption has increased significantly in
all regions of the island under LUMA. The average system-wide
time to restore electric service after an interruption
increased from 2 hours and 18 minutes during March, April, and
May 2021, with PREPA, to 5 hours and 23 minutes during June,
July, and August 2021, under LUMA.
Why is this happening? I believe the problem fundamentally
stems from a shortage of skilled and experienced workers. On
June 1, 2021, 3,119 PREPA workers were transferred to other
government agencies. How many linemen has LUMA hired to replace
the ones that left? How well trained are these workers? How
much experience, if any, did they have with the Puerto Rico
electric system prior to June 1?
We do not know the answer to these questions, even though
the Puerto Rico Legislature asked LUMA weeks ago. LUMA refused
to answer and went to court to not answer. All courts in Puerto
Rico, including the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, have ordered
LUMA to answer. We are still waiting for a resolution on the
second reconsideration LUMA filed before the Puerto Rico
Supreme Court.
In my opinion, a well-trained workforce is the most
important part of any infrastructure. Poles, conductors,
switches, and generators are all bought with money. People must
be hired and trained, and this is a process that takes more
than money. It takes well-trained people to train the newly
hired, and training takes time. Human capital cannot be
replaced in a few months, and in the case of specialized
positions such as power system dispatchers and high-voltage
linemen, it will take years of training for a person to become
truly proficient. Is the lack of well-trained and enough people
the cause of worse reliability and voltage surges? I believe it
is.
I am part of the Queremos Sol multi-sectoral coalition of
Puerto Rican community, environmental, and labor organizations
that put forward in 2018 a policy proposal for the renewable
energy transformation of Puerto Rico's electrical system under
a reformed public ownership model. The proposal emphasized
efficiency and distributed renewable electric energy,
particularly rooftop solar and behind-the-meter storage, as a
strategy to provide resilience to households, to reduce the
impact on agricultural and ecologically valuable lands from
utility-scale renewable energy projects, and to reduce the
island's dependence on imported fossil fuels and extensive
transmission systems.
In early 2021, we completed a study where we used advanced
modeling tools to make detailed simulations of the electrical
grid and modeled, probably for the first time, most of the
distribution system. We used data obtained from PREPA to
perform an in-depth modeling of the scenarios with increasing
penetration of renewable energy, up to 75 percent (with over
half of that from residential installations) of total
electricity consumption by 2035.
Our study shows that a grid with distributed generation
based on rooftop solar and storage for homes and businesses can
operate safely and reliably, saving money and stabilizing
prices. The distribution system can support high levels of
penetration of such systems with minimal investments.
In conclusion, for the reasons summarized in this
testimony, we urge the Committee to investigate PREPA's
agreement with LUMA Energy and, in particular, the lack of
trained personnel to properly operate the electric system. We
request that the House Committee on Natural Resources include
an inquiry on the status of FEMA funds for Puerto Rico electric
system work, to ensure that the funds are used in a cost-
effective manner to provide affordable, distributed, renewable,
and resilient electric energy for Puerto Rico.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Irizarry follows:]
Prepared Statement of Agustin A. Irizarry-Rivera, Professor of
Electrical Engineering, University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
I appreciate the opportunity to testify and submit written comments
on PREPA Post Implementation of the LUMA Transmission and Distribution
Contract. I am Dr. Agustin Irizarry and I have been studying electric
power systems, in general, and the Puerto Rico power system in
particular for over 25 years. I believe LUMA Energy's operation of our
electric system has been detrimental to the well-being of hundreds of
thousands of residents of Puerto Rico.
I join Ruth Santiago's message to this Committee to urge the
Federal government to earmark the FEMA funds allocated for the Puerto
Rico electric system to be used for rooftop solar and battery systems
and energy efficiency programs that will provide resilient electric
service, sustainability and economic benefit to the residents of Puerto
Rico as shown by many studies.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Puerto Rico Low-to-Moderate Income Rooftop PV and Solar Savings
Potential, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), 2020, Puerto
Rico Low-to-Moderate Income Rooftop PV and Solar Savings Potential
(nrel.gov); We Want Sun and We Want More (Summary), Fact Sheet, Puerto
Rico Distributed Energy Resource Integration Study: Achieving a
Renewable, Reliable, and Resilient Distributed Grid--Telos Energy,
Puerto Rico Distribution Modeling--EE Plus, Puerto Rico Distributed
Energy Resource Integration Study: Load, Energy Efficiency, and System
Cost--Energy Futures Group, Sol + Techos--Pagina principal
(cambiopr.org); Achievable Renewable Energy Targets (``ARET''), https:/
/www.uprm.edu/aret/docs/Ch_4_Solar_resource_ and_solar_thermal.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

I. Deterioration of Electric Service Under LUMA Energy

Under LUMA we have experienced longer and more frequent outages and
widespread problems with severe voltage fluctuations.
LUMA publishes on its website,\2\ under ``service interruption'', a
table indicating the number of clients without service, updated every
10 minutes. Note that a ``client'' is a meter not a person, thus the
number of people without electricity is 3 to 4 times the number of
clients without electricity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://miluma.lumapr.com/outages/outageMap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After processing the data, we estimate that the average number of
clients without service at any moment during September 2021 was
4,943.\3\ This estimate does not include load shed days or outliers.
The almost 5,000 average clients without service is two to three times
worse what it was during 2012-2014 when I was an elected member of
PREPA's Governing Board. By then the average number of clients without
service, on an ordinary day, was between 1,500 and 2,000.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ During the first half of September, Sept 1st thru 15th, the
average number of clients without service was 4,804 and during the last
half of September, Sept 16th thru 30th, it was 5,098.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And service is also much worse than it was compared to the period
directly prior to LUMA's takeover of the system. According to
reliability indices filed by LUMA with the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau,
the time it takes to restore electric service after an interruption has
increased significantly in all regions of the island under LUMA. The
average system-wide time to restore electric service after an
interruption increased from 2 hours and 18 minutes during March, April
and May with PREPA to 5 hours and 23 minutes during June, July and
August 2021 under LUMA.
Why is this happening? I believe the problems fundamentally stem
from a shortage of skilled and experienced workers. On June 1st, 2021
3,118 PREPA workers were transferred to other government agencies. How
many linemen has LUMA hired to replace the ones that left? How well
trained are these workers? How much experience, if any, did they have
with Puerto Rico's electrical system prior to June 1?
We do not know the answer to these questions even though the Puerto
Rico Legislature asked LUMA weeks ago. LUMA refused to answer and went
to court to not answer. All courts in Puerto Rico, including the Puerto
Rico Supreme Court, have ordered LUMA to answer. We are still waiting
for a resolution of the second reconsideration LUMA filed before the
Puerto Rico Supreme Court.
In my opinion a well-trained workforce is the most important part
of any infrastructure. Poles, conductors, switches, generators are all
bought with money. People must be hired and trained and this is a
process that takes more than money; it takes well-trained people to
train the newly hired and training takes time. Human capital cannot be
replaced in a few months and in the case of specialized positions such
as power system dispatchers and high-voltage linemen it will take years
of training for a person to become truly proficient. Is the lack of
well-trained, and enough, people the cause of worse reliability and
voltage surges? I believe it is.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ And we have seen it happening for a good while now. In 2016 a
report was presented, by Fisher and Horowitz, to the Puerto Rico Energy
Bureau (in case no. CEPR-AP-2015-0001) on problems PREPA was facing.
From page 30 of the report, on the subject of staff availability and
competence:

``Ms. Miranda's panel discusses that forced outages are due, in
part to ``skilled labor leaving operational roles and not being
replaced.'' PREPA's own internal documentation backs up and expands
this contention, blaming the outages on a ``loss of significant number
of experienced personnel,'' and that ``new employees do not have the
required expertise and knowledge.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

II. The Solution We Propose: Queremos Sol Proposal and Integration
Study of Distributed Solar Energy on Rooftops with Storage

I am part the Queremos Sol (``We Want Sun''), multi-sectoral
coalition of Puerto Rican community, environmental and labor
organizations, that put forward in 2018 a policy proposal for the
renewable energy transformation of Puerto Rico's electrical system
under a reformed public ownership model. The proposal emphasized
efficiency and distributed renewable electric energy, particularly
rooftop solar and behind-the-meter storage, as a strategy to provide
resilience to households, to reduce the impact on agricultural and
ecologically valuable lands from utility-scale renewable energy
projects, and to reduce the island's dependence on imported fossil
fuels and extensive transmission systems.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.queremossolpr.com/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In early 2021 we completed a study where we used advanced modeling
tools to make detailed simulations of the electrical grid and modelled,
probably for the first time, most of the distribution system. We used
data obtained from PREPA, to perform in depth modelling of scenarios
with increasing penetration of renewable energy, up to 75% (with over
half of that from residential installations) of total electricity
consumption by 2035. The results were used to estimate the costs of
achieving the Queremos Sol goals.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://cambiopr.org/solmastechos/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our study shows that a grid with distributed generation based on
rooftop solar and storage for homes and businesses CAN OPERATE SAFELY
AND RELIABLY, SAVING MONEY AND STABILIZING PRICES. The distribution
system can support high levels of penetration of such systems with
minimal investment.

The main results of our study show:

100% household resiliency can be achieved with 2.7 kW
rooftop solar systems and 12.5 kWh batteries and with
commercial installations. This will reduce household and
community vulnerability after hurricanes;

It is cost-effective to use $9.6 billion in federal funds
to implement this plan, which would reduce electric system
costs to less than 15 cents/kWh by 2035;

Puerto Rico could achieve 75% renewable energy in 15 years
and spend only $430 million annually on fuel (fuel costs
exceed $1.4 billion in 2019 and 2020);

There is no need for investment in new fossil fuel-based
power plants or conversion of existing plants to natural
gas;

CO
2
emissions can be reduced nearly 70%,
placing Puerto Rico at the forefront of addressing climate
change with urgency;

It is possible to retire fossil fuel-based generation,
starting with the AES coal plant;

With modest investments in the distribution system--$650
million--the grid can support the reliable integration of
75% rooftop renewable energy and battery storage;

The proposal is more economical than PREPA's proposed
plans such as the Integrated Resource Plan (and the cost of
the current system).

III. Conclusion

For the reasons summarized in this testimony, we urge the Committee
to investigate PREPA's Agreement with LUMA Energy, LLC and in
particular the lack of trained personnel to properly operate the
electric system. We request that the House Committee on Natural
Resources include an inquiry on the status of FEMA funds for Puerto
Rico electric system work to ensure that the funds are used in a cost-
effective manner to provide affordable, distributed, renewable and
resilient electric energy to Puerto Rico.

--End of oral testimony

--Written testimony continues----

IV. Comparison of Reliability Indices as Reported by LUMA to the Puerto
Rico Energy Bureau

Reliability metrics--SAIDI, SAIFI and CAIDI--reported by LUMA to
the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau show the deterioration of the system
under LUMA's management.
SAIDI is the ``System Average Interruption Duration Index''. SAIDI
is the average, non-momentary,\7\ outage duration for each customer
served over a defined period of time (usually 1 year) and is usually
measured in minutes or hours. The average SAIDI during 2019 for U.S.
electric utilities was 92 minutes. This SAIDI does not consider major
interruption events caused by hurricanes, earthquakes, etc.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ A momentary service interruption last for less than 5 minutes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUMA reported, from June thru August 2021, a SAIDI which is worse
than the one reported by PREPA from March thru May 2021. LUMA's
performance is worse than PREPA's, in most cases by a factor of 2, in
every distribution system region in Puerto Rico.
SAIFI is the ``System Average Interruption Frequency Index''. SAIFI
is the average number of interruptions that a customer would experience
over a defined period of time (usually 1 year) and is usually measured
in interruptions per customer. In the U.S. the average SAIFI is 1.1
interruptions per year without including major events.
During June thru August 2021 LUMA reported that fifteen (15) out of
26 distribution system regions experience more interruptions under
LUMA.
CAIDI is the ``Customer Average Interruption Duration Index''.
CAIDI gives the average outage duration that any given customer would
experience over a period of time, usually 1 year. CAIDI can also be
viewed as the average restoration time, the time it takes to the
electric utility to restore service once an interruption occurs. In the
U.S. the average CAIDI is about 82 minutes (81.6 minutes).
Again, for all distribution system regions, the restoration time
after an interruption increased significantly during June thru August
2021 under LUMA. The average system-wide time to restore electric
service after an interruption increased from 2 hours and 18 minutes
during March, April and May with PREPA to 5 hours and 23 minutes during
June, July and August 2021 under LUMA.

V. The LUMA Contract, Even if Properly Executed, Will Create a 20th
Century Utility, We Want a 21st Century Utility

Puerto Rico Law 120 was enacted with the objective to ``transform
the Puerto Rico energy system into a modern, sustainable, reliable,
efficient, cost-effective, and resilient system''. The contract between
LUMA and PREPA on its Recitals quotes the purpose of this Law 120 that
gives rise to the contract:

WHEREAS, in accordance with Act 120, Owner \8\ desires to transform
Puerto Rico's energy system into a modern, sustainable, reliable,
efficient, cost-effective and resilient system;
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ In the contract PREPA is identified a ``Owner''.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a traditional, 20th century, electric power system the
architecture was based on large-scale generation; centralized, a one-
way control strategy of the system; and passive loads. The traditional
system was not designed to meet many emerging trends, such as greater
adoption of relatively low inertia generation sources, increasing
penetration of distributed generation resources, and the need for
greater resilience.
A modern electric power system must be flexible, robust, agile. It
must have the ability to dynamically optimize grid operations and
resources, rapidly detect and mitigate disturbances, integrate diverse
generation sources, on both the supply and demand sides, integrate
demand response and energy-efficiency resources, enable consumers to
manage their electricity use, and provide strong protection against
physical and cyber risks.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Quadrennial technology review: An assessment of Energy
Technologies and research opportunities, Chapter 3: Enabling
Modernization of the Electric Power System, US Department of Energy,
September 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A modern electric power system must include more distributed
control, two-way flows of electricity and information, more energy
storage, more energy justice, more sustainable sources of energy, and
consumers as energy producers thru assertive deployment of resilient
and distributed renewable energy resources and as participants of
demand management and efficient use of electricity programs.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ International Energy Agency. ``Technology Roadmap: Smart
Grid.'' OECD/IEA. Paris, France, 2011. http://www.iea.org/publications/
freepublications/publication/smartgrids_ roadmap.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even a casual read of the LUMA contract shows that the contract
aims at achieving, if LUMA performs admirably--a condition that is not
happening--a 20th century utility.

VI. Generation Problems

In recent weeks, Puerto Rico has experienced a series of problems
at its power plants--including both those owned by PREPA and privately
owned plants--that have led to large-scale power outages. These outages
come on top of the worsened reliability of the transmission and
distribution system, as described above.
The problems at PREPA's power plants result from a long-standing
failure to adequately fund the maintenance of the plants. An expert
report to the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau in 2016 described the
``reliability crisis'' that the power plants were already experiencing
five years ago. The report noted that the outage rate of PREPA's power
plants had increased directly in proportion to the decline in spending
on operation and maintenance.\11\ PREPA's budgets for generation system
maintenance have not increased since that time. In the most recent 13
weeks for which data is available from the Puerto Rico Fiscal Agency
and Financial Advisory Authority (from mid-June to mid-September),
PREPA has apparently spent only 51% of its maintenance budget.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Expert Report of Jeremy Fisher and Ariel Horowitz, Puerto Rico
Energy Bureau Case No. CEPR-AP-2015-0001, November 23, 2016, pp. 11 and
30.
\12\ Fiscal Agency and Financial Advisory Authority. PREPA 13-Week
Cash Flow Updates dated May 19, July 21 and September 15, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am deeply concerned that the privatization of PREPA's power
plants--the solution proposed by the government of Puerto Rico--will
not resolve the generation problems. What is needed is a financial
commitment to improve the reliability of the plants, which the
ratepayers of Puerto Rico will pay for regardless of whether the plants
are publicly or privately owned. Indeed, if privatization results in
the loss of competent and experienced workers and mid-level managers at
the plants, similar to what has occurred with the LUMA contract, there
is every reason to expect plant availability to deteriorate further.

*****

This testimony is presented by Agustin A. Irizarry Rivera as his
testimony and it does not represent the testimony of the Universidad de
Puerto Rico, employer of Dr. Irizarry Rivera.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Agustin A. Irizarry-Rivera,
Professor of Electrical Engineering, University of Puerto Rico at
Mayaguez (UPRM)
Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan
Question 1. How do you think LUMA and PREPA can best prevent
blackouts in the future? How much would such efforts cost? Would a
transition to renewable energy sources help improve power reliability
for Puerto Rico long term?

Answer. The widespread outages experienced recently in Puerto Rico
are due to two causes: (1) LUMA Energy's inability to properly manage
the transmission and distribution system; and (2) many years of
deferred maintenance of Puerto Rico's power plants.
Fundamentally, as stated in my testimony, the longer outage times
experienced under LUMA are due to the company's lack of skilled and
experienced labor. This situation could be resolved by amending or
canceling the LUMA contract in order to restore the thousands of
displaced ex-PREPA workers to their former positions in the
transmission and distribution system.
A transformation to distributed (i.e. rooftop) solar and storage is
key to improving power reliability in Puerto Rico. Locating power
generation close to consumption would dramatically reduce Puerto Rico's
dependence on the south-to-north transmission system that failed during
Hurricane Maria. Rooftop solar and storage has been proven to be able
to continue to provide power to households and meet critical loads
during a grid emergency. According to detailed grid modeling of Puerto
Rico's electrical system, the island could achieve 75% penetration of
distributed renewable energy, including equipping every home on the
island with a small-scale solar and storage system, by 2035 with modest
improvements to the island's distribution system infrastructure. If
$9.6 billion of the FEMA and CDBG funds allocated for Puerto Rico's
electrical system were used to further this transformation, it would
result in a stable average rate of 15 cents per kWh, as well as
transforming the resiliency situation of Puerto Rican households. For
more details, see: Vila Biaggi, Kunkel and Irizarry, We Want Sun and We
Want More: 75% Distributed Renewable Generation in 15 Years in Puerto
Rico is Achievable and Affordable, 2021.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, the gentleman yields. Let me now
return to Ms. Santiago.
Ms. Santiago. Yes.
The Chairman. You are recognized for 5 minutes, thank you.

STATEMENT OF RUTH SANTIAGO, COMMUNITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
ATTORNEY, SALINAS, PUERTO RICO

Ms. Santiago. Thank you, Chair Grijalva. And hello again,
good afternoon.
On behalf of the Puerto Rico and stateside groups joining
in this testimony, we appreciate the opportunity to testify on
the PREPA post-implementation of the LUMA transmission and
distribution contract. The groups joining in this testimony
have substantial concerns with both the LUMA operation of the
electric system, and the control that LUMA wields over Federal
funds for electric system work in Puerto Rico.
We ask this Committee to investigate the LUMA contract, and
to urge the Federal Government to earmark the FEMA funds for
on-site and rooftop solar and battery systems, and similar
alternatives that will provide lifesaving electric service to
the residents of Puerto Rico.
Multiple studies have shown the viability, reliability, and
economic benefits of rooftop solar and storage. The Government
of Puerto Rico has $9.6 billion allocated by FEMA at its
disposal to solve the current energy crisis by deploying
rooftop solar and storage. The Federal Government must ensure
that taxpayer funds are invested in accordance with Federal
laws and policies that promote cost effectiveness, tackling the
climate crisis, and centering environmental justice. Solar
energy deployment in Puerto Rico is expected to create nearly
20,000 jobs by 2030.
Since LUMA took over operation of the system, Puerto Rico
has suffered constant power outages, destructive voltage
fluctuations, fires caused by electric malfunctions, where
hundreds of thousands of residents and businesses have been
deprived of electric service for extended periods of time.
People are now referring to the constant outages as Hurricane
LUMA.
Lately, LUMA has alleged that the outages are attributable
to lack of generation from PREPA plants. LUMA's numbers do not
add up, and I implore you to look at the specific numbers in my
written testimony. The documented evidence disproves LUMA's
excuses. An Emergency Management KPI Dashboard report shows
that Puerto Rico has hundreds of megawatts of available
capacity above maximum demand.
Under the contract, LUMA is responsible for determining
which plants inject or dispatch energy into the T&D system. The
malfunction of part of the PREPA fleet still leaves enough
generation available to supply demand. Another alternative that
LUMA has to avoid outages is to work with large customers to
use their own generation units, totaling about 234 megawatts.
That is additional to what is in the PREPA system.
Why has LUMA failed to dispatch the available PREPA units
or use demand response alternatives? Does the fact that
dispatching peaker units increases costs have something to do
with LUMA's decision? Does the fact that the Government of
Puerto Rico has asked FEMA to fund new gas plants or plans to
sell the plants to private investors have anything to do with
not dispatching the existing units?
PREPA's maintenance budget has been decreasing in the past
few years. We asked the commission to investigate the role of
the FOMB, which controls PREPA's budget.
LUMA is even delaying interconnection of rooftop solar for
the few residents that can afford them, which could also
contribute to alleviating energy demand, and thus reduce the
incidence of outages.
The investment by PREPA of Federal funds for rooftop solar
and storage achieves three goals: (1) access to energy
resilience, equity, and justice, especially for lower-income
sectors; (2) establish a uniform procedure where the public
corporation, with local talent and organized communities,
accelerate renewable energy deployment; and (3) break the cycle
of repeated destruction and reconstruction of the transmission
system that often disrupts service, and avoid the waste of
taxpayer funds on transmission that will be devastated by
future hurricanes.
Because PREPA is in bankruptcy, FEMA funds are the only
viable way to achieve renewable energy goals and accessible
electric rates. Financing PPOAs with PREPA as a credit
counterparty would entail prohibitively high interest rates and
costs.
The Stafford Act requires FEMA to determine the cost
effectiveness of projects, reduce the risk of, or increase the
resilience to, future damage, hardship, loss, or suffering.
The electricity crisis manufactured by LUMA and the
Government of Puerto Rico not only inflicts economic costs, it
can also cost lives. The LUMA contract grants LUMA control over
Federal funds, and points to conflicts of interest and
potential self-dealing by LUMA.
Lastly, we urge the Committee to investigate the LUMA
contract and the role of FOMB in its imposition and in the
electric crisis. We ask this Committee to urge the Federal
Government to earmark FEMA funds for on-site and rooftop solar
and battery systems, and similar alternatives that will provide
the lifesaving electric service, and include an inquiry on the
proposed use of FEMA funds to ensure that they are invested in
a cost-effective manner to provide affordable, renewable,
reliable, and resilient electric energy.
The use of this historic amount of funds allocated for the
electric system will determine the viability of Puerto Rico for
generations to come. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Santiago follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ruth Santiago, Community and Environmental
Attorney, Salinas, Puerto Rico
On behalf of the groups listed in the attachment to this letter, we
appreciate the opportunity provided by the House Committee on Natural
Resources to testify and submit written comments on the PREPA Post
Implementation of the LUMA Transmission and Distribution Contract. As
further explained below, the groups joining this testimony have
substantial concerns with both the LUMA Energy operation of the
electric system and the control that LUMA Energy proposes to wield over
federal funds for electric system work in Puerto Rico.
We urge the House Committee on Natural Resources to investigate
PREPA's Transmission and Distribution System Operation and Maintenance
Agreement with LUMA Energy, LLC and the role of the Federal Oversight
and Management Board in the imposition of the LUMA contract and the
Puerto Rico electric crisis. We ask this Committee to urge the Federal
Government to earmark the historic and once-in-a-lifetime amount of
Federal Emergency Management Agency (``FEMA'') funds allocated for the
Puerto Rico electric system for on-site and rooftop solar and battery
systems and energy efficiency programs that will provide life-saving
electric service to the residents of Puerto Rico. Multiple studies have
shown the viability, reliability and economic benefits of rooftop solar
and storage in Puerto Rico.\1\ Last year, the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory concluded that is rooftop solar more than sufficient to
power local areas, solar energy sited on rooftops are offsets and
reduce the overall amount of energy needing transmission and
distribution. According to that study, Puerto Rico has the potential to
produce four to five times as much solar energy than is needed to meet
its current residential demand. More than a decade ago, the University
of Puerto Rico found that solar is ``the least environmentally
intrusive.'' Because Puerto Rico followed the Los Angeles model of
development and urbanization, with housing sprawl and shopping malls,
we have what we call ``rooftop resource.'' The report recommended
generating power locally through solar and, in certain cases, creating
microgrids, such as for high-rise buildings. More recently, Cambio PR
and the Institute for Energy, Economics and Financial Analysis set out
a plan to achieve 75 percent renewable power generation in 15 years.
Solar energy deployment in Puerto Rico is expected to create nearly
20,000 jobs by 2030.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Meghan Mooney & Katy Waechter, Puerto Rico Low-to-Moderate
Income Rooftop PV and Solar Savings Potential, National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (2020), https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/78756.pdf;
Estudio de Integracion de Recurso Solar Distribuido en Puerto Rico, Sol
+ Techos, Cambio PR (2021), https://cambiopr.org/solmastechos/
#downloads; Ingrid M. Vila Biaggi et al., We Want Sun and We Want More
(Summary) (2021), https://cambiopr.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/
Modeling-Study-Fact-Sheet-03_21.pdf; Puerto Rico Distributed Energy
Resource Integration Study: Archieving a Renewable, Reliable, and
Resilient Distributed Grid, Telos Energy (December 2020), https://
cambiopr.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Puerto-Rico-Distributed-Energy-
Resource-Integration-Study-Telos-Energy.pdf; Puerto Rico Distribution
Modeling, EE Plus (2021), https://cambiopr.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/
03/Puerto-Rico-Distribution-Modeling-EE-Plus.pdf; Puerto Rico
Distributed Energy Resource Integration Study: Load, Energy Efficiency,
and System Cost, Energy Futures Group (2021), https://cambiopr.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/Puerto-Rico-Distributed-Energy-Resource-
Integration-Study-Energy-Futures-Group.pdf; Achievable Renewable Energy
Targets (``ARET'') ch. 4 Solar Resource, https://www.uprm.edu/aret/
docs/Ch_4_Solar_resource_and_solar_thermal.pdf), Agustin A. Irizarry-
Rivera et al., Achievable Renewable Energy Targets (``ARET'') (2008),
https://bibliotecalegalambiental.files.wordpress.com/2013/12/
achievable-renewable-energy-targets-fo-p-r.pdf.
\2\ Interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC), Solar Workforce
Development (2021), https://irecusa.org/programs/puerto-rican-solar-
business-accelerator/solar-workforce-development/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Government of Puerto Rico has $9.6B allocated by FEMA at its
disposal to solve the current energy crisis in Puerto Rico by deploying
rooftop solar and storage. Instead, in the 10 Year Infrastructure Plan,
the Government of Puerto Rico is requesting around $14B in federal
funds for the electric system, most of which would be for transmission
and new gas-fired plants and nothing for renewables.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Updated 10-Year Plan, submitted July 6th in PREB docket NEPR-
MI-2021-0002, p. 15. https://energia.pr.gov/wp-content/uploads/sites/7/
2021/07/20210706-Joint-Motion-Submitting-Updated-10-Year-
Infrastructure-Work-Plan.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

I. ``Hurricane LUMA'', LUMA's Generation Numbers Don't Add Up

The Puerto Rico Transmission and Distribution System Operation and
Maintenance Agreement dated June 22, 2020 between the Puerto Rico
Electric Power Authority as Owner, the Puerto Rico Public-Private
Partnerships Authority as Administrator, Luma Energy, LLC as
ManagementCo, and Luma Energy Servco, LLC as ServCo (the LUMA contract)
is a long, expensive and exclusive scheme that creates a private
monopoly over energy transmission, distribution, generation dispatch,
customer service, planning and all other electric system functions with
the exception of operation of the generation plants. Under the
contract, PREPA must use ratepayer funds to pay LUMA a service fee that
ranges from $83 million to $125 million per year, in addition to LUMA's
costs, so-called Operator T&D Pass-Through Expenditures, some capital
expenses and expenses during outage events. LUMA has no obligation to
invest its own funds. LUMA has already exceeded its budget and is
recently requested a rate hike notwithstanding its deficient service.
Puerto Rico ratepayers have already shouldered four rate increases this
year alone.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ultimos ajustes por compra de combustible y energia: un ABC,
Microjuris, Oct. 1, 2021, https://aldia.microjuris.com/2021/10/01/que-
significa-el-ajuste-por-compra-de-combustible/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since LUMA Energy took over the operation of the electric system,
Puerto Rico has suffered constant power outages, destructive voltage
fluctuations, fires caused by electric malfunctions where hundreds of
thousands of Puerto Rico electric consumers have been deprived of
electric service for extended periods of time.\5\ People have taken to
calling the frequent and extended outages, ``Hurricane LUMA''. Lately,
LUMA has alleged that the outages are attributable to lack of
generation from the PREPA power plants. The documented evidence
disproves LUMA's excuses about its deficient service. On January 29,
2021, the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (``PREPA'') filed a
report with the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau that provides a breakdown of
electricity generation resources and energy demand. The report, titled
Emergency Management KPI Dashboard, reflects that electricity demand
was at 1960 MW, compared to the maximum capacity of the generating
units in service of 3,361 MW with installed capacity of the units at
4596 MW. Moreover, according to the report, PREPA has additional units
that could be placed into service with an extra maximum capacity of 935
MW and with an installed capacity of 1,722 MW.\6\ We are aware that
many of the plants no longer function at the original-installed
capacity. Considering only functional capacity of the plants, a simple
mathematical exercise shows that PREPA's excess generating capacity of
at least 1401 MW, plus 935 MW from the units that were not in service
but are functional. Although demand is higher in the summer months,
PREPA still has excess generation capacity and sufficient reserves.
Puerto Rico has about twice the available electricity capacity compared
to peak (maximum) energy demand.

\5\ Partial list of articles published in Puerto Rico media on
LUMA:

Yaritza Rivera, LUMA reconoce que sus plataformas digitales estan
abrumadas y no funcionan correctamente, June 4, 2021, https://
www.elvocero.com/gobierno/luma-reconoce-que-sus-plataformas-digitales-
est-n-abrumadas-y-no-funcionan-correctamente/article_194d6304-c4cb-
11eb-b464-df919d17eb73.html.
Primeros dos meses de Luma: retrasos, danos y servicio deficiente,
Sin Comillas, Aug. 16, 2021, https://sincomillas.com/primeros-dos-
meses-de-luma-retrasos-danos-y-servicio-deficiente/.
Paciente de esclerosis multiple clama a LUMA Energy por servicio de
electricidad, Cybernews, June 15, 2021, https://
www.periodicolaperla.com/paciente-de-esclerosis-multiple-clama-a-luma-
energy-por-servicio-de-electricidad/.
Alcalde de Ponce emplaza a LUMA Energy por deficiencias en el
servicio electrico que afecta a residentes y comerciantes, Redaccion
Digital, June 11, 2021, https://www.periodicolaperla.com/alcalde-de-
ponce-emplaza-a-luma-energy-por-deficiencias-en-el-servicio-electrico-
que-afecta-a-residentes-y-comerciantes/.
Jose Rafael Hernandez, Reclaman a LUMA Energy atienda los problemas
de electricidad en Caguas, June 17, 2021, http://www.presenciapr.com/
reclaman-a-luma-energy-atienda-los-problemas-de-electricidad-en-
caguas/.
Luis Penchi, Municipio de San Juan activa brigadas ante problemas
con LUMA, July 12, 2021, https://www.elforodepuertorico.com/municipio-
de-san-juan-activa-brigadas-ante-problemas-con-luma/.
Alcalde de Villalba alega que no logra comunicacion efectiva con
LUMA, Telemundo, Aug. 15, 2021, https://www.telemundopr.com/noticias/
puerto-rico/alcalde-de-villalba-alega-que-no-logra-comunicacion-
efectiva-con-luma/2248393/.
PIP pide investigar deficiencias operativas de LUMA, Noticel, June
11, 2021, https://www.noticel.com/legislatura/ahora/pip/politica/
20210611/pip-pide-investigar-deficiencias-operativas-de-luma/.
Istra Pacheco, LUMA confronta problemas con la facturacion a
clientes, Sept. 29, 2021, https://www.elvocero.com/gobierno/agencias/
luma-confronta-problemas-con-la-facturaci-n-a-clientes/
article_adee728a-1c11-11ec-a567-470d7815aba2.html.
Cathy Kunkel, Retrasos, danos y mal servicio: los dos primeros
meses de LUMA Energy ponen de relieve los defectos de la privatizacion,
Aug. 16, 2021, https://ieefa.org/retrasos-danos-y-mal-servicio-los-dos-
primeros-meses-de-luma-energy-ponen-de-relieve-los-defectos-de-la-
privatizacion/.
Elivan, Martinez, Apagones empeoraron desde la entrada de LUMA,
reconoce un documento de la empresa, Sept. 30, 2021, https://
periodismoinvestigativo.com/2021/09/apagones-empeoraron-desde-la-
entrada-de-luma-reconoce-un-documento-de-la-empresa/.
Mas de 270,000 abonados sin servicio electrico en Puerto Rico, EFE,
Sept. 28, 2021, https://www.diariolibre.com/usa/actualidad/mas-de-
270000-abonados-sin-servicio-electrico-en-puerto-rico-EI29036772.
Investigan el origen de la explosion que produjo apagon en Puerto
Rico, EFE, June 11, 2021, https://www.swissinfo.ch/spa/p-rico-
apag%C3%B3n_resumen-_investigan-el-origen-de-la-explosi%C3%B3n-que-
produjo-apag%C3%B3n-en-puerto-rico/46699210.
Cynthia Lopez, Alza en tarifa de la luz es cuestion de tiempo, Luma
dice que tuvo perdidas de $80 millones, Sept. 9, 2021, https://
jayfonseca.com/alza-en-tarifa-de-la-luz-es-cuestion-de-tiempo-luma-
dice-que-tuvo-perdidas-de-80-millones/.
Aseguran que LUMA es responsable de problemas recientes con el
sistema electrico, Radio Isla, June 17, 2021, https://radioisla.tv/
aseguran-que-luma-es-responsable-de-problemas-recientes-con-el-sistema-
electrico1/.
LUMA pone en peligro vidas y propiedades de residentes a traves de
la isla, Redaccion Digital, June 28, 2021, https://
www.periodicolaperla.com/luma-pone-en-peligro-vidas-y-propiedades-de-
residentes-a-traves-de-la-isla/.
Yaritza Rivera, Reconocen problemas de LUMA Energy, El Vocero, Aug.
3, 2021, https://www.elvocero.com/gobierno/reconocen-problemas-de-luma-
energy/article_307e48bc-f48d-11eb-b865-ef16ecc194b3.html.
Siguen los problemas con LUMA: Tras apagones, restablecen el
servicio de energia, Sala de Redaccion, Aug. 23, 2021, https://
www.elforodepuertorico.com/siguen-los-problemas-con-luma-tras-apagones-
restablecen-el-servicio-de-energia/.
Juan Marrero, LUMA no revela querellas por enseres electricos
danados en apagones, Sept. 16, 2021, https://www.metro.pr/pr/noticias/
2021/09/16/luma-no-revela-querellas-enseres-electricos-danados-
apagones.html.
Yennifer Alvarez, Sin mecanismo para presentar reclamaciones
clientes con enseres danados por apagones, June 16, 2021, https://
jayfonseca.com/sin-mecanismo-para-presentar-reclamaciones-clientes-con-
enseres-danados-por-apagones/.
Sofia Rico, Aunque LUMA este en transicion, no es excusa para
perjudicar los derechos del consumidor, Noticel, July 12, 2021, https:/
/www.noticel.com/ahora/gobierno/20210712/aunque-luma-este-en-
transicion-no-es-excusa-para-perjudicar-los-derechos-del-consumidor/.
Luis Penchi, Comisionada pedira rendicion de cuentas a LUMA y AEE
por mala administracion en el sistema de energia de Puerto Rico, Sept.
17, 2021, https://www.elforodepuertorico.com/comisionada-pedira-
rendicion-de-cuentas-a-luma-y-aee-por-mala-administracion-en-el-
sistema-de-energia-de-puerto-rico/.
Gerardo Alvarado, Fallas en el sistema de facturacion de LUMA
Energy frenaron un aumento mayor para los consumidores, Sept. 22, 2021,
https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/notas/fallas-en-el-sistema-
de-facturacion-de-luma-energy-frenaron-un-aumento-mayor-para-los-
consumidores/.
Vuelven los cacerolazos: protestan contra LUMA y constantes
apagones, Telemundo, Sept. 28, 2021, https://www.telemundopr.com/
noticias/puerto-rico/vuelven-los-cacerolazos-protestan-contra-luma-y-
constantes-apagones/2263504/.

\6\ See, Motion to Present Status and Final Progress Report and
Request for Release of Order at 23; Mocion-para-Presentar-Reporte-de-
Estatus-y-Progreso-Final-y-Solicitud-de-Relevo-de-Orden-NEPR-AP-2020-
0001-1.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a motion dated September 8, 2021, LUMA Energy submitted a report
to the Energy Bureau that indicates that available capacity was 3245
MW.\7\ While the figure is less than PREPA's earlier filing this year
it is still more than enough generation to cover peak demand which LUMA
estimates is 2750 MW.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See, Motion Submitting Slides Projected by LUMA During
Technical Conference of September 3, 2021, Motion-Submitting-Slides-
Projected-by-LUMA-During-Technical-Conference-of-September-3-2021-NEPR-
MI-2021-0014.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under the contract between the PREPA and LUMA Energy, LUMA is
charged \8\ with determining which plants inject or dispatch energy
into the transmission and distribution (T&D) system to provide
electricity to customers and not leave any residence, business,
industry, government agency or public lighting without electric
service. The malfunction of part of the Palo Seco plant and Unit 1 of
the Aguirre Power Complex, which has a maximum capacity of 400 MW
(installed capacity of 450 MW), allegedly affected by sargassum, making
them inoperative still leaves enough generation available to supply
energy demand if the remaining PREPA units are placed in service.
Another alternative that LUMA has at its disposal to avoid outages is
to lower peak demand by working with large customers to use their own
self-generation units, totaling about 234 MW, at peak times.\9\ Why has
LUMA Energy failed to dispatch the available PREPA units as required by
the contract or use demand response alternatives? Does the fact that
dispatching peaker units increases costs have something to do with
LUMA's decision? Does the fact that the Government of Puerto Rico has
asked FEMA to fund new ``natural'' methane gas plants in Palo Seco and
throughout Puerto Rico or the government's intention to sell the plants
to private investors or both have anything to do with not dispatching
the existing units?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The Puerto Rico Transmission and Distribution System Operation
and Maintenance Agreement, June 22, 2020 at 35, 42, 73, https://
www.p3.pr.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/executed-consolidated-om-
agreement-td.pdf.
\9\ PREPA estimated that large customers had 234 MW of self-
generation in Slide 15 of PREPA's presentation during Panel A of the
Integrated Resource Plan evidentiary hearing. See, Autoridad de Energia
Electrica, January 2020 Earthquakes: Effect on Existing Resources,
https://app.box.com/s/fuvsx24ceblv64drlskvohiru8thsywt.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is analogous to the situation in 2020, when the earthquakes
damaged the two large units at the Costa Sur (810 MW) and part of the
EcoElectrica plant. The PREPA Executive Director at the time, Jose
Ortiz claimed there was insufficient generation capacity in the system.
The Energy Board approved the issuance of a request for proposals for
temporary generation to be financed by FEMA. Civil society groups
opposed the RFP as a waste of funds because PREPA had peaking units
available to cover the demand. In the end, the case was withdrawn and
no new temporary generation was required.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Expedientes--NEPR, NEPR-AP-2020-0001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are aware that PREPA's maintenance budget has been decreasing in
the past few years and that this may have led to lack of funds to
maintain cooling water intake structures to prevent sargassum from
clogging the filters at the Aguirre Power Complex.\11\ We ask the
Commission to investigate the role of the Federal Oversight Management
Board (FOMB) which controls and must authorize changes in PREPA's
budget.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Laura M. Quinter,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another way that LUMA could limit outages would be to expedite
resolution of the pending interconnection requests for rooftop solar
and storage made by the relatively few residents of Puerto Rico that
can afford to finance the cost of these systems.\12\ However, LUMA is
delaying even those ready-to-go requests. These rooftop solar and
storage installations, although only available to the privileged few
could also contribute to alleviating energy demand from the centralized
grid and thus reduce the incidence of outages. LUMA has exacerbated the
crisis by failing to allow timely interconnections of rooftop solar
systems; LUMA has a backlog of more than 5,000 systems still to be
interconnected, and the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau is considering
issuing daily fines of $1,000 until LUMA clears the backlog.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See, Maximo Solar Industries, Inc. Vs. Autoridad de Energia
Electrica de Puerto Rico, Docket No. NEPR-QR-2020-0029, https://
energia.pr.gov/expedientes/?docket=nepr-qr-2020-0029.
\13\ Puerto Rico Energy Bureau Resolution & Order, August 6, 2021,
Docket NEPR-MI-2019-0016, https://energia.pr.gov/wp-content/uploads/
sites/7/2021/08/20210806-MI20190016-Resolucion -y-Orden.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The electricity crisis manufactured by LUMA Energy and the
government of Puerto Rico not only inflicts economic costs, it can also
cost lives.

II. Disaster Recovery Funding

FEMA disaster recovery funds allocated to PREPA present a unique
opportunity to provide a lifeline to Puerto Rico residents and
businesses with rooftop solar and battery energy storage. The
investment by PREPA of federal funds allocated to it for rooftop solar
and storage systems through a transparent process for large-scale
deployment of renewable energy technology achieves three primary goals:
1) provide access to energy resilience, equity and justice, especially
for lower-income sectors of the population; otherwise, most people in
Puerto Rico would not be able to obtain loans or leases for solar
systems and batteries; 2) establish a uniform procedure through the
public corporation, together with local talent and organized
communities to accelerate the installation of solar and storage systems
at or near the place of consumption/use; and 3) break the cycle of
repeated destruction and reconstruction of the vulnerable long-distance
transmission system that often disrupts power service in Puerto Rico
and avoid the waste of federal taxpayer funds on a transmission system
that will be devastated by future hurricanes.
Puerto Rico is at a crossroads with respect to its electric system.
One of the main issues confronting the territory is whether to use FEMA
funds to double down on rebuilding antiquated 20th century
infrastructure or to embark on the creation and construction of a 21st
century electric system, based on laws that require the Puerto Rican
government to shift to renewable energy and enable Puerto Rico
residents to participate in this essential public service. Over 97% of
Puerto Rico's electric energy comes from burning fossil fuels.\14\ The
Queremos Sol civil society proposal (``We Want Sun,''
queremossolpr.com), endorsed by the groups joining in this testimony
vigorously calls for the transformation of the Puerto Rico electric
system as a public service including PREPA governance and the
technology that empowers citizen participation as ``prosumers''--
producers and consumers of energy to achieve resiliency to the more
frequent and intense hurricanes brought on by the climate crisis. Civil
society in Puerto Rico favors rooftop solar as opposed to land-based
utility scale projects that impact scarce agricultural land, ecological
sensitive areas and open spaces.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), Puerto Rico--
Territory Profile and Energy Estimates Overview, https://www.eia.gov/
state/?sid=RQ.

Because PREPA and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are in
bankruptcy, FEMA funds are the only viable way in which Puerto Rico can
achieve its Renewable Portfolio Standard, renewable energy goals, and
attain accessible electric rates. Financing of new power purchase
agreements with PREPA as a credit counterparty would entail
prohibitively high interest rates and financing costs that would lead
to skyrocketing of the already astronomical electric rates that are
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
currently about double the average U.S. rate.

Section 404 (``Hazard Mitigation'') of the Stafford Act, as amended
by the Disaster Recovery Reform Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-254, Oct.
5, 2018), provides that ``The President may contribute up to 75 percent
of the cost of hazard mitigation measures which the President has
determined are cost effective and which substantially reduce the risk
of, or increase resilience to, future damage, hardship, loss, or
suffering in any area affected by a major disaster or any area affected
by a fire for which assistance was provided under section 420. Such
measures shall be identified following the evaluation of natural
hazards under section 5165 of this title . . . and shall be subject to
approval by the President.'' Stafford Act Sect. 404(a); 42 USC
5170c(a). Some of the projects to rebuild Puerto Rico's electric grid
are proposed as hazard mitigation measures that must be guided by the
goal of minimizing future damage to that grid and the suffering that
results from such damage. Accordingly, FEMA is required to perform a
cost-effectiveness analysis prior to funding projects such as those
proposed by the Government of Puerto Rico. The Cambio-IEEFA study cited
above shows that rooftop solar and storage is more cost effective than
the projects proposed by the Government of Puerto Rico.
The current plan for FEMA funds would not only perpetuate
dependence on the existing fossil fuel plants, but actually fund
construction of new fossil fuel plants in Puerto Rico: the very first
three very first three ``Notable Projects'' in PREPA's Updated 10-Year
Plan are new gas-fired plants.\15\ PREPA senior executives have
indicated that the funds for methane gas infrastructure and the
reconstruction of the current T&D system will come from federal
sources. Implicit in this approach is the presumption that the people
of Puerto Rico will be getting a ``free lunch'' and that they can
request large sums for infrastructure of doubtful utility and security
because it is paid by the federal government and ultimately, taxpayers.
This reflects a mentality of dependence driven by the methane gas/LNG
industry and corporations that sell fossil generation units. The
``free'' methane gas infrastructure would tie Puerto Rico to methane
gas-burning plants for decades and endanger public health and safety,
almost certainly requiring repeated injections of federal funds to
restore transmission lines downed, time and again, by storms and
earthquakes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ New Black Start at Costa Sur, Emergency Generation at Yabucoa,
Thermal Generation Feasibility Study at Palo Seco. Updated 10-Year
Plan, submitted July 6th in PREB docket NEPR-MI-2021-0002, p. 15. See,
https://energia.pr.gov/wp-content/uploads/sites/7/2021/07/20210706-
Joint-Motion-Submitting-Updated-10-Year-Infrastructure-Work-Plan.pdf.

A true understanding of three points: price, reliability, and
resiliency leads to the conclusion that FEMA funds should be invested
in rooftop solar and storage to provide ratepayers accessible,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reliable, and resilient energy.

Price: Multiple studies, cited in this testimony have shown the
economic viability and benefits of rooftop solar and storage in
Puerto Rico. The avoidance of transmission system costs makes
rooftop/on-site solar more viable than centralized generation.
Transmission costs represent a huge opportunity cost that
displaces investments in renewables. Furthermore, fossil-fired
plant externalities are imposing costs on environmental justice
communities and increasing the social cost of carbon in Puerto
Rico.

Reliability: The studies cited in this testimony demonstrate
that a grid powered by rooftop solar and storage is more
resilient, reliable and affordable than one powered by large,
centralized plants. In the meantime, PREPA's dashboard of its
system showed generation capacity, enough to meet peak load
with the necessary reserve margin--when dispatched properly.
Puerto Rico does not need new gas-fired plants.

Resiliency: The Puerto Rico grid depends on vulnerable long-
distance transmission to provide power to northern Puerto Rico,
especially the San Juan metropolitan area. Electrons from the
plants in the south did not reach San Juan for months after
Hurricane Maria: this demonstrates the vulnerability of the T&D
system vertical poles, lines, towers and substations to
hurricanes and multiple other natural events.\16\ Rebuilding
and hardening the T&D system will not provide the resilience of
rooftop solar and storage. These alternatives also have the
advantage of avoiding impacts to scarce agricultural land,
ecological sensitive areas, and open spaces. These alternatives
also have the advantage of avoiding impacts to scarce
agricultural land, ecological sensitive areas and open spaces.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ In 2005, Congress determined that rebuilding these lines over
and over was not a cost-effective strategy: ``. . .electric power
transmission and distribution lines in insular areas [including Puerto
Rico] are inadequate to withstand damage caused by the hurricanes and
typhoons which frequently occur in insular areas and such damage often
costs millions of dollars to repair;'' 48 U.S.C.A. Sec. 1492(5).

Law No. 550, the Land Use Plan Act, as amended by Law No. 6 of
January 3, 2014, requires guaranteeing that a minimum of 600,000 acres
of agricultural land are reserved. The Land Use Plan and all planning
instruments must establish a process to ensure that land suitable for
agricultural production and animal husbandry is preserved. Puerto Rico
has lost about 133,000 acres of agricultural land every five years,
according to census data between 2002 and 2007. Agricultural land in
Puerto Rico was reduced from 584,987 cuerdas/acres in 2012 to 487,774
acres in 2018, equivalent to a loss of 17%, or an annual loss of 16,202
acres. According to Dr. David Sotomayor Ramirez, Professor of Soils at
the College of Agricultural Sciences of the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez Campus, most countries dedicate at least 41% of the area to
agriculture, compared to 22% of Puerto Rico.

III. LUMA Energy Control Over Federal Funds, Conflicts of Interests and
Potential Self-Dealing

The LUMA contract grants LUMA Energy control over federal funds
assigned for the Puerto Rico electric system as detailed below.

1.  LUMA participates and has veto power in the selection of the
federal funds grant manager. Contract Section 1.1, page 17.

2.  LUMA can request changes or modifications to the federal funding,
including modifications to, or reallocations between, the
project worksheets related to the T&D System prepared by
FEMA pursuant to Section 428 of the Stafford Act or the
Integrated Resource Plan. Contract Section 4.3(j), Pages
50-1.

3.  LUMA, in conjunction with the Administrator determines that
capital improvements are done to maximize the potential
realization of the federal funding anticipated or received.
Contract Section 5.9, Page 70.

4.  LUMA has ``complete flexibility, subject to compliance with the
Contract Standards and prior consultation with, but not
subject to approval by, Administrator or PREB, to (i)
reallocate, accelerate or postpone expenditures within the
approved Operating Budget, (ii) reallocate, accelerate or
postpone expenditures within the approved Capital Budget--
Federally Funded, subject to the Federal Funding
Requirements,'' . . . Section 7.3, Page 89.

5.  LUMA and its subcontractor will ``deal with federal funds
management'' to manage ``longterm recovery using federal
funding on behalf of the Owner''. Page Annex II-39, Page
(pdf) 207.

6.  LUMA Energy, LLC, was created by Quanta Services and ATCO, an
affiliate of Canadian Utilities these companies are
expected to benefit from the billions of dollars in federal
funds. LUMA's parent company, Quanta Services plans to
``compete for work associated with Puerto Rico's electric
T&D system modernization efforts that are separate from its
ownership interest in LUMA'', ``expected to be funded by
U.S. federal disaster relief agencies and managed by
LUMA.'' \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ ``Quanta believes there is opportunity for it to compete for
work associated with Puerto Rico's electric T&D system modernization
efforts that are separate from its ownership interest in LUMA. Puerto
Rico's electric T&D system is at a critical juncture after the
destruction caused by Hurricanes Maria and Irma. As a result, the
government of Puerto Rico, through the P3 and in collaboration with
PREPA, have embarked on a plan to rebuild, modernize, harden and
``green'' its power grid, a majority of which is expected to be funded
by U.S. federal disaster relief agencies and managed by LUMA. The P3
estimates that more than $18 billion of electric T&D capital investment
could be required through 2028 for this initiative.'' Quanta Services
and ATCO-Led Consortium Selected by the Puerto Rico Public-Private
Partnership Authority for the Operation and Maintenance of Puerto
Rico's Electric Power Transmission and Distribution System, https://
investors.quantaservices.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/277/
quanta-services-and-atco-led-consortium-selected-by-the.

7.  The contract states that the Operator (LUMA) will work with IEM
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(as its subcontractor) to manage federal funds.

8.  LUMA establishes a governance framework to manage longterm
recovery using federal funds on behalf of PREPA. (VII.
Federal Funds Procurement Manual).

9.  LUMA may request changes or modifications to federal funding
(including modifications or reassignments between project
worksheets related to the T&D system prepared by FEMA
pursuant to Section 428 of Stafford Act) or the Integrated
Resource Plan. (LUMA contract page II-39, pdf 207).

10.   Luma Energy objects to PREPA using funds allocated for the
electric system by FEMA and other federal agencies to
install rooftop solar systems and batteries. LUMA and its
affiliated companies Quanta and ATCO plan to use the funds
for transmission projects. In a proceeding before the
Energy Bureau, one of the LUMA Energy representatives, Lee
Wood, falsely alleged that FEMA would not allow the use of
funds for behind the meter generation, that is, located in
the residence or business of the consumer, mainly rooftop
solar.\18\ Several recent communications from Members of
Congress belie LUMA's allegations.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ In the recording of the proceedings before the Energy Bureau,
Luma's representative tries to argue that PREPA cannot use the FEMA
funds assigned to it to install solar systems with batteries for its
subscribers. See, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oGYujWJ8S7s (minute
1:49).
\19\ Jose Delgado, Alexandria Ocasio Cortez, Nydia Velazquez y
Charles Schumer reclaman priorizar la energia renovable en Puerto Rico,
Feb. 25, 2021, https://www.elnuevodia.com/corresponsalias/washington-
dc/notas/alexandria-ocasio-cortez-nydia-velazquez-y-charles-schumer-
reclaman-priorizar-la-energia-renovable-en-puerto-rico/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

IV. Environmental and Climate Justice

The LUMA contract establishes that the grid work must ``align''
with the Grid Modernization Plan, which is the Puerto Rico government's
proposal to rebuild the existing grid rather than transform the
electric system to provide the resilience that would make the
difference between life and death in the face of disaster and shock
events. PREPA's Transmission and Distribution System Operation and
Maintenance Agreement with LUMA Energy promotes the operation of
centralized generation that lacks the life-saving resiliency of
distributed renewable energy and storage and perpetuates environmental
injustice. Rebuilding the T&D system to connect to these plants
perpetuates their operation.

In addition to Executive Order 12,898 on Environmental Justice, the
Biden Administration's Executive Order, ``Tackling the Climate Crisis
at Home and Abroad'' provides a further foundation for environmental
justice claims and states in part as follows:

To secure an equitable economic future, the United States must
ensure that environmental and economic justice are key
considerations in how we govern. That means investing and
building a clean energy economy that creates well-paying union
jobs, turning disadvantaged communities--historically
marginalized and overburdened--into healthy, thriving
communities, and undertaking robust actions to mitigate climate
change while preparing for the impacts of climate change across
rural, urban, and Tribal areas.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ See, Exec. Order No. 14008, 86 C.F.R. 7619, Executive Order on
Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, Jan. 27, 2021, Section
219, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/
2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/.

The communities near the existing fossil-fired power plants, most
of which are located in southern Puerto Rico, are overburdened by the
operation of the plants. The Guayama region is an environmental justice
community with high poverty rates and where the majority of residents
are Afro-Puerto Ricans.\21\ According to the Toxic Release Inventory
this region suffers the greatest contamination of any region in Puerto
Rico. The Guayama region also has among the highest poverty,
unemployment, and school dropout rates in Puerto Rico. Simultaneously,
the region has experienced a sharp decrease in medical services
available to this environmental justice community with the closure of
two hospitals and only one hospital currently in operation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Hilda Llorens, In Puerto Rico, Environmental Injustice and
Racism Inflame Protests over Coal Ash, December 8, 2016. http://
theconversation.com/in-puerto-rico-environmental-injustice-and-racism-
inflame-protests-over-coal-ash-69763; Hilda Llorens, Puerto Rico's
Coal-Ash Material Publics and the Summer 2019 Boricua Uprising,
February 25, 2020. https://www.societyandspace.org/articles/puerto-
ricos-coal-ash-material-publics-and-the-summer-2019-boricua-uprising;
Catalina De Onis, Energy Islands, Metaphors of Power, Extractivism, and
Justice in Puerto Rico, June 2021, https://www.ucpress.edu/book/
9780520380622/energy-islands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The LUMA contract will exacerbate PREPA's current system
vulnerabilities and harm public health and safety. Hurricanes Irma and
Maria demonstrated that the 230kV and 115 kV lines that carry power
from the large, centralized power plants in the south to the north were
a key vulnerability of the system. The LUMA contract entails continued
reliance on centralized fossil fuel combustion plants and these
transmission lines, and even contemplates more large, centralized
plants, also connected to the grid through the same vulnerable
transmission lines. The south-to-north transmission lines are
vulnerable to extreme weather events, vegetation growth, wildlife
impacts, lack of investment in maintenance, and difficult access to
servitudes and easements, among others. The seismic events of 2020
further demonstrated the vulnerability of large, centralized plants and
the affiliated transmission system: Costa Sur and EcoElectrica were
both damaged.
The U.S. Geological Survey has determined that the areas where the
San Juan and Palo Seco plants are located present high risk of
liquefaction in the event of earthquakes. The Great Southern Puerto
Rico Fault Zone runs through the Jobos Bay area where the Aguirre Power
Complex and the AES coal burning power plants are located.\22\ The Palo
Seco plant, depot and accompanying infrastructure are in a tsunami
flood area. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission earlier this year
issued an Order acknowledging that regulators have not sufficiently
analyzed the risk impacts to powerplants from more frequent and intense
earthquakes in Puerto Rico.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Bachhuber, Hengesh, & Sunderman, Liquefaction Susceptibility
of the Bayamon and San Juan Quadrangles, Puerto Rico, at Figure 6, PDF
p. 30 (2008), https://earthquake.usgs.gov/cfusion/external_grants/
reports/03HQGR0107.pdf (noting very high susceptibility zones in areas
along the Bayamon coastal plain, Bahia de San Juan, and Laguna San
Jose); Hengesh & Bachhuber, Liquefaction susceptibility zonation map of
San Juan, Puerto Rico, in Mann, P. (ed.), Active tectonics and seismic
hazards of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and offshore areas:
Geological Society of America Special Paper 385, at 249-262 (2005).
\23\ Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Order Establishing
Briefing, Docket CP95-35-000. ``There has been an increase in frequency
and intensity of earthquakes on Puerto Rico since 2003.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The operation of all fossil fuel plants in Puerto Rico emit
multiple contaminants that adversely impact public health and the
environment. The Applied Energy System (AES) Corporation coal-fired
power plant and the Aguirre Power Complex, located in southeastern
Puerto Rico are the two primary sources of toxic emissions in Puerto
Rico and disproportionately impact some of the poorest communities.
These two plants also extract large amounts of freshwater from the
South Coast Aquifer and have contributed to the water scarcity that led
to water rationing in summer 2019 and in previous years. The AES coal
burning power plant in Guayama transmits electricity to northern Puerto
Rico, including the San Juan metro area and accumulates hundreds of
thousands of tons of coal ash waste at its plant site. The facility and
its polluting practices already contaminated part of the South Coast
Aquifer, the sole source of potable water for tens of thousands of
people in Puerto Rico.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ EPA, 2019 TRI Factsheet--Guayama, PR (Oct. 2020), https://
enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/
tri_factsheet.factsheet?pzip=&pstate=PR&pcity=GUAYAMA&pcounty=&pyear=201
9&pParent= TRI&pDataSet=TRIQ1; U.S. Dept. of Interior, USGS Water Use
Data for Puerto Rico (2021), https://waterdata.usgs.gov/pr/nwis/wu;
Jason Rodriguez, Acuifero del Sur: Retrocede la unica Fuente de agua
potable de 30 mil surenos, May 29, 2021, https://
www.periodicolaperla.com/acuifero-del-sur-retrocede-la-unica-fuente-de-
agua-potable-de-30-mil-surenos1/; Report On Corrective Measures
Assessment Aes Puerto Rico--Agremax
TM
Staging Area Guayama,
Puerto Rico Haley & Aldrich, Inc. (2019), https://
www.aespuertorico.com/sites/default/files/2021-02/Corrective-Measures-
Assessment-English.pdf; AES Puerto Rico Coal Combustion Residuals Rule
Compliance Data and Information, https://aespuertorico.com/ccr/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Costa Sur and EcoElectrica plants in southwestern Puerto Rico
both burn imported methane gas and also transmit energy long distance.
Gas combustion is the substitution of one group of contaminants for
others. The myth that methane gas is a cleaner energy source is a
fallacy.
The LNG imported to Puerto Rico must be stored under cryogenic
conditions and revaporized/regasified before it can used at the plants.
These additional processes add to the total emissions of LNG use in a
way that exceeds the CO2 emissions of other fossil fuels. Methane gas
combustion also emits increased Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) such
as formaldehyde, benzene, toluene, hexane, and styrene.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Public Comments by Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty
Unit (PEHSU), Mount Sinai Medical School, FERC Docket CP13-193-000 at
1-2. https://elibrary.ferc.gov/eLibrary/file download?fileid=01c6d80b-
66e2-5005-8110-c31fafc91712.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple scientific studies, including a Harvard University report
found that, ``A small increase in long-term exposure to PM2.5 leads to
a large increase in COVID-19 death rate, with the magnitude of increase
20 times that observed for PM2.5 and all-cause mortality. to air
pollution and COVID-19 mortality in the United States. The study
results underscore the importance of continuing to enforce existing air
pollution regulations to protect human health both during and after the
COVID-19 crisis.'' The specific findings demonstrate that, an increase
of only 1 ug/m3 in PM2.5 is associated with a 15% increase in the
COVID-19 death rate, at a 95% confidence interval.\26\ Particulate
matter is emitted by electric power plants, motor vehicles and other
sources of air contamination. Continued reliance on these plants for
energy transmission to San Juan and northern Puerto Rico is another
climate disaster in the making.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Wu, X., Nethery, R.C., Sabath, M.B., Braun, D. and Dominici,
F., Air pollution and COVID-19 mortality in the United States:
Strengths and limitations of an ecological regression analysis Science
advances, 6(45), p.eabd4049, (2020), https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/
covid-pm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the LUMA contract has especially ominous implications for
environmental justice communities, the LUMA scheme does not bode well
for the health and safety of the general population in Puerto Rico.
LUMA can abandon the tasks required under the contract after PREPA has
been dismantled and when reinforcements for the electric system are
most needed and almost at any time. In an extended force majeure event,
LUMA, as Operator has the right to terminate the contract, in the event
that the force majeure event continues for a period longer than
eighteen (18) consecutive months and materially interferes, delays or
increases the cost of initial transition services (front-end) or
operation and maintenance services (O&M). (LUMA contract page 125, pdf
132). In addition, according to the contract, ``force majeure event''
is defined so broadly that it excuses LUMA from performing the services
required for almost any reason, including an interruption or blackout
event (page 22, 29), computer sabotage or virus, quarantine, epidemic,
or civil disobedience; any event that causes any Puerto Rico or federal
government agency to declare any part of the geographical area of the
T&D system as part of a ``disaster zone'', ``state of emergency'' or
any other similar declaration; and a change in the law. (LUMA contract
pages 14-5, pdf 22. In sum, the definition of force majeure in the
contract is very broad and allows LUMA to evade responsibility after
receiving the benefits of the contract.

V. Conclusion

For the reasons summarized in this written testimony, we urge the
House Committee on Natural Resources to investigate PREPA's
Transmission and Distribution System Operation and Maintenance
Agreement with LUMA Energy, LLC and the role of the Federal Oversight
and Management Board in the imposition of the LUMA contract and the
Puerto Rico electric crisis. We ask this Committee to urge the Federal
Government to earmark the historic amount of FEMA funds allocated for
the electric system for on-site and rooftop solar and battery systems
and similar alternatives that will provide life-saving electric service
to the residents of Puerto Rico and include an inquiry on the proposed
use of FEMA funds for electric system work to ensure that they are
invested in a cost-effective manner to provide accessible, affordable,
renewable, reliable and resilient electric energy. The use of the
historic amount of FEMA funds allocated for the electric system will
determine the viability of Puerto Rico for generations to come.

*****

Attachment

List of Puerto Rico and Stateside Organizations

that join in the testimony on the

PREPA Post Implementation of the LUMA Transmission and Distribution
Contract

Presented by Ruth Santiago, Esq.

Puerto Rico Organizations

1.  Alianza Comunitaria Ambientalista del Sureste

2.  Amigos del Rio Guaynabo

3.  Amnistia Internacional-Puerto Rico

4.  Asociacion de Empleados Gerenciales de la AEE

5.  Asociacion de Psicologia de Puerto Rico

6.  Boutique Comunitaria

7.  Campamento Contra Las Cenizas en Penuelas, Inc.

8.  Ciudadanos en Defensa del Ambiente

9.  Clinica Legal Psicologica

10.  Coalicion Organizaciones Anti Incineracion

11.  Colectivo Editorial Luscinia

12.  Colegio de Profesionales del Trabajo Social de Puerto Rico

13.  Comite Dialogo Ambiental, Inc.

14.  Comite Yabucoeno Pro-Calidad de Vida

15.  Cuatro Costas

16.  El Puente: Enlace Latino de Accion Climatica

17.  El Punto en la Montana

18.  Frente Unido Pro-Defensa Del Valle De Lajas, Inc.

19.  Hermanxs de la Calle

20.  Hispanic Federation

21.  Impacto Juventud

22.  Intercambios Puerto Rico

23.  JunteGente

24.  Mayaguezanos por la Salud y el Ambiente

25.  Proyecto Vida. Accion. Salud (VAS)

26.  Red Continental Cristiana por la Paz

27.  Sierra Club Puerto Rico

28.  Surfrider Foundation Rincon

29.  Taller de Psicologia Social Comunitaria

30.  Union de Trabajadores de la Industria Electrica y Riego

31.  Urbe A Pie

Stateside Organizations

1.  350 New Orleans

2.  ANAD

3.  Boricuas Unidos en la Diaspora (BUDPR)

4.  Businesses for a Livable Climate

5.  CA Businesses for a Livable Climate

6.  Call to Action Colorado

7.  Catholic Network US

8.  Cleveland Owns

9.  CO Businesses for a Livable Climate

10.  CODEPINK Golden Gate Chapter

11.  Community Power

12.  Cooperative Energy Futures

13.  Earthjustice

14.  Fairbanks Climate Action Coalition

15.  Hispanic Federation

16.  I-70 Citizens Advisory Group

17.  Labor Council for Latin American Advancement NYC Chapter

18.  Local Clean Energy Alliance

19.  Montbello Neighborhood Improvement Association

20.  Network for a Sustainable Tomorrow

21.  North Range Concerned Citizens

22.  People Power Solar Cooperative

23.  RapidShift Network

24.  Redwood Energy

25.  Renewable Energy Worcester

26.  Roxanna Smith Communications

27.  Sierra Club

28.  Small Business Alliance

29.  Solar United Neighbors

30.  SolidarityINFOService

31.  Soulardarity

32.  System Change Not Climate Change

33.  The Boricua Solidarity Movement

34.  The Democracy Collaborative

35.  The Green House Connection Center

36.  Unite North Metro Denver

37.  Wall of Women

38.  Womxn from the Mountain

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much. Let me thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony, and now turn to the
members of the Committee for their questions and comments.
I will forego my initial questioning, and turn to my
colleague, the Chair of the Insular Affairs and Vice Chair of
the Committee, Mr. Sablan.
You are recognized for 5 minutes, if you have any
questions.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, I do, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
I cannot seem to find Mr. Fernando Gil on my screen.
Mr. Gil, are you with us, sir?
Mr. Gil. Yes, sir. As I mentioned, we had technical
difficulties in my testimony. That is why we are basically
navigating without any type of visibility.
Mr. Sablan. Can you hear me?
Mr. Gil. I can hear you, sir----
Mr. Sablan. All right, thank you. And let's be mindful of
my 5 minutes.
Mr. Gil, what involvement have you had, and what specific
actions have you taken to ensure FEMA and CDBG monies are
invested in full alignment with the President's climate goals
for Puerto Rico's renewables public policy?
And who do you believe is responsible for the persistent
delays in the flow of funds, and what congressional action do
you think would help?
Two questions in one.
Mr. Gil. Thank you for the question. For what I grasp about
it, actually, in terms of a CDBG funding, right now we have--
the Department of Housing, which I don't manage any more, or
being there any more, has $1.9 billion authorized for it. They
are working on the action plan that actually goes through a
process that tends to have community participation.
Regarding the FEMA funding, we have regular oversight from
not only FEMA, but from the COR3. There is a plan in place for
it, and that plan complies with the IRP and all the
applicable----
In order to speed up the process, we actually--within the
means that we have, we can see which kinds of projects actually
can be accelerated in a more speedy way, and also see which
other projects that are not as visible or important, in terms
of IP technology and other things, can run parallel to, instead
of waiting for other quarters to implement it.
Mr. Sablan. Well, yes, thank you. But there have been, from
what I have heard from testimonies, persistent delays in the
flows of funds. So, who do you believe is responsible for these
delays?
Mr. Gil. Sir, actually, the delay was basically put out
there by the Office of Inspector General of HUD, and where
basically it is determined that the HUD Administration may,
more probably than not, back in the last administration,
withheld funds.
And, obviously, from that time of having all the action
plans approved to--the signature of that grant agreement that
basically gives you the ability to execute all the programs,
more than 300 days went by, and that is unacceptable, because
then what happened was it takes you out from the planning
process, and then keeps you navigating on a dark sea, in that
sense, that you cannot see what is going to happen, because you
are not aware, or you are not secure that that funding is
secure there.
So, being that, I know that this Administration----
Mr. Sablan. So, it is HUD. HUD has been responsible for the
delay of the funds, in your opinion.
Mr. Gil. Well, in the funds, there was actually $1.9
billion that was appropriated back in the supplemental of 2018.
That $1.9 billion related to the power energy--the notice came
out recently, after the Biden administration took over.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, thank you.
Chairman, I have other questions I will submit for the
record.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Sablan. Let me now turn to the
gentlelady from Puerto Rico, Miss Gonzalez-Colon.
You have 5 minutes. Thank you.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know this
is a good panel, we have many people here. And with the
situation on the island that today you have power, maybe
tomorrow you will not, I think there are several questions that
need to be answered.
The first--and I will submit some questions for the record,
as well--but I think we are hearing here about--I see three
major issues.
The first one, how good is our infrastructure right now? Is
it going to handle any hurricane? Can it handle any other
situation?
The second one, how reliable would that be, knowing that
there is a goal of 2050 to have 100 percent renewables. But
then Puerto Rico right now just got 2 percent of renewables
happening.
And I know some of the witnesses established their goal, or
their aspiration, to have Federal money be earmarked for
renewable communities in terms of establishing that kind of
reliable service. But my concern here is this is not just using
batteries or solar panels. We are talking about industry. We
are talking about commercial, residential. Are we ready to move
completely to renewables today, without having the proper
backups in terms of satisfying the demand?
I think we should be working to do both ends, in terms of
looking to the renewable integration that should be achieved,
but at the same time allowing stable energy on the island,
certainty in terms of the energy that is provided for not just
communities, but the industry itself.
So, my question will be to PREPA. It could be answered both
by the Chairman of the Board or the current CEO of PREPA,
Engineer Colon.
And the first one will be in terms of the grid itself. Is
it in a condition to handle the load of PREPA's generation?
And second, how resistant is the infrastructure today to
handle a hurricane?
And I would love if you can go directly to the point, and
be mindful of the time.
Mr. Gil. Mr. Colon will answer that question, since it is a
technical one.
Mr. Colon. Thank you, Madam Congresswoman. I am Josue
Colon, I am the newly appointed CEO for PREPA. And my answer
for your question is that the generation system of Puerto Rico,
as today, is not as reliable as it should be.
As you should know, we were handling many outages on load
shedding in the past 2 months. Right now, we are better
handling the load the system is carrying out, but in general,
our system is still fragile, and we are trying with the
resources that we have to improve the fleet that we have, day
by day.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Question: how much integration of
renewables can we really achieve by 2025?
I know the law mandates it, so I would like to know if it
is possible. And with the results that you have in the current
situation that is real, can you have at 2025, or even 2050, the
complete goal of renewables?
Mr. Gil. OK, I will handle that question, based on the
analyses we are running, Congresswoman Gonzalez. Basically,
there is a total of 3,750 megawatts that are being programmed
for it, and we are running out of space for it. Like, already,
the first phase is for 1,000 mega, with 500 of battery power,
also.
And there is another one, other tranches that are coming up
for 500 megawatts and 250 megawatts for storage capacity--six
months of difference.
So, basically, before 2025, we are trying to achieve that
goal. Obviously, there are other factors to consider, based on
the grid. And actually, the new batteries that we have, or the
existing batteries right now, as it is, our grid was designed
to provide energy, not to receive it in that sense.
So, it is not that it is not feasible or it is not
possible, but the grid, as it is right now, is not as efficient
as it will be when the grid is ready.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Answer me this question yes or no. The
dozen or so LNG power units proposed in the PREPA and FEMA
action plan, will these in any way prevent the continuance of
the conversion to renewables?
Mr. Colon. Well, I am going to answer that question. In my
personal opinion, the answer is yes.
Any modernization that can be accomplished to the actual
fleet with new technology that uses natural gas are going to
help PREPA help the system to handle it better, the
introduction of new renewable energy sources. That is a matter
of technical issues, and those kind of technologies are going
to be more helpful for the system to handle new injection of
renewable to the generation of PREPA.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you. My time is up, so I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentlelady yields. Let me now
turn to the gentlelady from New Mexico, Representative
Stansbury.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
everyone for convening today's important hearing.
I recently had the opportunity to visit Puerto Rico and
Vieques, and saw firsthand myself the beauty of the island and,
of course, the continued impacts that the hurricanes have had
on basic infrastructure, including the electric grid. In fact,
while I was visiting, numerous people shared that they had
lived for months without electricity on Vieques in the wake of
Hurricane Maria. And, as we have heard this morning, many have
continued to experience blackouts across the island as part of
their daily lives.
Access to electricity is not only a necessity, but a basic
human right. Without it, medical facilities cannot operate.
Children cannot study. Businesses cannot remain open. And daily
life is disrupted in countless ways.
Since LUMA took over energy transmission and distribution,
residents are reporting that they are paying twice as much as
mainland customers for electricity, and that power is going out
three to four times a day. These blackouts affect, as we have
heard this morning, hundreds of thousands of people, and
demonstrate the clear need to modernize Puerto Rico's electric
grid and address these operational issues.
This challenge is particularly acute in Puerto Rico, in
large part because it is an island, but it is also a challenge
that communities across the United States are facing. In fact,
just last year we saw in Texas, as a downed electric grid
affected millions who had no heat and water for days in the
wake of a major storm.
The need to modernize our grid across the United States has
reached a major inflection point, in terms of ensuring the
safety and well-being of our communities, and meeting the
moment of our clean energy revolution and addressing climate
change. That is why in New Mexico, I worked with colleagues on
both sides of the aisle to help pass a bipartisan grid
modernization bill just this last year, because modernizing our
grid is both a humanitarian issue and a necessity for tackling
climate change.
The people of Puerto Rico, as has been discussed, recognize
the importance of this transition and the need for renewables.
But unfortunately, in February of this year, 16 commercial
solar projects that would have generated 593 megawatts of
electricity were rejected, leaving the island dependent on a
coal-fired power plant and non-renewable resources. The
transition to renewables and modernization of the grid are
crucial to the residents of the island, and also to climate
action across the country and the planet.
As the devastation of Hurricane Maria has demonstrated, and
as the world watched, we know that the Federal Government did
not respond and act in good faith, and we are still seeing
those impacts today, and I believe it is the Federal
Government's responsibility to ensure that our communities are
safe and their basic needs are met.
So, I believe it is our responsibility, as Congress, to not
only conduct oversight, but to also support the needs of Puerto
Rico and the communities in addressing these issues. The people
of New Mexico and my district stand united with the people of
Puerto Rico in demanding energy justice and grid modernization,
and the social, economic, and environmental imperative of doing
so.
With that, I would like to just take a moment to ask a
question of Mr. Gil.
Mr. Gil, thank you so much for being here today. It
appears--and as was just asked--the Fiscal Oversight and
Management Board recently voted to reject this 450 megawatts of
solar projects, and has recently stated that it may reject up
to 1,000 megawatts of renewable projects that are currently
being teed up. Combined with the other challenges that we have
heard about this morning in terms of providing electricity, it
is clear that the system is in dire need of modernization.
We have heard from a few of the witnesses this morning, but
can you please share with us: (1) what you believe can be done
and what is needed to bring these renewables on-line and
transition the grid to a more stable and resilient power
system; and (2) how the Federal Government, especially as we
are working right now to pass an infrastructure and
reconciliation bill, can help and support Puerto Ricans and the
utility as it is embarking on building a more resilient grid?
Mr. Gil. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question. And
from the complexity of it, obviously, I mean, there is a
process that they started back in 2012. And almost the same
amount that we are putting out there for renewable energy, more
than 3,000 megawatts, was supposed to be already built.
Things happened, that they took away those. Actually,
recently, we submitted to the FOMB around 150 megawatts only
that they were requested that they comply with our MTRs, and
they were also the amount that--right now.
So, answering to your question, it is not that we are
saying that it cannot be done, but right now it is not
feasible, and it can bring some problems to the grid, as it is.
Nonetheless, some combination of repairs of the turbines, that
they are completely broken, or they can be changed with
different sorts of power or gas--for example, changing bunker
fuel for LNG--will give a more sustainable--and can help us,
obviously, move into the future with a more stable generation
fleet, and at the same time looking forward to comply with all
the Act 17 mandates regarding renewables.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields, thank you very much.
Let me now recognize Representative Wittman for his 5 minutes
of questions, comments.
Sir, you are recognized.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to yield
my time to Representative Gonzalez-Colon. And thanks again, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
Miss Colon?
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Representative Wittman, for
yielding, I really appreciate that.
My question will be to the LUMA CEO now. And I want to say
thank you to both of the panelists, witnesses, that are here
today.
We did a roundtable 2 weeks ago with stakeholders, just to
know where is the status of all the Federal funds that are
being allocated to the island. We are talking about $9.6
billion that were approved by Congress in 2018 and 2019 for the
reconstruction of the power grid on the island, and some
generation maintenance.
At this time, none of those funds are being used--again,
$9.6 billion that are a Federal mandate. And one of the reasons
for that is that FEMA just made those funds available last
year. So, that means that LUMA needs to provide the scope of
work to FEMA just to get an approval for that plan, and then
begin those projects and receive part of the funds in a
reimbursement process.
I know FEMA recently changed the way to manage big projects
like this, to try to make them faster. And I know COR3, the
agency on the island, and PREPA are working to that end.
But again, I think the short explanation I just did is one
of the main concerns. Why, if we do have $9.6 billion in
Federal funds to get a renewable system, to change the power
grid, make it more resilient, and help with the generation, as
well, why are those funds not being used?
My question to LUMA right now will be how long it would
take LUMA to provide to COR3 or PREPA the scope of work for the
change and the breakthroughs from transformers and many others
in the transmission and distribution area?
Mr. Stensby. Thank you very much, Commissioner, and I
appreciate the opportunity again.
And I do want to say that grid modernization is exactly a
fundamental element of what LUMA is here to do.
Today, we are building this pipeline of projects, and today
there are 65 projects that represent approximately $2.8 billion
that presently have received FEMA initial statements of work,
and that allows us to proceed with preliminary engineering,
with hazard mitigation efforts, and with development of EHP, or
environmental and historic preservation requirements. Those 65
projects consist of approximately 23 transmission projects, 23
distribution projects, and 15 substations.
The next step is to carry out that preliminary engineering.
There are six architecture engineering firms engaged, and we
then bring back a revised or more fully developed statement of
work for FEMA approval. Once we receive FEMA approval, we then
move into detailed engineering and procurement, and eventual
construction.
We are optimistic that the leading project--so those
projects that are most advanced--are able to be out in the
marketplace for construction contracts into 2022, and we are
optimistic that we will be able to put a shovel in the ground
in the second quarter of 2022.
I think it is vitally important that we start priming the
pump, if you like. There are many other projects behind that
that have received PREB approval. And as I say, this is a large
pipeline of work, but I think it is critical that those first
projects start.
As my fellow witness from COR3 described in his testimony,
there are many complexities with regard to matching, and many
other----
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. I know, I know the complexities. What
is going to be the timeline for submitting the scope of work
recommendations to FEMA to see the transmission and
distribution of funds?
Mr. Stensby. For those very early projects, we would hope
to get those statement of works back into FEMA by the end of
the year, or early next.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. OK. So, you agree with me that some of
the transformers and the breakers can be taking 1 or 2 years of
manufacturing, correct?
Mr. Stensby. Absolutely. Large power transformers,
breakers, certainly in today's supply chain environment, often
have between 6 and 18 month lead times.
We are presently doing work to work with manufacturers and
to develop a supply chain way, if you like, to pre-order some
breakers and some transformers in order that we can better take
advantage of actually getting substations into operation.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you. And I want to be mindful of
the time, but I just make this question to let the people know
that it is not just when the documentation is going to be
submitted to FEMA, it is how long it would take to have 1 or 2
years of just manufacturing to get the transformer.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. OK, the gentlelady yields. Let me now turn to
the gentlelady from New York.
Representative Velazquez, you are recognized.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gil, can you please expand on the outages in Monacillo
and Costa Sur? Were they caused by transmission issues?
Mr. Gil. I am sorry, I would like to yield that question to
the technical engineer, Josue Colon.
Mr. Colon. Thank you for your question, Madam
Congresswoman.
Recently, events that happened in the generation feed that
caused load shedding that happened in the last 2 months were
related to some technical or mechanical problems that happened
on the south coast, Units 5 and 6.
Ms. Velazquez. Were they caused by transmission issues?
That is my question.
Mr. Colon. OK, now I understand.
Well, on Unit number 6, the failure that happened on the LP
pressure of the turbine, we have information that the cause
initiated with a failure on a transmission line. But
specifically, if we can achieve or assign that failure to the
transmission line alone, no, we don't have that kind of
information at this point.
Ms. Velazquez. Mr. Gil, you make reference to Costa Sur,
where, in your statement, you alluded about generation issues,
didn't you?
Mr. Gil. Yes, I did, Congresswoman. And actually, it was on
August 22, and the transmission line fault led to a voltage
fluctuation that affected generating facilities in the south,
including Costa Sur.
Ms. Velazquez. OK.
Mr. Gil. Those fluctuations actually caused Costa Sur's
Unit 6 to go off-line, and damaged the steam turbine rotor----
Ms. Velazquez. OK. Thank you. My time is limited.
Mr. Stensby, if generation is the issue, then why is it
taking longer to repair interruptions since LUMA took over?
Mr. Stensby. I think we need to understand, Congresswoman,
that both the transmission distribution and the generation
system is in a very challenging and precarious state. I don't
think it is one or the other. I think it is both, for sure.
Some people are seeing shorter outages. Some people are,
indeed, seeing longer outages since LUMA took over, and I did
talk about some of the early----
Ms. Velazquez. Well, in fact, during the months of June,
July, and August 2021, the average time for repairs was 323
hours, compared to PREPA's 155 hours last year, when PREPA was
managing transmission and distribution.
Mr. Stensby. Yes, and those----
Ms. Velazquez. And those are the facts.
Mr. Stensby. And those are under-reported statistics that
we showed in front of the PREB from last year, and I did talk
about some of the challenges we had in actually getting our
equipment and our teams to work in June because of, frankly,
union blockades.
But yes, we are indeed----
Ms. Velazquez. Sir, how many linemen does LUMA currently
have who are employees and not hired contractors?
Mr. Stensby. We have approximately 900 employees in the
field that you would call the equivalent of what PREPA used to
refer to as line workers.
Ms. Velazquez. And given the current energy crisis in
Puerto Rico today, are you planning to hire more?
Mr. Stensby. We will continue to train, and we will
continue to hire more, indeed, especially for the large amount
of FEMA and rebuilding work that will be required----
Ms. Velazquez. OK, out of the 900 workers that you have
today, how many of those had no experience working on Puerto
Rico's electrical system prior to June 1?
Mr. Stensby. I would say a very large portion of those have
Puerto Rican experience, but I don't have the exact number,
ma'am.
Ms. Velazquez. Can you please provide the exact numbers to
the Committee?
Mr. Stensby. Yes.
Ms. Velazquez. Sir, how many LUMA employees and executives
earn over $200,000? And how many earn over $500,000?
Mr. Stensby. I am not going to provide salary information
regarding our employees, ma'am.
Ms. Velazquez. You are not? So, sir, do you believe in
transparency?
Mr. Stensby. I completely do, which is why we were posting
customer outages when PREPA did not----
Ms. Velazquez. So, why do you refuse to this day to comply
with the request from the Puerto Rican Legislature, whose
responsibility is to enact public policy based on what is
working and what is not? And if they don't have that
information, how do you think the Puerto Rican Government could
exercise oversight?
Mr. Stensby. There is substantial oversight under our
contract. It follows Act 120, both from the PREB, from the P3
Authority, and from PREPA. And LUMA is in complete compliance
with that oversight, and all of that, all of those laws.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Velazquez. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields. Let me now invite
Representative Gohmert.
You have 5 minutes. Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate the
witnesses being here today.
Since the Texas grid was mentioned earlier, let me point
out Texas had been spending a great deal of its resources in
moving toward what is called green energy, with more solar,
more windmills, and what not. If that is what any area relies
on, there are going to be times when you don't have energy, and
that means you have to have twice as many transmission lines
going from something that you know you can count on to the same
users.
But aside from the additional cost, the Texas grid went
down earlier this year, but there had been a study previously,
an analysis, that indicated that Texas needed to winterize its
natural gas facilities so that that would always be there.
Well, Texas was so busy trying to be green that they didn't
winterize what was needed in time of emergency. So, those were
areas that froze up because of the winter storm.
That is probably not going to be a major problem for Puerto
Rico, having facilities freeze up. But it does point to the
fact, again, if you are relying totally on green energy, you
better have standby ready to go. And Texas, unfortunately,
didn't, due to this pushing of more green energy without taking
care of what you could rely on in a disaster.
And by the way, the $2.2 billion in grants and Federal
loans to the green energy concave mirrors that magnified
sunlight at three different towers, they burned up one of the
towers. So, in a quick, cheap way to deal with it, they quickly
built a natural gas facility. So, I would just encourage that
for Puerto Rico's consideration. It is cheap. It helps clean up
the air, and can be amazingly helpful.
Mr. Laboy, I wanted to ask you--and if it has been
answered, I missed it, and I apologize--but how much damage
remains unrepaired, unfixed, unreplaced from prior hurricanes
and storms with regard to the grid, or the generation of
electricity?
Mr. Laboy. Yes. So, first of all, again, as I stated in my
testimony, our role, as recipients and administrators, is to
provide the technical support to the subrecipient--in this
case, PREPA.
Mr. Gohmert. OK, so you don't know.
Let me ask, is there anybody that knows how much was
damaged in prior storms in the way of generating facilities or
capacity or grid that is not repaired?
[No response.]
Mr. Gohmert. Anybody know?
Well, if nobody knows, out of these experts--yes, please.
Mr. Stensby. I can offer--and perhaps Fernando Gil can
chime in--but the vast majority of the FEMA funding that has
been assigned for the T&D system here is a result of the
storms, and then the Build Back Better exercise.
I can tell you today that very little of it has been fully
restored to a new and fully functioning system. That is, in
fact, the exercise that is in front of us.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, OK, that is what I wanted to know, and
that sounds like----
Dr. Irizarry. Congressman?
Mr. Gohmert. Yes, go ahead.
Dr. Irizarry. My name is Agustin Irizarry.
Mr. Gohmert. Right, right.
Dr. Irizarry. About a year after Hurricane Maria, 99
percent of the people in Puerto Rico had electricity. It took a
year or so, but the system was restored.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes, but apparently there is still a lot of
equipment and things that need to be replaced or repaired. But
I mean, we have that situation here. You run out of
electricity, you can get it up and going, but for the long term
it is not helpful.
Thank you, Professor. It just sounds like we have a lot of
work remaining to do in Puerto Rico, and I appreciate your
being here.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Gohmert. Let me now invite the
gentleman from Florida.
Congressman Soto, you are recognized, sir.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman. Puerto Rico faces major
challenges. The people need reliable power. The blackouts need
to stop. And we also need to work together to boost renewable
and clean energy.
I want to talk first about reliable power. As a brief
history, Puerto Rico had a nearly totally government-run
utility system, PREPA. This is an outlier. No state has a fully
run government system. All states have public and private
systems to encourage competition and avoid political patronage
and corruption.
As a result, their focus for years was on keeping rates
low, without making long-term investments to maintain and
upgrade the grid. Add in an economic crisis, the debt,
Hurricane Maria, and earthquakes. That has all decimated,
together, a poorly maintained system. And now the people suffer
as a result.
The Puerto Rican Government finally made a decision to
increase competition by contracting with LUMA to handle
transmission this summer. LUMA's job is to maintain and fix the
very power lines that have been neglected for decades. We
applaud LUMA for working with IBEW. IBEW trains some of the
best electrical workers on the planet.
Sadly, the transition hasn't been smooth. Many PREPA
employees--I have heard over a third, and we will get to that
in a moment--didn't transfer to work over to LUMA. I understand
the disappointment of some local unions in Puerto Rico who
opposed the transition, even after the transfer happened. But
sadly, this discouragement slowed down the process of repairing
and maintaining the grid. It slowed down the hiring of new
people, and training of new people and existing folks from
PREPA, and contributed to the blackouts.
We need to conduct meaningful oversight of LUMA and stop
the blackouts. But this Committee also can't be blind to the
facts that they inherited--LUMA and IBEW--inherited a disaster
of a grid just a few months ago this summer.
The second point I want to make is on renewable energy. We
applaud the Puerto Rico Legislature for 100 percent renewable
by 2050. This goal was incredible to boost renewables,
especially rooftop solar, wind, hydro, and other clean
electricity. The reality, though, is a stark difference. There
are six diesel plants: four fuel oil plants, one coal plant,
and one gas plant currently operating.
First of all, diesel and fuel oil, it is the most
expensive, it is the highest pollution, and it is the stone
ages. No one in the states has this anymore. The diesel fuel
oil and coal plants have to go, and that is my message to PREPA
and to the Fiscal Board.
Natural gas is a good bridge fuel, and the future is in
wind and solar. PREPA must take seriously the Puerto Rico
Legislature's new renewable goals. This Committee supports
those goals. We urge PREPA and the Fiscal Board and, most
importantly, the Puerto Rico Government to work with community
solar organizations for rooftop solar, make conscious efforts
to increase wind, including in the south, and, overall, to
increase resiliency to combat climate change and energy
independence.
The bottom line: we need to conduct meaningful oversight.
And the good news is we have Hurricane Maria recovery funds,
and soon Build Back Better funds to help with this transition:
$1.9 billion for grid funds that have already gone out to
notice; $12.1 billion in HUD funds that have been released
recently by the Biden administration.
Mr. Stensby, my question to you, what was the percentage of
employees that didn't transfer over from PREPA to LUMA, and how
has that affected blackouts?
Mr. Stensby. Thank you very much, Congressman. Two points
that I would like the opportunity to make is that through our
recruitment process, we put training and safety of all of our
people first, and so we were very thorough----
Mr. Soto. Mr. Stensby, I apologize, but my time is limited.
I just need to know how many folks transferred over.
Mr. Stensby. So, of the slightly over 3,000 employees we
have today, almost 1,300, or roughly 1,300, came from PREPA.
Mr. Soto. OK, so a large share did not make the transition.
Mr. Gil, what do you think it is going to take to
transition away from diesel, coal, and fuel oil, the dirtiest
of fuels, the most expensive of fuels for Puerto Rico?
Mr. Gil. Congressman Darren Soto, thank you for everything
that you do for Puerto Rico.
But, basically, the goodwill, the ability, and the
possibility of the people making that, we need to change that.
That is not one thing or the other, that we have to be in
balance here, that we have to drive--like, obviously, LNG,
there is a combination that you can use, like hydrogen in it,
and create green hydrogen. It is more efficient, it reduces 70
percent the CO
2
emissions from it.
So, it is a combination, and then transition when that
technology is even more advanced. Solar technology and
renewable technology advance in a second, as computers did back
in the day. So, we need to, obviously, make that balance, and
be careful about the environment, but we have to also take into
consideration Puerto Rico is a small island.
The PV panel systems, they cannot be disposed in landfills.
They should be recycled in the United States. There are not
enough recycling facilities for PV panels. So, those are the
things that, in terms of taking care of the environment, we
have to consider for energy, and specifically for the
betterment of our people.
Mr. Soto. Colleagues, let's stop the blackouts, and let's
make sure we ensure a more clean energy and renewable energy.
Let's focus on the achievable, and we can do it together.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Thank you. Let me now
ask Representative Graves.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for joining us today. Certainly, a topic that we have
spent a lot of time on in this Committee. And again, thanks for
being with us.
I guess the first question, maybe for Mr. Fontanes--I am
not certain if you have expertise here or not, but I heard
questions earlier about the cost effectiveness of this
agreement with LUMA. Was that a sole source process? Was it an
open competition? How did that occur?
Mr. Fontanes. Thank you, Congressman. This was, actually, a
long process that took close to 2 years. We had five
participants in the procurement process, originally.
At the end, we received two different proposals. And LUMA
was the entity selected, so it wasn't a sole source. It was a
competitive process through the P3 Act, and our structure and
our process, and we ended up with two solid proponents out of
the five that were originally qualified presenting proposals.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. And is it your opinion that LUMA, at
this point, is complying with the contract requirements that
they are obligated to comply with?
Mr. Fontanes. From a contract perspective, they are
complying with the requirements of the contract. Yes.
Mr. Graves. OK, thank you. It was noted earlier that there
was some lack of transparency, or there wasn't value to
taxpayers, and I guess I was struggling with understanding
that. But I thank you for clarifying.
Mr. Stensby, this really is an amazing situation. I
represent South Louisiana, which we certainly have been subject
to hurricanes. But every time I look back at this, I look at
the amount of money that is being spent in building the system
back.
Certainly, you all have experience operating around the
United States and Canada, I believe. Have you ever seen a
situation where you have a utility operating like this, perhaps
with the percentage of debt that is out there, the number of, I
guess, the amount of theft of electricity that is out there?
Have you all ever operated in an environment like this?
Mr. Stensby. No. I would say, frankly, PREPA--and not to
cast any aspersions on my current colleagues at PREPA, but
PREPA is unquestionably--call it the worst performing utility
in the United States, and by each and every measure.
But I think that what that speaks to, Congressman, is the
need to, in fact, make meaningful change. And it also probably
speaks to some of the resistance that we have been seeing,
whether it is on customer service, whether it is on outage
response, whether it is on labor relations, whether it is that
reinvestment.
Certainly, there is lots of experience with the
reinvestment of this large capital program, and that is a very
important part of this. And there is lots of experience with
reconfiguring and bringing in better business processes. But I
would say, in terms of the basic--it took two decades for PREPA
to get in this state, we shouldn't forget, and that is why it
is so important to get started, and continue to push ahead.
Mr. Graves. And I want to associate myself with Congressman
Soto's comments--Puerto Ricans deserve electricity, they
deserve better service, and we are investing extraordinary
amounts of taxpayer dollars to get there.
Could you talk a little bit about the role, maybe, that the
project labor agreement has in either benefiting or perhaps
challenging your ability to do your job?
Mr. Stensby. For certain. As I mentioned, we have a
collective bargaining agreement now with our own workers. We
have also rolled out a project labor agreement, which will be
critical to supporting stability and predictability, as this
large amount of FEMA funding is used to rebuild the grid.
I mean, it is very important that we get qualified,
skilled--we put safety first. And, really, we do put workers at
the front of this equation, and Puerto Rican workers. And that
was why, between LUMA and the IBEW, we have rolled out the PLA
to bring that certainty so that we can deliver for customers.
Mr. Graves. OK, thank you, and I am going to ask you a
question for the record on that one.
But last question, I am seeing some of these targets for
renewables in the future. One, as I understand, the current
effort to try to add $.04 to the bill is being rejected right
now, because folks are saying they can't afford it. What is
your----
[Audio malfunction.]
Mr. Graves [continuing]. Achieve these renewable direction
obligations or goals, and the cost associated with that?
Mr. Stensby. Well, I think what LUMA is really focused on
is to get a larger amount of renewable integration here, you do
require a reliable transmission and distribution system. So,
our focus is--at the end of the day, if you like, we are the
transportation company, right?
And we all know, and we believe at LUMA, that the better
the T&D system is, the more renewables can be integrated into
the system and, in the end, still provide reliable and
affordable electricity. So, that is where our focus is,
Congressman.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Stensby.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you. I just want to make note
that I think, as we move forward, we need to be looking
carefully at the price sensitivity of the investments that are
being made to ensure that we are not going to be pricing Puerto
Ricans out of power with the price sensitivity they apparently
have.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Thank you. Let me now
recognize Representative Torres.
Mr. Torres, you have 5 minutes. Thank you.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a quick yes-or-no
question for the CEO of LUMA.
Does your company operate the total energy distribution and
transmission system on the island?
Mr. Stensby. We are responsible for the transmission and
distribution system. PREPA today remains responsible for the
operation of the generation system.
Mr. Torres. But everywhere on the island, right?
Mr. Stensby. Sorry, yes, all across the island, and also--
--
Mr. Torres. Because I have heard the word ``competition.''
But if one company is managing all the energy distribution and
transmission infrastructure, that is not competition, that is
objectively a monopoly.
So, LUMA's management of Puerto Rico's electric grid is
cause for concern for me. Power outages and service disruptions
remain prevalent. Customer complaints are said to have risen.
Response times are said to have fallen. I have heard multiple
mayors fault LUMA for the lack of communication.
The Mayor of Juana Diaz, for example, said it would have
taken PREPA 4 to 5 hours to arrive at his town. By contrast, it
takes LUMA 2 to 3 days. So, by every indication, LUMA is
failing the people of Puerto Rico.
And my first question is directed to PREPA. If LUMA
continues to under-perform, does the operation and maintenance
agreement allow the Government of Puerto Rico to reverse the
privatization of the electric grid?
Mr. Gil. Congressman Torres, we would like to be the
expertise on that, and the monitor of that contract is the P3
Authority. So, that question should be addressed to the P3
Authority----
Mr. Torres. Are you a party to the agreement?
Mr. Gil. We are a party of the agreement, yes.
Mr. Torres. So, as a party to the agreement, you should
know if the new operator under-performs, whether you have the
right to retrieve control of the electric grid. As a party to
the agreement, that is a relavant fact to now.
Mr. Gil. Well, obviously, if it is declared in default by
any chance, but they will have to take care of it.
Mr. Torres. Are you suggesting to me that the people of
Puerto Rico are stuck with LUMA, regardless of performance, for
the next 15 years?
Mr. Gil. I am sorry, I am saying, obviously, we have to
respect contracts. If not, if we don't do that, there is a
constitutional----
Mr. Torres. I am asking are there performance standards
built into the contracts?
Mr. Gil. Performance standards built into their contract
are evaluated. If they are not performing that well, they don't
receive the payment that they should receive for it, in that
sense.
If we stuck to it, it is a matter of, we have the force
here, also. But in the meantime, we have to respect their
contracts, and that is our position in that sense.
Transitioning one day to another is almost impossible.
We took a year with LUMA actually on a front-end
transition, and then afterwards----
Mr. Torres. Let me move on. I just want to reclaim my time.
As everyone knows, Puerto Rico is fundamentally dependent on
imported fossil fuels. In order to facilitate the transition to
clean energy, Puerto Rico passed a law, the Puerto Rico Energy
Policy Act, which requires 40 percent clean energy by 2025; 60
percent by 2040; 100 percent by 2050.
Several obstacles, however, have emerged on Puerto Rico's
path to clean energy, and the greatest among those obstacles is
the Financial Management and Oversight Board, which rejected 16
solar projects that would have brought renewable energy from 2
to 20 percent of Puerto Rico's electricity. So, I feel like we
are reminded once again that the United States is colonizing
Puerto Rico in more ways than one. Not only is the United
States subjecting Puerto Rico to higher fossil fuel costs via
the Jones Act, but the United States, through the Financial
Management and Oversight Board, is also actively preventing
Puerto Rico from escaping those higher costs and transitioning
to clean energy.
Climate change is a financial risk, and by sabotaging the
transition to clean energy, the Financial Control Board is
planting the seeds of financial instability on the island.
Now I have a question for PREPA. According to the COO of
Applied Energy Services, he said the following quote: ``We have
the intention of transforming our energy production from coal
to renewables before the 2027 deadline. If we reach an
agreement today, we could do it in 2 years.''
My question for PREPA is, when are you going to reach an
agreement with AES? Can you get an agreement done immediately,
so that the coal power plant can be closed within the next 2
years?
Mr. Gil. Congressman Torres, I will take that question. And
obviously, right now, we are running RFP processes, as
requested by the FOMB. Later on, the FOMB changed the story,
and says that we don't have to run the procurement process. In
that sense----
Mr. Torres. I am with you on that piece. But can you reach
an agreement with AES today, or in the near future, that could
lead to closing of the plant?
Mr. Gil.  It will be irresponsible on my behalf to take
that position. Actually, right now, without the consent of the
whole board and everything----
Mr. Torres. Before my time is up, what is the due date for
the latest RFP regarding renewable energy? I know it was
originally May, but it was delayed. What is the new due date?
Mr. Gil. There is already a first tranche. Second tranche
is coming up next week in October, like the notice. And
afterwards, every 6 months we will have another RFP for it.
Mr. Torres. OK, thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Thank you very much.
And let me now ask Mrs. Radewagen--she is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing.
At this time, I would like to just yield all of my time to
Representative Gonzalez-Colon.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Amata, and thank you,
Chairman.
And coming from an island, I know she understands how
difficult it is for islanders, like often in Puerto Rico, just
to rely on the generation of electricity, not knowing if we are
going to have power tomorrow or not. So, the next question will
be for me, in terms of PREPA and LUMA both.
Is our system near to a complete collapse here soon?
I mean, not just in terms of generation, but in
transmission. I just need a yes or no answer. Engineer Colon?
Mr. Colon. Thank you for the question, Madam Congresswoman.
The answer is no, but I want to expand my answer. Our
system is in a critical condition right now in the generation
side. As you know, we have many of our generating units not
available because a lack of maintenance, and we are in an
effort to bringing them back.
And in the transmission system, also, as you may know, and
the other Congressmen, the system was repaired after the
hurricane, but not restored.
So, to answer your question properly, both sides of the
equation are under critical condition, but not to collapse at
this point.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Is the transmission distribution
system near to a collapse?
[Pause.]
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. LUMA?
Mr. Stensby. I would answer in a very similar way. No, but
it is critical that the re-investment continue.
And as we think about generation outages, it is only
through the generation load shedding that we have been able to
avoid the collapse. That is why it is so critical that we
continue on with repairs on generation, and repairs on
restoration and transmission.
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. OK, then I will submit some questions
for the record, as well.
The first one will be for PREPA and for LUMA. The FEMA
funds that are allocated to the island are $2.4 billion for
transmission distribution and $4.9 billion for distribution. I
would like to know, how is the process expected to be managed,
what is the timeline for PREPA and for LUMA to submit for FEMA
for those scope of work, and COR3, the status of all of it, who
is going to be answering for maximizing the use of those funds
to build a system that people can trust.
I know that there is a lot of comments about works in the
shovel-ready projects that were requested for renewables in
PREPA that were not approved by the Board. My question to Mr.
Fermin and to Mr. Gil--again, for the record--if PREPA or the
P3 challenge that FOMB decision of canceling those renewable
contracts, and why. If there is any way to get those in the
line, when they are shovel-ready, and what was the main reason
for that. I think that that is not the scope of the award, that
is something that should be in the hands of PREPA, in the case
of generation.
My next question will be, how long will it take for all
those units that are going to be receiving maintenance in the
next month. Even private generators and the government
generators are going to be receiving maintenance. So, are we
going to see more of these related outages across the island?
Do you have a plan that has been informed to the public in
that sense?
And remember, there are many communities that rely on
energy to pump their water. So, if you don't have power in some
rural communities, they will not have water usage at the same
time. That is the reason how this is so difficult to manage to
the rest of the island.
Mr. Gil?
Mr. Gil. Thank you, Congresswoman Gonzalez-Colon, for a----
The Chairman. If the gentleman would answer as quickly as
possible, because time is over already.
Mr. Gil. I will. Actually, from our end, we have about 40
projects totaling $2.5. There are already $78 million invoices
and cost, and we still have pending $7.3 for the outstanding
reimbursement for it.
In terms of the FOMB, no, they shouldn't, but they did,
based on the amount of money, actually, that it will cost, or
the amount of money that it was projected, based on the fiscal
plan for it, and the IRP. And hence, if those projects were
made back in the day, today we wouldn't have that problem.
Nonetheless, politics--and because it was done by the last
administration--they took it out.
And then the FOMB recently, after more than 80 years,
actually requested the Governing Board to see that project. We
went out there, we negotiated with more than 16 of those. And
then afterwards they make the decision that only two of them
were going to be. If we have the hands tied to it--yes, we do--
but that is the way that our company is working right now.
The Chairman. Time is up, thank you, sir. I understand that
there is a lot of specificity to answers, but being long-winded
is another issue. Let me now recognize Mr. Tonko.
You have 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for bringing
such great focus to a very important concern for the people of
Puerto Rico.
As Puerto Rican communities recover and rebuild from the
COVID-19 pandemic, as many work or attend school virtually, and
as temperatures rise and storms worsen, Puerto Ricans need
reliable and affordable electricity, more than ever. And yet
the island's electric grid, with less than 3 percent renewable
electricity, continues to plague Puerto Ricans with, often,
life-threatening outages, while costing them double the average
U.S. rate.
So, Mr. Gil, what plans do you have in place to meet the
renewable energy goals established by Act 17?
Mr. Gil. Well, as it is right now, Congressman, we are
running the RFPs requested to pick the best option for the
island, and at the same time, when all the grid modernization
comes into play, then the idea of the virtual power plants can
come to fruition, and we may have an excess of those.
Mr. Tonko. Professor Irizarry, as extreme weather events
become more frequent, what risks will the current plan pose,
and how would solar energy bring more reliability and cost
savings to Puerto Ricans?
Dr. Irizarry. Thank you, Congressman. We already saw what
happens when we face a Category 4 or Category 5 hurricane. The
transmission system collapses. And that will happen again, even
if you rebuild it. If you rebuild it up to code, current codes,
it will still not withstand a Category 5 hurricane.
What we are proposing is renewable energy on the rooftop of
homes and commerce, with storage. That proved to be the most
resilient alternative to the hurricanes, like Maria. People
that had a solar rooftop system with batteries continued with
electricity provided from their solar PV systems.
I don't see how investing in a technology of the 20th
century will bring us to a 21st century condition. We need to
embrace new technology, and we have the know-how on the
technology, and it is today cheaper than the alternative. So,
we encourage the government to review their plans to invest in
old technology that is vulnerable to stronger storms, as the
ones we are seeing right now.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
And Ms. Santiago, what obstacles currently impede a greater
investment in energy sources like solar on the island?
Ms. Santiago. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Primarily, the LUMA contract right now is the largest obstacle
we are seeing for integration of renewables. In fact, at a
hearing before the Energy Board, one of LUMA's representatives,
a guy named Lee Wood, said that FEMA funds could not be used
for rooftop solar. He was corrected immediately by the board
personnel, but that has been LUMA's position.
They want to, as Professor Irizarry just mentioned, rebuild
the old 20th century transmission system, that will be knocked
down by the next hurricane. And that is taxpayer money to the
tune of $9.6 billion or more that will just be wasted.
So, what we are proposing is--and what is really popular in
Puerto Rico, and anyone with any kind of means is doing--is
acquiring rooftop solar. So, PREPA, with that allocation from
FEMA, can do that for low- and middle-income, and businesses
and residents all over Puerto Rico, and provide lifesaving
resiliency.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And I would think an island such as
Puerto Rico would be a classic example of solar opportunity.
That would just be a natural go-to.
Ms. Santiago. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Stensby, Ms. Santiago's testimony mentions a
backlog of more than 5,000 systems on the island waiting to
implement solar technology.
So, what are you folks doing to address this backlog, and
what challenges remain?
Mr. Stensby. Yes, thank you very much for the question,
Congressman.
In fact, when we began on June 1, it was a very long
backlog. And as we pointed out, some people have been waiting
for as long as 2 years. We have made substantial efforts in
reducing that backlog. We are processing new solar connections
more than seven times what PREPA had been able to do prior to
that. And we believe, by the end of this year, we will have
completely eliminated the backlog.
And I think LUMA--people are trying to portray us as anti-
solar, and it is absolutely not true. We just released, in
fact, a hosting map on our website, so that people who are
interested in solar can more easily connect and make decisions
about their solar investments. So, we want to be very clear. We
are supportive of rooftop solar, and we are doing everything in
our power to support that.
Mr. Tonko. And I would hope that includes storage.
With that, my time is up. Mr. Chair, I yield back, and
thank you so much for the hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you, Congressman. The Congressman
yields. Let me now recognize Mr. McClintock.
Sir, you are recognized.
[Pause.]
The Chairman. Mr. McClintock, sir, you are recognized.
[Pause.]
The Chairman. If not, let me go to the next colleague on
the list.
Representative Tiffany, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
We will hold that other for Mr. McClintock if and when he comes
forward.
Representative Tiffany?
[Pause.]
The Chairman. OK, let me now recognize Congressman Garcia.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Electricity, of course, is something that many of us take
for granted. But for people in Puerto Rico, it is a matter of
life and death. Hundreds of thousands on the island are
currently experiencing outages lasting several days, all while
already paying twice as much for electricity than what most of
us in the states pay.
We are seeing classes suspended, people being forced to
throw out food, disruptions in medical services, and a family
in Aguadilla losing everything after a power surge burned their
house. This would not be acceptable anywhere else. So, why do
we allow it to happen in Puerto Rico?
Last year, this Committee held a hearing to pre-emptively
address concerns around the privatization of Puerto Rico's
power grid. Yet, a year later, with Puerto Rico on the brink of
power supply crisis, we have this situation.
A question for Mr. Fontanes. We heard earlier that, as of
June 1, more than 3,000 ex-PREPA employees transferred to other
government agencies. Why did P3 allow for thousands of PREPA
employees to be transferred, rather than to work for LUMA?
Mr. Fontanes. Thank you, Congressman, for the question, and
for the opportunity to address this topic.
The way Act 120 is established, what the law required was
that we allowed the PREPA employees the opportunity to make the
decision that they would like to make, in terms of whether they
wanted to join a private entity, or they wanted to remain
within the Government of Puerto Rico.
During the transition period we did everything within our
power to try to provide information to the employees at PREPA,
so that they could weigh in on what was better for them, in
particular, and they could make the decision they would like to
make.
So, at the end of the day, most of those employees decided
to stay with the government rather than to join PREPA. I would
have to say, in my opinion, that it is a shame. LUMA provided
better salaries, the same or better benefits than most of
these----
Mr. Garcia. Yes, thank you for your answer. It feels really
wasteful to let skilled electrical workers serve as drivers or
security workers, especially at this time of Puerto Rico's
energy crisis.
A question for Mr. Stensby. Consumers have reported
difficulties with accessing LUMA's customer service, especially
when widespread outages occur. How have employees at call
centers been trained and resourced to respond to these events?
And do you feel that LUMA's customer service operation is
currently meeting the demand for consumers?
Mr. Stensby. Thank you very much for the question, Mr.
Congressman.
What I can tell you is that we trained, ahead of service
commencement, a very large number of call center agents. We now
have four call centers around Puerto Rico. It was important to
us that they were in Puerto Rico. We have almost 10 times as
many agents as PREPA had, as we moved into the transition.
What we are seeing is a very large volume of calls. We have
rolled out a number of digital channels for people, but we are
seeing large numbers of calls. And frankly, we attribute that
to the fact that we are answering the phone. Our average answer
time is in approximately the 10-minute mark, and we are
beginning to fix the system, so that is----
Mr. Garcia. Forgive me for reclaiming my time. Is it
inadequate, sir, yes or no?
Mr. Stensby. Yes, for today it is, sir, yes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
Ms. Santiago, I want to make sure you get a word in. How
has LUMA engaged with community stakeholders prior to and
following its acquisition of the T&D system?
Do you feel that LUMA has sufficiently responded to the
questions and concerns of community members?
And you have about 35 seconds.
Ms. Santiago. OK. No, not at all. Not before, not during,
not now has LUMA communicated with communities. In fact, we are
working with a group of 10 community organizations in the LUMA
performance metrics case, and LUMA this week said that they did
not have to answer questions about the emergency response plan.
Now, we have plans here in Salinas, Puerto Rico, that--for
example, the Aguirre Power Complex is the largest electrical
complex in Puerto Rico, that the surrounding communities need
to know what the emergency response plan is for that
infrastructure, and the transmission system that comes out of
that infrastructure.
So, LUMA is not responding at all to community requests for
information.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Ms. Santiago.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Garcia.
Let me ask the Ranking Member, Miss Gonzalez-Colon, are
there any Members on your side?
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can see Mr.
Obernolte is connected, as well as Mr. Moore.
The Chairman. Does he seek to be recognized on that?
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Yes.
The Chairman. Mr. Obernolte, you are recognized for 5
minutes, sir.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to our witnesses on this really critical topic for the
people of Puerto Rico.
I had a question for Mr. Gil. I would like to follow up on
the line of inquiry that Congresswoman Velazquez was pursuing
earlier. Recently there was an outage on the island of Puerto
Rico that was tied to several of the power plants going down
because of clogging of intakes for the generators with brown
seaweed. And on Friday afternoon, there was a protest by
hundreds of Puerto Ricans in front of the Governor's mansion
against these outages. And many of those protesters were angry
with LUMA.
But my question to you is should they be angry with LUMA,
or should they be angry with PREPA, given the fact that PREPA
is responsible for generation, and LUMA is just responsible for
distribution?
Mr. Gil. Congressman, actually, at that time they could
have been mad at both--it was a matter of generation with us--
you have the sargassum or seaweed, in that sense. Those filters
are already being procured in that scenario. They are extremely
expensive. There was something that--it shouldn't happen.
But at the same time, there being other outages not related
to generation, that has been creating the emotions around there
and, obviously, other political motivations, and the opposition
to it. It is fueling that fire.
Mr. Obernolte. OK, so what could LUMA have done about that
particular outage?
Mr. Gil. In terms of the generation, I mean, they don't
have any type of control in the generation. They do have the
dispatching of it, of the generation by itself, meaning we can
start transmitting and distributing.
So, when it is related to outages because of transformers,
substations, or any other particular poor wiring, or something
like that, it is related to the T&D. When it is related to
generation by itself, any machine that broke or whatever, it is
related to us, in PREPA.
Mr. Obernolte. Right, OK. So, talking about that outage in
particular, can you give us kind of a layman's explanation of
what happened with the seaweed, and why it caused such a
problem at those two plants?
Mr. Gil. Well, basically, to give you the proper answer and
the correct answer, Mr. Colon is the expert in generation, so
he will take that question.
Mr. Colon. Thank you for that question, Mr. Congressman.
As Fernando explained, what happened over there was that a
high amount of seaweed or sargassum entered the intake of water
that is used in the power plant for the steam that it is used
to move the turbine. The reason for that was that we have five
sets of screens that are using for filter or prevent those
seaweed to enter the channels that are tied to the condensers.
But at that time, when this happened, all of the five filters
failed, and that was the main reason that led to the shutdown
of the units on Aguirre, and also to reduce the amount of
energy that one of the generation can produce.
And LUMA doesn't have anything to do with that. It was a--
--
Mr. Obernolte. OK, are they at surface level, or are they
below the surface?
Mr. Colon. Both, but the majority of the seaweed was on the
surface, but also are below the water level.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. And, as I understand it, these are
large, floating mats of brown seaweed. Is that correct?
Mr. Colon. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. So, I am just a layman, I am not an expert,
but why even allow those mats of seaweed to come close to the
inlets?
I mean, couldn't you just take some surface watercraft and
go collect that, or push it away, or erect a floating boom or
something, if you knew that was a hazard?
Mr. Colon. Well, actually, that was a failure from our
people in the Aguirre power station. Actually, the power plant
has watercraft and equipment to prevent those seaweed from
getting close to the intake, but they also have a lack of
personnel to conduct that kind of maintenance service for this
kind of process. And all of this leads to what happened, and we
are now taking the actions required to prevent that.
Since that time, the unit returned to service without any
problem from the seaweed. And we are putting all of our efforts
to prevent that from happening again, even though we don't have
the equipment, the new equipment that is needed to replace the
broken ones.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Now let me turn to the
next, thank you for the questions, and the gentleman yields.
Let me recognize Representative Tlaib for her questions.
Representative, you are recognized.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Chairman. I am so sorry, I have been
having technical difficulty today--phone on my laptop, so
please bear with me. Thank you so much for holding this
important hearing.
While Puerto Rico may be very far from my district, the
problems we are talking about seem so familiar. I mean, this
summer, hundreds of thousands of people in the Metro Detroit
area, in my community, lost power, some for as many as 6 to 7
days, Chairman. Our investor-owned, shareholder-centered
electrical utility company, called DTE, has raised rates by
nearly $1 billion in the last decade, while having some of the
worst reliability and performance in the whole nation. So, it
is incredibly important for us to understand the connection
between many of our districts and what is happening to the
Puerto Rican people.
In the last several weeks, numerous press accounts have
emerged about the impact, as you all know, of the ongoing,
unreliable, and substandard electrical service for Puerto Rican
residents. These include reports of constant and extended
outages that we have been talking about, lasting more than 24
to 48 hours in communities with many elderly residents, and
residents with chronic illnesses. And we all, as Members of
Congress, have experienced and heard from our residents about
how their health and everything is connected to that access to
electricity.
I know the Mayor of San Juan is spending nearly $1 million
to buy generators for water pumps, so that power outages do not
continue to result in water outages. And the Secretary of
Commerce and Economic Development has denounced the impact of
poor service on economic development, and so forth.
We heard reports of power surges regularly destroying
people's appliances--you all know that--even causing house
fires, like an incident of a family that lost everything in
Aguadilla after a power surge burned their house down.
So, Mr. Chairman, we know that this terrible level of
service isn't acceptable for the Puerto Rican people. It isn't
acceptable in Michigan either, and it shouldn't be acceptable
anywhere in our country or in our world.
Privatizing electrical service is a disaster for the Puerto
Rican people, because private utilities serve investors, not
the public. I am going to say that again. Private utilities
serve their investors, not the public. Reliability has worsened
when it became private, and so we need to basically make sure
that we are speaking that truth as we talk about these issues.
Mr. Stensby, as of June 1, more than 3,000 ex-PREPA
employees transferred to other government agencies, rather than
work for LUMA. How many workers and crews does LUMA have
assigned to the municipalities of Aguadilla and, is it Ponce?
Mr. Stensby. As I testified earlier, we have 900 employees
that are in the field today. I can't tell you precisely how
many are assigned to those two municipalities, Congresswoman.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes, so they left, they left LUMA. How many left
LUMA?
Mr. Stensby. How many left LUMA?
Ms. Tlaib. So, more than 3,000 ex-PREPA employees
transferred--you said 3,000--and then they left, and you said
900 went to the municipalities.
Mr. Stensby. No. I think it is a mischaracterization. LUMA
recruited and, as Mr. Fontanes had testified, for an employee
that was working for the Government of Puerto Rico, they had a
choice to join LUMA or take a transfer to another agency within
the government.
Ms. Tlaib. And 3,000 of them said, ``We are going to leave
LUMA.''
OK, what is the average crew response time for outages?
Mr. Stensby. The average response time across the most
recent month is, in round numbers, in the 5- or 6-hour time
frame.
Ms. Tlaib. How many complaints has LUMA Energy received
regarding voltage--what they call fluctuations--damaging home
appliances?
Mr. Stensby. I don't have that specific number with me.
Ms. Tlaib. I would love if the Committee can follow up and
get that information.
How much money has LUMA Energy received so far under its
contract?
Again, I apologize if this was answered before, but I would
like to know for something else.
Mr. Stensby. LUMA Energy, during this interim period until
the point in time when PREPA would eventually move out of
bankruptcy, earns approximately $7 million a month.
Ms. Tlaib. OK. How many LUMA employees, executives, earn
over $200,000, and how many earn over $500,000?
Mr. Stensby. I think I was asked that question earlier,
but----
Ms. Tlaib. And you didn't want to answer, right?
Mr. Stensby. I am not able to disclose employee salaries.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. If you want to get in the business of
providing a public good, and for the Federal Government to
subsidize it, or for us to play a part in it, then you
understand that those salaries are also the public salary. Do
you understand?
So, just know that it doesn't make sense that you don't
want to reveal that. You don't even have to tell me the names
of it. I think Velazquez and I are just curious how many of
your employees earn over $200,000, and how many of them earn
$500,000? I don't need names. I just want to know how many. So,
if you can follow up, and talk to your legal folks, I think
they will come back and tell you that that should be actually
transparent and open.
Do you know what the median household income is in Puerto
Rico, sir?
Mr. Stensby. No, I do not, Congresswoman.
Ms. Tlaib. It is $20,000, according to the Census Bureau,
$20,000. So, LUMA has received millions of dollars, and stands
to receive billions more in an attempt to privatize the grid in
Puerto Rico over the next 15 years. But the last 4 months have
been a disaster for the people of Puerto Rico. And
privatization, I know, will only worsen it.
So, I just want you, sir, to understand that, if you are
going to serve the people, you should know what the medium
income is. You should know what the impact is. And the fact of
the matter is you failed them just alone in the last 4 months.
So, please understand that my frustration with all of this is
because they deserve to make sure that they have access to
something that is very much a lifeline to medical issues they
are struggling with, being able to provide for their families,
of course, food, all those things, appliances, everything is so
connected to that.
With that, Chairman, I yield. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, the gentlelady yields. Let me call
again on my colleague, Representative McClintock, if he is
available now. If not, Representative Tiffany, if he is
available. They are recognized, either/or.
[Pause.]
The Chairman. If not, let me go to Representative Espaillat
for his 5 minutes.
Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I wanted
to ask a very simple question. I want, really, an honest yes or
no answer.
Since LUMA assumed responsibility, have power outages and
other service disruptions increased, Mr. Gil?
Mr. Gil. Sorry, we don't have the actual data for that. It
is something that is related to LUMA, and LUMA should answer
the amount that they had before, and the amount of outages that
they have since June 1.
Mr. Espaillat. Mr. Stensby for LUMA, since you took
control, or responsibility, have outages and service
disruptions increased?
Mr. Stensby. The frequency of outages has gone down, sir,
and in some months the duration of outages has gone up.
Mr. Espaillat. Have service complaints increased from your
customers?
Mr. Stensby. The calls that we receive have absolutely
increased, and I believe that is fundamentally because we are
actually beginning to make a difference, and people are now
reporting issues in order for us to correct them.
Mr. Espaillat. So, you are saying that outages have
decreased, while service complaints have increased? Usually, it
is the other way around. Usually service complaints increase
when you have problems, when you have outages and service
disruptions. But what you are saying is that service complaints
have decreased--rather, that the outages have decreased, and
service complaints have increased.
Mr. Stensby. What I am saying, Congressman, is that with
PREPA, I think people had a certain level of expectation. And
now that LUMA has arrived, those expectations have risen, and
people are indeed engaging with us, and they are beginning to
see some action. We are replacing more poles, we are improving
services. And that in itself is causing increased calls and
interest in its hopes, or it is helping people understand that
we can and we are making a difference.
Mr. Espaillat. So, are you saying that responsiveness to
these complaints have declined, or have increased?
Mr. Stensby. I am saying the responsiveness has increased.
We just completed our most recent JD Power survey, and customer
satisfaction is actually slightly up from before June 1.
Mr. Espaillat. Mr. Chairman, for the record, I just want to
state that our records and our office have received information
to show that, in fact, customer service complaints have
increased, and responsiveness to the complaints have declined.
Now I have another question, which is regarding the
renewable energy transition. Reports provided to my office show
that PREPA has experienced multiple delays in the Energy
Bureau's IRP and resulting RFP schedule for procuring large
amounts of solar power battery storage. Are you aware of this
issue, and what has been causing the delays in PREPA's purpose
procurement process? This is for PREPA.
Mr. Gil. Sir, Congressman Espaillat, actually, in terms of
an answer to relate this question to the PREB, in that sense,
but we have the obligation, actually, to present the problem to
the PREB, and once the PREB authorizes, we can go out,
actually, and procure those.
In terms of any statement or anything, the PREB that is
actually one of the witnesses can attest better to that.
Mr. Espaillat. Well, what is the cause for these delays, in
your opinion?
Mr. Gil. Sir, I mean, in terms of what we seen here, there
might be a delay of a couple of weeks or something, but it is
not a delay of years, or withholding projects for years. It
might be something procedural. I mean, it can be regarding,
obviously, the person, and how they are handling things. But in
that sense, I feel comfortable with the pace that we have right
now. That first RFP already notified--or the line of people
that can basically can get a contract, it might go to 12.
And, obviously, next week actually, we will issue the
second one, and so forth. So, it is about keeping that rhythm,
and into that direction in order for us to be able to produce
the public policy goals of that 40 percent for 2025----
Mr. Espaillat. Mr. Chairman, let me just, for the record,
state my concern regarding these delays, and the potential that
other interests may be involved in causing these long-standing
delays. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Let me now ask once
again if Representative Tiffany or Representative McClintock,
Minority side, if they are present, either/or can be
recognized.
[Pause.]
The Chairman. If not, let me go to the gentleperson from
California, Chair of this Committee's Oversight and
Investigations.
Chair Porter, you are recognized.
Ms. Porter. Thank you so much. We are here to talk about a
coal ash plant run by LUMA. And I have a picture of it here,
and you can see a mountain of coal ash right here. And, spoiler
alert, it is highly toxic, and poisoning residents of the
nearby community of Guayama.
[Slide.]
Ms. Porter. Mr. Stensby, you are here today. And despite
concerns about staffing and competence that my colleagues and I
had earlier this summer, and still have, LUMA began operating
Puerto Rico's electricity system, called a grid, on June 1. We
are glad that you took Congress up on its invitation to appear
today and testify this time.
I wanted to ask you, how would you characterize LUMA's
transition to managing Puerto Rico's electrical grid so far,
with 1 being a total disaster and 10 being a remarkable
success?
Mr. Stensby. I think, as I set out, Congresswoman, it has
certainly been a challenging transition. There have been many
factors at play.
But when I look at it on balance, I would give us a B. I
think we have a lot to do.
Ms. Porter. OK, so 1 to 10, you would give yourself, like,
a 6?
Mr. Stensby. I would give us a 7, considering what we----
Ms. Porter. A 7, OK. How many blackouts--I know this has
been covered, but how many blackouts have been reported since
LUMA took over on June 1?
Mr. Stensby. The system has a very large number of outages,
Congresswoman, both before and after----
Ms. Porter. Can you count them? Is it so big you can't even
keep track of them all?
Mr. Stensby. There are outages every single day,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Porter. Every single day. So, if you are having trouble
doing this, and there are voltage spikes, destroyed appliances,
house fires, complaints about customer service, why should LUMA
be allowed to continue to manage the plant, if it is not
actually delivering electricity?
Mr. Stensby. Two things. I want to be very clear. The
picture that you showed, LUMA has nothing to do with the AES
coal plant. Our job is to operate the electric system.
Ms. Porter. Do you not get energy from this plant that you
then move along the grid?
Mr. Stensby. Puerto Rico receives energy from that plant,
yes.
Ms. Porter. And then you move it along the grid.
Mr. Stensby. That energy is flowed through the grid to
customers, yes.
Ms. Porter. OK. I want to talk about customer service. How
many customer service reps did you have on June 1?
Mr. Stensby. I don't have the exact number, but we----
Ms. Porter. How many today?
Mr. Stensby. Sorry?
Ms. Porter. You have a large number of customer service
reps, which is good, because you have a large number of
blackouts. How many customer service reps do you have today?
Mr. Stensby. We have more than 350 agents. And, in
addition, many more people that are customer service people.
Ms. Porter. And how many experienced linemen do you have
today?
Mr. Stensby. I think, as I described earlier----
Ms. Porter. Nine hundred?
Mr. Stensby. The way that PREPA would describe them, we
have more than 900 people in the field today.
Ms. Porter. OK. I want to turn to--last hearing we had a
witness describing that his aunt is dead, his wife and daughter
might be dying. A doctor testified about terrible illnesses. Is
the AES plant worth running, in your opinion, given the lost
lives and serious illnesses?
Mr. Stensby. As I say, I think the conversation about AES
is not a conversation for LUMA. LUMA's job is to transform the
transmission and distribution system, Congressman.
Ms. Porter. Are you equally able to transmit energy that
comes from renewable sources?
Mr. Stensby. Yes. And I think, as I testified earlier,
Congresswoman, we have been working hard to reduce the waiting
and connecting new renewable resources as we speak.
Ms. Porter. So, you commit to doing everything in your
power to transition to renewables?
Mr. Stensby. We are very supportive of renewables.
Ms. Porter. Do you think Puerto Rico is on track to meet
its renewable goals?
Mr. Stensby. Once again, I think it is important that
people understand. LUMA's role is to operate the transmission
and distribution system, and rebuild that system. Many of your
questions are perhaps better for----
Ms. Porter. Sorry. We heard testimony today that you are
delaying ready-to-go rooftop solar and storage installations,
and there is a backlog of these systems that are still waiting
to be connected. Why is that, if you are so committed to clean
energy?
Mr. Stensby. No, I think that is a mischaracterization. I
think my testimony actually said we are accelerating those
systems. We are moving at seven times the pace that they were
being moved out before we came into operation.
We are confident there will be no backlog by the end of the
year, and we just posted hosting maps on our website to support
more renewables.
Ms. Porter. How long do you think it will be until LUMA can
deliver the energy in a consistent and reliable way, with
blackouts that are comparable to what we see in the United
States, and what you saw at your prior employer?
Mr. Stensby. I believe that it is going to take many years
to transform all of Puerto Rico's electric system. It is going
to require the FEMA funding, and it requires a complete
overhaul. It took decades to get where we are today, and it is
going to get better month by month by month. But, frankly, it
is going to take many years to get a world-class electric
system here in Puerto Rico.
Ms. Porter. Thank you, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields.
Representative Gonzalez-Colon, is there any Member on your
side of the dais that wishes to be recognized?
Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Not at this time, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. Let me just go over some quick
questions and a comment.
Mr. Stensby, according to economic analysis and experts at
the University of Puerto Rico, the cost of electricity is one
of the expenses straining most Puerto Rican citizens and small
businesses. When can we expect--and it follows up with a
question--that LUMA's control of PREPA's transmission and
distribution system is going to lead to a reduced cost,
increase reliability for service for the consumers and the
people of Puerto Rico? When is the end game on this?
Mr. Stensby. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And what I want to
say is, we submitted our plans to the PREB, and the PREB has
approved those investment plans.
I do believe it will get better each and every month. But,
as I said, it is going to take a number of years for that
overall reliability, through reinvestment, to get the system
here in Puerto Rico to what many people in the mainland United
States would expect from their power system.
The Chairman. Thank you. This next question is for Mr.
Fontanes or Mr. Laboy.
Will LUMA be the sole control of the $9.5 billion Federal
cost share payment that FEMA will provide for rebuilding the
grid? That is one question.
Also, will LUMA be able, on their own, to select off-island
contractors, such as their parent company or other affiliates,
to complete the work to modernize the grid?
Mr. Laboy. So, Mr. Chairman, for the first question, it is
very important to state that the only administrator and the
recipient of the Federal funds obligated by FEMA for the
permanent work for the electrical grid is the COR3. We are the
responsible entity. It is stated in the FEMA state agreements,
according to the Stafford Act and Federal regulations, and we
are the entity that is responsible to manage and----
The Chairman. So, effectively, LUMA cannot make those kinds
of contracting decisions, all that, without your concurrence,
right?
Mr. Laboy. Every project which needs to be approved by
FEMA----
The Chairman. No, I'm saying they want to hire a
contractor, it has to come to you. Is it your approval that
drives that, or not? That is my question.
Mr. Laboy. LUMA and PREPA have to follow the procurement
requirements according to Federal, local, and state. And when
we receive a reimbursement request, we verify and validate that
each project has been procured according to Federal, state, and
local requirements, and we validate 100 percent, according to
those FEMA requirements.
The Chairman. Yes, as we conclude the meeting, let me just
thank the witnesses, thank the Members for their questions.
Many of the questions that I had developed were asked by other
Members and redundancy is not something we want to encourage.
But I do want to say a couple of things that were made, and
I think Members made the point. I think somebody said that the
issue of what happened with the grid and the power loss, the
blackouts in Texas during the winter, was as a result of trying
to green the energy grids too soon.
Well, other, more informed conclusions, were that it was a
fully privatized energy delivery system, unregulated and with
limited oversight and control on the part of the state
government. And I certainly wouldn't want the Federal
Government, with the investment that it is making to the Puerto
Rican people, to be in the position, as the Texas Legislature
and their administration are, of not providing oversight and,
essentially, deregulating their energy distribution system,
which many--I believe--caused the outages.
But, anyway, the other point that was made today is that I
think we need some answers on the two questions, the earmark
issue for rooftop and storage, for individuals and for
neighborhoods regarding renewable energy, and the development
of those microgrids to deal with that. I think we need to look
at that, and follow up with FEMA as to the ability to indicate
that.
And further, look at the contract--at the agreement--with
LUMA and PREPA, and all the responsible parties. I think that
needs to be looked at much deeper, and some questions came up
today.
The issue is reliability and dealing with the urgency of
having reliable power to the consumers in Puerto Rico, period.
Nobody denies that. And there is going to have to be some
patches. There has to be some corrections, some improvements,
some repairs in order to guarantee that during that transition.
But transition is the goal. It is the goal under public law
in Puerto Rico, and it is the goal under the present
Administration in the White House. And as such, I think
accountability and transparency with this contract is
essential, so that we don't get into foot dragging, we don't
get into double dealing, and we don't get into preferences that
take away from meeting that transition goal, because I think
you can do both, chew gum and walk. And to constantly use the
excuse of a system that is not up to standards, which we all
know, as the reasons we can't make the transition, I think, is
a false choice.
So, we are going to follow up. Members have indicated some
follow-ups around investigative issues. And also, in terms of
FEMA and the other issue, we will be forwarding to LUMA some
specific requests, in terms of information. In the past, they
have said that it is proprietary, and they cannot provide it to
Congress. We will issue that. We hope they are responsive. If
they are not, then we will proceed to the next step to compel
that information to come forward.
With that, let me thank all the witnesses, thank my
colleague, the Ranking Member, Miss Gonzalez-Colon.
The meeting is adjourned. Thank you very much.

[Whereupon, at 3:43 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
AES PUERTO RICO
October 6, 2021

AES Puerto Rico, L.P. (AES-PR) appreciates the opportunity to
provide an update on significant developments since the Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee's June 30, 2021 hearing and to once again
share with the House Committee on Natural Resources (``Committee'')
that it supports a responsible transition to renewable energy in Puerto
Rico.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Comments of AES Puerto Rico Submitted to the House Natural
Resources Committee (June 30, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To be clear: AES-PR is committed to a responsible and orderly
transition from baseload coal-fueled power to renewable energy. This
transition can be achieved with state-of-the-art solar power and
battery storage before the coal-powered plant is scheduled to close at
the end of 2027, while ensuring the reliability of the grid and
respecting AES-PR's contract rights. Indeed, as recent power outages
across Puerto Rico have shown again,\2\ Puerto Rico must have
sufficient, reliable baseload electricity generating resources to
provide electricity or risk continuously disrupted life across the
island.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ E.g., The Weekly Journal, ``PREPA Assessing Damages to Unit 6
in Costa Sur,'' (Sept. 27, 2021) (available at https://
www.theweeklyjournal.com/online--features/prepa-assessing-damages-to-
unit-6-in-costa-sur/article_4905178a-0ce8-11ec-a9f5-5b7ab3711e76.html).

The AES Corporation. AES-PR is an affiliate of The AES Corporation
(``AES''), a global company that provides reliable, affordable, and
sustainable energy in 14 countries in the Americas, Asia, and Europe.
AES' portfolio includes solar, wind, hydro, natural gas, and coal, as
well as energy solutions such as smart distribution networks and
battery energy storage systems. AES operates more than 30,000 MW and is
the global leader in utility scale energy storage.
AES is taking real steps to accelerate a more sustainable energy
future. In the past five years, AES has added tens of thousands of
megawatts of renewable capacity and reduced by more than 10,500 MW its
oil and coal capacity. In 2020, AES achieved (early) its goal to reduce
electricity generation from coal in its portfolio to less than 25% and
has set a new goal to reduce that to 10% by 2025 and achieve net zero-
carbon emissions from electricity globally by 2040.

AES Puerto Rico. AES-PR was selected by the government of Puerto
Rico in 1994 to build a new coal-fueled power plant to modernize the
island's ailing fleet. AES-PR invested $800 million to construct a 510
MW plant, including state-of-the art emission controls approved by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. In operation since 2002, AES-PR's
thermal power plant reliably supplies up to 25% of the island's
electricity every day.
Under AES-PR's Power Purchase and Operating Agreement (PPOA) with
the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA), AES-PR is Puerto
Rico's lowest cost baseload power provider and has saved consumers
billions of dollars in energy costs over the past two decades. AES-PR
has also funded, designed, developed, and now operates AES Ilumina, a
20 MW utility-scale solar generation facility. Launched in 2012, AES
Ilumina was at the time the largest Caribbean solar energy project, and
the first large-scale solar power plant connected to PREPA. Today, AES-
PR provides direct and indirect employment to more than 700 people.
1. AES-PR is committed to a responsible, orderly transition from
baseload coal-fueled power to renewable energy before 2027.

AES-PR supports Puerto Rico's goal to achieve 100% renewable power
generation by 2050, as well as responsible efforts to accelerate that
transition before 2027 through investments in renewable energy. AES-PR
has already outlined to Puerto Rico officials concrete solutions that
would achieve a responsible transition of the 500+ MW of baseload
energy produced from coal to renewable energy and battery storage,
without interrupting the reliable electricity that AES-PR provides
today. AES-PR has proposed to replace the energy from coal-fueled
generation with brand new, state-of-the-art solar facilities with
battery storage. The new facilities would include the Maverick 5B
technology,\3\ which uses 50% less land than a traditional solar
project and can be built three times faster than other solar resources.
This is a resilient and proven technology, able to withstand Category 4
hurricanes. As the renewable resources come online, electricity
produced from coal would be systematically reduced, while the plant
would remain available to ensure grid reliability during emergencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.aes.com/5b-and-aes-unfold-power-solar-energy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AES can help Puerto Rico achieve this transition by working
together with PREPA and Puerto Rico to enter into a revised agreement
that is in accordance with the existing contractual rights and
responsibilities under the current PPOA. PREPA's previous leadership
had raised concerns about entering into a revised PPOA, but Puerto Rico
Law 17-2019, Article 4.11 expressly promotes an early transition of
AES-PR's coal-fueled power to new generating assets through a revised
PPOA. Moreover, there is increasing support for this sensible approach.
On October 4, 2021, Puerto Rico Governor Pedro Pierluisi publicly
recognized that AES-PR is ready to convert its thermal plant to another
source of energy, and he has directed PREPA's new leadership to carry
out the negotiations needed to accelerate the transition of AES-PR
before 2027. Likewise, the Financial Oversight and Management Board for
Puerto Rico (FOMB) recently concluded--as already was clear from the
plain text of Article 4.11--that PREPA has the discretion to enter into
negotiations for a revised PPOA, and that FOMB would review any new
agreement reached to ensure it is fiscally sound. The Governor's and
FOMB's supportive statements spell good news for the people of Puerto
Rico: once an agreement between PREPA and AES-PR is reached, AES-PR's
transition to renewable energy resources can be completed in less than
two years.
2. AES-PR has been a reliable supplier of low-cost electricity--and
will continue to make its best efforts to support Puerto Rico
during the current energy generation shortfall.

When Puerto Rico has most needed electricity, AES-PR has been
available to provide reliable low-cost baseload power.\4\ The same is
true during today's energy crisis in Puerto Rico, during which AES-PR
will make best efforts to ensure it continues to serve the island
safely and reliably.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ AES-PR was available shortly after Hurricane Maria, long before
many other resources. Following the 2019/2020 earthquakes on the
island, AES-PR was the first large-scale electricity generation
resource to be 100% available.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The current crisis is simply the result of a shortage of reliable
electricity generation. Over the past several months, key units within
the PREPA system have had technical failures. That has forced the units
offline and compelled PREPA to interrupt service, because it lacked
sufficient reliable generating capacity to step in for the out-of-
service units.\5\ Throughout this crisis, the AES-PR thermal power
plant has continued to supply approximately 25% of the island's
electricity. Just as importantly, it has provided power reliably, with
one of the lowest forced outage rates on the island.\6\ However, the
current energy generation crisis on the island is stretching the
thermal plant to its limits. Like any thermal power plant, AES-PR's two
units and associated equipment require regular maintenance to ensure
reliable service. As such, especially for larger units, maintenance
outages are scheduled well in advance to allow personnel to safely
inspect, repair, and replace equipment. AES-PR was due to begin a long-
scheduled, maintenance outage on September 25, 2021, but upon LUMA/
PREPA's urgent request,\7\ AES-PR deferred that maintenance to ensure
Puerto Ricans have power during the current crisis. LUMA/PREPA has
asked AES-PR to delay the maintenance until at least January 2022. AES-
PR is working with LUMA/PREPA to select an optimal time to perform the
maintenance without compromising grid reliability and operational
safety.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The Weekly Journal, ``More Selective Blackouts Over Low Energy
Generation,'' (Sept. 30, 2021) (available at https://
www.theweeklyjournal.com/online--features/more-selective-blackouts-
over-low-energy-generation/article_00808a5a-222b-11ec-bc58-
c352b791ebd3.html).
\6\ The ``forced outage rate'' measures the percentage of time a
unit suddenly stops working, and thus, a lower forced outage rate means
a more reliable unit that is available to provide electricity. The two
AES-PR thermal units have a forced outage rate of 3%--comparable PREPA-
owned units face forced outage rates of 18-20%.
\7\ This is not the first time PREPA has asked AES-PR to defer
maintenance. AES-PR was so critical to the grid in 2020 that PREPA
asked the company to postpone scheduled maintenance and keep its
thermal plant online. Without AES-PR, many Puerto Ricans would have
been without power, because PREPA had no alternative resource.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet, deferring maintenance is not a long-term solution to the
energy crisis in Puerto Rico. Rather, these power outages across Puerto
Rico have reaffirmed that it is essential that the people of Puerto
Rico have reliable baseload resources over the long run to provide
electricity, including while the island moves forward to meet the
Puerto Rico legislature's direction to transition to renewable sources
of energy, or risk continuously disrupted life across the island.
Without such capacity and without an orderly transition, we would
expect the cost of electricity to rise, environmental impacts to
increase (when PREPA is compelled to turn to unreliable and higher
emitting oil-fueled power to try to meet demand), and Puerto Rico to
face even more significant power outages, leaving many without
electricity.

*****

AES-PR appreciates the Committee's interest in attempting to
accelerate Puerto Rico's transition to renewable energy and modernizing
the electrical grid. As part of AES--one of the most important
renewable energy developers in the world with more than 40 years of
global experience developing, operating and innovating safe and
reliable energy solutions--AES-PR is ready to contribute our expertise
and knowledge to the energy transition in Puerto Rico. AES's experience
supporting countries pursuing similar energy transitions, has taught
the importance of ensuring that transitions are done in an orderly and
responsible manner, and of having the necessary investments, not only
in renewable energy, but also in other key links in the electricity
supply chain.
AES-PR is confident that Puerto Rico is ready to accelerate this
transition and that we can be a part of this process. Done responsibly,
this transition could reduce the cost of electricity in Puerto Rico and
contribute directly to the island's sustainability and climate change
goals, while helping to drive economic growth. AES-PR believes that all
parties would welcome the constructive engagement of this Committee to
help us achieve this goal. AES-PR looks forward to continuing to work
productively with the Committee on this matter.

______

CAMBIO PR

Sierra Club of Puerto Rico

El Puente

UTIER (Union of Electrical and Irrigation Industry Workers)

October 14, 2021

Dear Chairman Grijalva and members of the Natural Resources
Committee:

During the October 6th House Natural Resources Committee hearing,
many questions were raised about the lack of renewable energy in Puerto
Rico's electrical mix and the possibility of using FEMA grid
reconstruction funds to further the integration of greater amounts of
renewable energy.

We are writing to clarify the importance of distinguishing between
rooftop solar and utility-scale solar. Rooftop solar in Puerto Rico
enjoys several key advantages over utility-scale renewable energy:

Reducing dependence on the long-distance transmission
system. Currently, two-thirds of Puerto Rico's power
generation capacity is along the south coast and about two-
thirds of the population lives in the north. Thus, the
island is highly dependent on a south-to north transmission
system through the mountains, which failed catastrophically
during Hurricane Maria.

The widespread dissemination of rooftop solar and storage,
especially in the San Juan metropolitan area, has the
potential to largely eliminate power imports into the
metropolitan area, greatly reducing the vulnerability of
the system.\1\ Utility-scale renewable energy cannot
provide this benefit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Telos Energy. Puerto Rico Distributed Energy Resource
Integration Study. December 2020.

A less expensive way to provide resiliency. Properly
installed rooftop solar and storage systems are a proven
resiliency solution in Puerto Rico; they kept the lights on
after Hurricane Maria, while tens of thousands of island
residents waited six months to a year for the lights to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
come back on.

Instead of investing massively in rooftop solar and storage
solutions for resiliency, however, PREPA proposed to the
Puerto Rico Energy Bureau to improve the resiliency of the
grid by hardening the transmission system and creating
eight ``mini-grids'' across the island designed to isolate
from each other in the event of a severe storm. The
transmission investment required to do this work was
estimated at $5.9 billion.\2\ Utility-scale renewable
energy provides no resiliency benefits and therefore would
rely on these sorts of expensive and unproven grid-
hardening proposals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Puerto Rico Energy Bureau. Final Resolution and Order on the
Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority's Integrated Resource Plan. Case
No. CEPR-AP-2018-0001. August 24, 2020. paragraph 717.

By contrast, the amount of distribution work needed to upgrade
the grid to support the widespread integration of rooftop
solar and storage--specifically 75% distributed renewable
energy penetration by 2035--is estimated at only $650
million.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Energy Futures Group. Puerto Rico Distributed Energy Resource
Integration Study: Load, Energy Efficiency and System Cost. February
2021.

A better use of land. Unlike many regions of the United
States, Puerto Rico does not have large expanses of land
available for renewable energy development. And given that
the island also imports more than 90% of its food, land for
agricultural use should not compete with land for energy
development. By contrast, rooftop solar and storage make
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
use of available roof spaces that are not being utilized.

Less expensive than current electric rates. Puerto Rico's
residential electric rate is about 24 cents/kWh--and
rising, due to increasing fossil fuel prices. According to
the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, a customer can go
off-grid and generate their own electricity via a rooftop
solar and battery system for less than the current rate.\4\
In other words, rooftop solar and storage is an
economically viable alternative in Puerto Rico--for those
customers who can afford the upfront cost or financing
cost.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority. Puerto Rico Integrated
Resource Plan, Appendix 4: Demand Side Resources. June 2019.

Recent grid modeling studies commissioned by CAMBIO PR
demonstrate that using a portion of the available federal
funds to invest in rooftop solar and storage island-wide to
achieve 75% distributed renewable energy by 2035 would
result in a stable average rate of approximately 15 cents/
kWh, or nearly 40% below current residential rates.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Energy Futures Group. Puerto Rico Distributed Energy Resource
Integration Study: Load, Energy Efficiency and System Cost. February
2021.

Less investment required in the distribution system to
integrate the same quantity of renewable energy. As noted
previously, comprehensive grid modeling studies have
demonstrated that Puerto Rico could integrate 75%
distributed renewable energy--including equipping every
home on the island with a solar and battery storage
system--with only modest investment ($650 million) in the
distribution system and no additional investment in the
transmission system, beyond what is needed under any
circumstance to bring the grid up to basic safety code. The
grid investments needed to integrate distribute renewable
energy are relatively modest because the location of
electric generation near the point of consumption minimizes
use of the distribution system.\6\ By contrast, integrating
an equivalent amount of utility-scale renewable energy
would result in significantly larger investments in the
transmission and distribution systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ EE Plus. Puerto Rico Distribution Modeling. March 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For these reasons, we strongly urge the Committee to ensure that
rooftop solar and storage systems are a priority for federal funding in
order to rebuild a truly resilient and more affordable electrical
system in Puerto Rico.

Sincerely,

CAMBIO PR
Sierra Club of Puerto Rico
El Puente
UTIER (Union of Electrical and Irrigation Industry Workers)

______

INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS

Washington, DC 20001

October 5, 2021

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking Member,
Natural Resources Committee,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

On behalf of the more than 775,000 active and retired members of
the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW), I am
writing in regards to the upcoming hearing on the Puerto Rico Electric
Power Authority (PREPA). As you are aware, the electric power
infrastructure of Puerto Rico is in a state of disrepair due to years
of neglect that Hurricanes Irma and Maria tragically exacerbated in
2017. While there is no overnight fix for this situation, I am
confident that the IBEW can play a key role in its restoration with our
members' skills, expertise, and training.
The IBEW has partnered with LUMA Energy, which maintains the power
infrastructure in the commonwealth, and signed the first collective
bargaining agreement at the utility in more than a decade. With it, the
IBEW will ensure a skilled, professionalized workforce that will
finally lead to the energy transformation in Puerto Rico. Additionally,
the IBEW and LUMA have reached a project labor agreement that
guarantees any utilization of federal funding will only be executed by
qualified IBEW members earning fair wages under local hire provisions.
This will ensure that the community-sustaining benefits of union
careers stay in Puerto Rico. The PLA framework also assures that
federal funds will be effectively spent on transforming the electricity
system, not wasted on temporary, inadequate fixes by under-trained
technicians.
After years of underinvestment, delivering Puerto Rico's modern,
sustainable, world-class energy system requires a successful
partnership between the utility and its workers. Shortcuts will only
result in further failure. The IBEW's continued collaboration is a
major first step in the energy infrastructure's transformation, and our
members appreciate your support for this critical effort.

Sincerely yours,

Lonnie R. Stephenson,
International President

______

WINDMAR GROUP

October 12, 2021

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking Member,
Natural Resources Committee Members and Staff,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Unsolicited comments on the problems residential and small
commercial customers of PREPA/LUMA are having and how the
Congress of the United States could help

Dear Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman and Members of the
House Committee on Natural Resources:

As has been widely reported, the Puerto Rico electric grid is
unable to provide reliable, affordable, resilient and clean electric
energy.
At the recently concluded hearings, you heard from some but not all
the Puerto Rican electric sector stakeholders. I would like to share
with you these unsolicited comments from a Puerto Rican businessman.
I have been a participant of renewable energy projects in Puerto
Rico since 1978. I have had success with some and failure with
others.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Windmar Group, a local renewable energy company, has installed
over 10,000 solar (``PV'') plus storage (``BESS'') residential and
small business systems since Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto Rico in
September 2017. In the last 12 years, Windmar Group has developed over
100MW of PV solar and installed over 150MWh of battery storage systems.
Currently, we employ over 1,000 men and women. The Windmar Training
Center graduates 40 new employees every month. For many of them,
installing residential solar systems is their first job.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, the role of a regulated grid to provide electric service
to a residential or small business \2\ client is not exclusive. Solar
(``PV'') plus storage (``BESS'') provides the reliable, resilient,
affordable and clean energy we all aspire to.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Puerto Rico as of May 2021 had 1,348,097 Residential customers.
They are responsible for 42% of the electricity sold. Most residential
clients and small commercial clients in Puerto Rico have enough roof
space on their homes and buildings to deploy the solar panels they need
to self-generate the electricity they consume.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
What is making possible the growth of residential solar and how the US
Congress could help?

The realization by lenders that a long-term, typically 20 years,
loan to finance a PV solar and BESS system to a residential customer
with a FICO score above 650 \3\ is a safe bet has been a game changer.
The loan payment for such a system is less than the electric bill for
the electricity the system provides. Furthermore, the BESS avoids the
extra expenses for spoiled food and medicine or back-up generation when
the grid goes out.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The average FICO score is Puerto Rico is 678.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As Hurricane Maria demonstrated, by adding storage to the PV, the
PV asset is no longer stranded; guaranteeing the consumer continued
electricity supply. Thus, ensuring quality of life of the consumer and
providing the revenue to pay for the system.
While PREPA, LUMA, FOMB, COR3, and PREB go back and forth not
getting much done, tens of thousands of Puerto Rican households have
switched to PV+BESS systems. They currently generate for self-
consumption more electrical energy than the existing utility scale
solar installations provide to the grid. It only takes a day to install
5kW of panels and a battery at a house. Thousands of Puerto Rican
workers hit the road every day installing thousands of systems every
month.
If you want to help, there are a few easy fixes to the existing
federal renewable energy incentives and loan guarantee programs that
could facilitate and accelerate the residential and particularly the
small business rollout of PV+BESS.
First, amend the ITC to extend a cash in lieu of the ITC (Section
1603 of ARRA) or to provide Direct Pay to Puerto Rican taxpayers.
Currently, only US taxpayers can capture the ITC from the PV+BESS
systems that are installed in Puerto Rico. The tax equity by-pass to
capture the ITC does not work for small installations.
Second, provide loan guarantees to small business to entice lenders
to provide 20-year financing. Currently financial institutions provide
only 7 to 10-year commercial loans to small businesses.
Third, provide a payment guarantee for 85% of the loan to
residential customers with FICO scores below 650.
Lastly, the US Congress can put a carbon tax on the LNG, coal and
oil that is imported into Puerto Rico. The funds collected can be used
to pay the PREPA unfunded pension liability and the money owned to the
bond holders. No need for a SOLAR TAX to pay the legacy debts of PREPA.

Sincerely,

Victor L. Gonzalez,
President

______

Submissions for the Record by Hon. Javier A. Aponte Dalmau, Majority
Speaker, Puerto Rico Senate

Senado

Estado Libre Asociado De Puerto Rico

San Juan, Puerto Rico

October 5, 2021

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Natural Resources Committee,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Re: Energy Crisis in Puerto Rico

Dear Chairman Grijalva:

On September of 2017, the electric system of Puerto Rico suffered a
devastating blow when the Island was hit by Hurricane Maria. Most
Puerto Ricans were without electric power for several months. In the
aftermath of the hurricane, the Government of Puerto Rico enacted Law
120-2018 to implement a new public policy in favor of the privatization
of our electric system.
Later, on June 22, 2020, a contract entitled ``Puerto Rico
Transmission and Distribution System Operation and Maintenance
Agreement'' was signed between the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority
(PREPA) (owner), the Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority
(Administrator), Luma Energy, LLC. (management operator) and Luma
Energy ServCo, LLC (service operator).
The terms of said contract, as well as the irregular and deficient
transition process, was controversial and the legislature of Puerto
Rico proposed legislation to postpone the implementation of the
agreement in response to the requests of our constituents.
Unfortunately, the Governor vetoed the initiative and falsely
argued that Luma Energy was ready to the assume its contractual
responsibilities.
On January 28th, 2021 the Senate of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
ordered the Committee of Energy and Special projects to carry out a
legislative inquiry into the terms, scope and implementation of the
contract subscribed between the local Government and Puma Energy PR,
LLC. Energy PR, LLC. (S.R. 1). As part of that process, on June 28th,
2021 the Committee issued a preliminary report listing several
disturbing findings (enclosure). However, the legislative process has
been disrupted by Luma's refusal to comply with several orders of the
Supreme Court of Puerto Rico to provide documents and information to
the legislative committees with jurisdiction in this matter.
It should be noted that, despite the fact that the contract
assigned Luma Energy the responsibility over the transmission and
distribution of energy, it also allowed Luma to create a subsidiary to
provide energy generation services (Shared Services Agreements). In
that case, Luma would be in position to control the entire energy
operation in Puerto Rico. That is particularly troublesome if we
consider that the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
allocated close to 9 billion dollars for the renovation of our energy
generation grid.
In other words, with the blessing of the Financial Oversight and
Management Board created by the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management and
Economic Stability Act of 2016, the local government transferred a
public monopoly into private hands using federal funds. We are
concerned that policy decision and the possibility of Shared Service
Agreements could jeopardize the much needed resources if FEMA
reconsider its allocation by virtue of the provisions of the Stafford
Act, Public Law 100-707.
Even worse, since Luma Energy took over the operation from the
Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority few months ago, the condition of
our electric system has deteriorated dramatically. In sum, under Luma,
constant power outages and several tariff increases have become a daily
reminder of a failed policy and a permanent hurdle for all Puerto
Ricans and our languished economy.
According to the Executive Director of the Public-Private
Partnership Agency, this aforementioned transaction was ``endorsed and
promoted by the federal government''.
Given these remarks, and the critical situation that we are facing,
it is of the utmost importance that the congressional committee that
you chair assume immediate jurisdiction to assess the energy policy in
Puerto Rico and its implementation.

With nothing further,

Javier A. Aponte Dalmau,
Portavoz de la Mayoria.

*****

Attachment: Senate Resolution 1, First Partial Report, dated June 28,
2021

This document is part of the hearing record and is being retained in
the Committee's official files. Available at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II00/20211006/114107/HHRG-117-II00-
20211006-SD003.pdf

______

Submissions for the Record by Hon. Luis Raul Torres-Cruz, Puerto Rico
House of Representatives

CAMARA DE REPRESENTANTES

San Juan, Puerto Rico

September 30, 2021

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Natural Resources Committee,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Re: Transformation of the Electric System of Puerto Rico

Introduction
After more than four years of PREPA's bankruptcy, under the advice
of the Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico (FOMB),
and the implementation of a privatization strategy promoted by the
Commonwealth Government, the electric system of Puerto Rico has become
more unreliable and costly than ever. The entities in charge of the
reconstruction of the electric system, including the Public Private
Partnerships Authority (P3A) and the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau (PREB),
do not have the necessary expertise to guide the system through its
transformation. Moreover, the recovery process after the hurricanes was
shrouded by obscure processes, such as the contracts with Whitefish and
Cobra, one of them resulting in criminal prosecution of former FEMA
officers and Cobra executives by the federal justice system. All of
these constitute good reasons for searching for a different approach to
achieve the transformation of Puerto Rico's electrical system.
Based on all the above, we respectfully come before you to request
your assistance in finding a sound alternative to achieve the
transformation of our electrical system. Notwithstanding, our concern
is whether Puerto Rico's needs can be addressed in a timely fashion
before the federal funds assigned for the reconstruction are used
contrary to the wellbeing of all residents of Puerto Rico. As we will
discuss, PREPA has signed a Transmission and Distribution System
Operation and Maintenance Agreement (The Agreement) with LUMA Energy,
LLC and LUMA ServCo, LLC. (Together known as LUMA.) that became
effective on June 1, 2021. The first three months of the contract have
shown that LUMA is ill prepared to operate the electric system and,
furthermore, it has the potential to hinder the economic growth in
Puerto Rico. We are confident that your commitment to the people of
Puerto Rico will move you to intervene in this matter.
It appears that a few months from now, any intervention from
Congress could be moot, since Puerto Rico is on the verge of executing
a great number of projects to reconstruct the electrical system, under
the present guidance of the FOMB, and maybe still influenced by
exogenous political influence that could result in arbitrary and non-
effective spending of federal funds. Even worse, LUMA will manage all
the projects and federal funds, through the Agreement.
We urge Congress to act immediately and take action to designate an
entity to oversee the transformation of Puerto Rico's electric system
as a project under its supervision, assuring that federal funds are
used efficiently and revisiting the laws and contracts, including the
Agreement, executed by PREPA and the Government of Puerto Rico to
prescribe the path to this transformation.
PREPA under PROMESA, FOMB, FEMA, and Related Others
On August 14, 2014, the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority
(PREPA) entered into a debt strategy agreement, the Forbearance
Agreement for PREPA, with owners and insurers of more than 60% of
PREPA's bonds and banks that have loaned PREPA monies to operate, since
it had failed to make required Bond Service and Redemption Accounts
deposits on July 25, 2014.
On July 2, 2017, the Puerto Rico Fiscal Agency and Financial
Advisory Authority (AAFAF) said PREPA had filed in the United States
District Court of Puerto Rico for protection under Title III of the
2016 Puerto Rico rescue law known as PROMESA, which gave the Government
of Puerto Rico, its agencies and instrumentalities, access to a workout
process akin to U.S. bankruptcy.
As we are writing, an unfair Restructuring Support Agreement (RSA)
is being questioned as filed, by other creditors, congressional members
and interested parties. Some parties are arguing for the appointment of
a trustee under Puerto Rico law or an independent, private sector firm
(IPSIG). In the past, the Financial Oversight and Management Board for
Puerto Rico (FOMB) tried to appoint a CEO, but this attempt to control
PREPA by the FOMB was rejected by the Title III Court.
Since PREPA first defaulted on July 25, 2014, it has paid more than
an estimated one billion dollars in consultants, legal representation
for both itself and the bondholders, as required by the agreements
reached between both parties.
Notwithstanding, PREPA's finances have not improved, even after
receiving millions of dollars from the federal government to rebuild
the electric system of the island. The costs related to the Agreement,
together with LUMA's incompetency, have caused PREPA's finances to
weaken to the point that the cost of energy will have risen to a 35%
during the last nine months if the latest submission for reconciliation
of the fuel and power purchase adjustments are approved by the PREB. At
this point, it is relevant to mention that a member of PREPA's
Governing Board and a former Executive Director have publicly
questioned the claims made by LUMA regarding this latest submission,
which if approved would represent an increase of 16.4% in the cost of
the kilowatt-hour.
We argue that PREPA's top management purposely delayed \1\ the
much-needed maintenance and reconstruction of the Transmission and
Distribution System and Energy Production System, in order to justify
the privatization of the public corporation and to fulfill a promise
made during the political campaign of 2016, reaffirmed by former
governor Ricardo Rossello on January 2018, later implemented by former
governor Wanda Vazquez, and vehemently defended by governor Pedro
Pierluisi, without apparent support of the actual facts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ An example of this can be found on page 10 of the 2020 PREPA
Fiscal Plan (the Fiscal Plan) certified on June 29, 2020 by the
Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico (FOMB), on
which it is stated that: ``At the end of FY2020, PREPA expects a $153
million surplus, driven by underspending in vegetation management and
necessary maintenance expenses.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A similar situation is occurring at the present time with the
generation system. Over half of the installed generation is not
available or limited, while the rest of the fleet is under-maintained.
This becomes obvious by looking at how the maintenance budget for the
generation system has been diminished consistently during the last
years. Moreover, this lack of compliance with the required conservation
of the generating units has caused several forced outages during the
past months, on top of outages due to failures in the transmission and
distribution system, which some say are a direct result of LUMA's lack
of ability and knowledge about Puerto Rico's electric system.
The non-compliance with the proper conservation of the generating
units is not a result of incompetence or lack of interest on the part
of PREPA's employees. Up to a few years ago, PREPA counted on highly
educated, skilled, and experienced professionals devoted to the public
corporation, but the interference of some politicians, going after
their political and personal benefit, ultimately ruined PREPA. This is
the primary root cause of PREPA's demise, as concluded by some
restructuring experts that were contracted for PREPA's restructuring
process.
The Puerto Rico Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) 2018-2019, prepared
by Siemens Industry, Inc. on February 12, 2019 (final draft submitted
for the approval of Puerto Rico Energy Bureau), contemplates (Section
8.3.1) 2,716 MW generation capacity additions from now until 2029. Not
even a 1 MW capacity has been added since 2019. Also, this IRP includes
the retirement of 2,905 MW capacity between now and 2028.
All of these happened under the supervision of the FOMB. Sadly,
after spending an estimated one billion dollars, there are no results
to show.
Under the advice of the FOMB, PREPA discarded several contracts for
utility scale renewable energy generation projects that were being
renegotiated and could have been ready to provide clean, economic, and
reliable energy to the island. Moreover, this would allow for the
definite retirement and decommission of the oil fueled generating
plants, some of which have been declared as Limited Use Units under the
Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) regulation.
As it is widespread known, in September 2017, the island was hit by
two major hurricanes, causing devastation, and causing a blackout
island wide. It took over a year for the electric system to be
restored, but not necessarily up to code, and definitely including no
improvements to the system. At the time of these hurricanes, PREPA was
working on implementing an Integrated Resource Plan (IRP), which had to
be rethought after the effects of the hurricanes.
Recently, the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau (PREB) approved a new IRP,
redefining the electric system of the island after considering the
impacts of the 2017 hurricanes. Nevertheless, this IRP was based on
unlikely scenarios not including a proper sensitivity analysis. This
could lead the island into investing the limited resources available,
on the wrong projects. This is why the intervention of Congress is
needed on a timely fashion.
LUMA Contract
As a result of the unlikely scenarios adopted by the Government of
Puerto Rico for the formulation of the IRP, a Transmission and
Distribution System Operation and Maintenance Agreement was executed
between PREPA, the Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority
(P3A), and LUMA (a new corporation formed by a consortium between
QUANTA Services, Inc. and ATCO Group).
As explained by the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial
Analysis (IEEFA), ``the contract with LUMA is not solely a T&D
operation and management agreement. The LUMA contract identifies a
scope of services that goes beyond management of PREPA's transmission
and distribution assets and gives LUMA responsibility for planning,
rate setting, asset management, budgeting, procurement, collections,
public relations and other financial matters. It is a full
privatization of PREPA's operational functions.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See: Contract Between Puerto Rico, LUMA Energy Sets up Full
Privatization, Higher Rates for Island Grid, page 10 https://ieefa.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Contract-with-LUMA-Energy-Sets-up-Full-
Privatization_Higher-Rates_October-2020.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Considering this analysis, some questions might come to mind. For
one, can the shell public corporation that will remain after the
reorganization of PREPA and the execution of the LUMA contract be
recipient of federal funds for the repair, restoration, and replacement
of damaged facilities? This question has not been specifically answered
to this day. According to the provisions of the Stafford Act, Sec. 406.
Repair, Restoration, and Replacement of Damaged Facilities (42 U.S.C.
5172), only state and local governments, and private non-profit
organizations that provide critical services are allowed to receive
contributions from the federal government for the repair, restoration,
reconstruction, or replacement of a facility damaged or destroyed by a
major disaster and for associated expenses.

This contract has several provisions that are contrary to the legal
framework and against the best interest of the people of Puerto
Rico.\3\ Some of those provisions are:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Idem.

According to publicly available documents, the projections
of the variables used to justify the Contract are overly
optimistic and fail to include a sensitivity analysis to
handle the uncertainty of important variables. PREB should
require the PREPA and P3A to perform a more complete
analysis to validate projections. Even with these
optimistic projections, LUMA has already requested an
increase in the electricity cost. This is proof that the
contract docs not provide for a reduction in the cost of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
electricity in Puerto Rico.

The Contract provides more protection to LUMA's interests
than to the public interest. It establishes conditions that
could lead to a conflict of interest, as LUMA could hire
its parent companies to carry out rehabilitation or
construction works for both transmission and distribution,
and generation.

The Contract stripped employees and PREPA retirees of the
rights acquired and earned over many years and jeopardizes
the subsistence of the retirement funding for pensions.

The Contract provides for the payment to LUMA of an
Incentive Fee in case the expected performance metrics are
exceeded for a particular year. However, it does not
establish penalties in the event that the expected metrics
are not reached. The metrics, as set out in Annex IX of the
Contract, are non-binding and are still under revision by
the PREB. Currently there are no metrics to adequately
supervise the performance of LUMA.

The Contract includes no adequate provisions as to
guarantee that the reconstruction projects performed by
LUMA will carried out in such a way that the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) will reimburse the money
invested.

LUMA is a newly created, limited liability corporation, so
the public interest must be protected through a Parent
Company Guarantee. We understand that the maximum warranty
amount of $105 million for the entire term of the Contract
is not sufficient when compared to other electricity
industry contracts that have been awarded in Puerto Rico.
Also, QUANTA Services reports to the Security and Exchange
Commission (SEC) reveal some red flags regarding the
financial stability of this parent company.

The process of drafting, awarding, and finalizing the
Contract was carried out without transparency. Nor was the
public interest, customers, employees, let alone retirees,
defended. This Agreement was treated as one of adhesion.
Today, after several court processes, LUMA still refuses to
comply with a court order mandating LUMA to provide the
information requested under a legislative investigation
being carried out by the House of Representatives of the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

The Contract is potentially bad for PREPA's customers,
employees, and retirees, and could hinder the goal of
providing a customer-centric system, with financial
viability, reliable and resilient, that is a sustainability
model, and that becomes the engine of Puerto Rico's
economic development.

The Contract, as proposed, takes away from the Government,
its main role in establishing social justice, promoting
programs to eliminate poverty, creating an adequate
environment of economic development and growth, and
establishing and implementing a sound public policy on
energy resources, given the geography of the island.

Conclusion
FEMA assigned approximately, $10.7 billion for the renovation and
restauration of the PREPA's Transmission and Distribution System
(T&DS). Management of these funds has been assigned to LUMA Energy, LLC
under the Agreement. This contract is not good for PREPA, nor for the
people of Puerto Rico. For example, the contract provides for LUMA's
parent companies, affiliates, and subsidiaries to be among the
contractors selected to perform the works for reconstructing the
Transmission and Distribution System. This would give LUMA, its parent
companies, and affiliates an unduly advantage due to the access to
privileged inside information, casting doubt and possible conflict of
interests on the management of the federal funds.
The above cited defects of the IRP and the LUMA contract, will
negatively impact and will constitute an obstacle to the economic
development of the island. This, in turn, will delay ending the
bankruptcy of the Government of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Also,
the IRP and the 10-Year Infrastructure Plan, which provides an overview
of PREPA's infrastructure investment strategy, must be revised under
the provisions of President Joseph R. Biden, Executive Order 14008 of
January 27, 2021 for Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad.
Therefore, LUMA contract must be annulled or substantially modified
to provide the right tools for the much-needed transformation of the
electrical system of Puerto Rico, in compliance with the Energy Public
Policy Law of Puerto Rico, requiring that 100 percent of the energy
demand on the island be generated from renewable energy sources, and to
promote the economic development needed to put an end to the
bankruptcy. Also, Congress should take action to appoint an
administrator or trustee to oversee the reconstruction of the electric
system.
The Commission I preside has conducted a thorough investigation of
the awarding, execution, and implementation of the LUMA contract.
Attached is a copy of the final report of this investigation.
My goal in writing this letter is to shed light upon the path
chosen by the Government of Puerto Rico and the FOMB for the
transformation of Puerto Rico's electric system, since this
transformation is vital to the livelihood of all Puerto Ricans.

Respectfully,

Luis Raul Torres Cruz,
Presidente

*****

Attachment: H.R. 136 Final Report, Dated May 11, 2021

This document is part of the hearing record and is being retained in
the Committee's official files. Available at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II00/20211006/114107/HHRG-117-II00-
20211006-SD001.pdf

______

Submissions for the Record by Ruth Santiago, Esq.

LUMA Energy Report

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

October 14, 2021

Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chairman,
Hon. Bruce Westerman, Ranking Member,
Natural Resources Committee,
1324 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

Supplemental Information for Hearing on the PREPA Post Implementation
of the LUMA Transmission and Distribution Contract

Dear Chair Grijalva and Members of the House Committee on Natural
Resources:

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the hearing regarding
PREPA Post Implementation of the LUMA Transmission and Distribution
Contract. In addition to the written testimony submitted on October 4,
2021, I submit this supplemental letter and the written comments of
David Sotomayor-Ramirez, Ph.D., Professor of Soil Science, University
of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, College of Agricultural Sciences titled, The
case for preserving agricultural land area in Puerto Rico and green-
energy projects. In his comments, Dr. Sotomayor highlights the
importance of preserving agricultural land in Puerto Rico in the
context of proposals to build utility scale renewable energy projects
on these important resources. The comments and graph show that Puerto
Rico lost approximately 70% of agricultural land-area between 1964 and
2018.
Other scholars have noted the importance of preserving agricultural
land in Puerto Rico noting that, ``Given the relatively small size and
mountainous terrain of Puerto Rico, innovation will be important to
keep key watersheds and mountain slopes forested, and to increase
sustainability and productivity on all working lands.'' Land Use,
Conservation, Forestry, and Agriculture in Puerto Rico, William A.
Gould, Frank H. Wadsworth, Maya Quinones, Stephen J. Fain and Nora L.
Alvarez-Berrios, Forests 2017, 8, 242; doi:10.3390/f8070242, http://
www.mdpi.com/journal/forests, P.14. The study further documents that,
``In recent decades, 14 percent of the island's prime agricultural land
has been converted to urban use through development, with arguably more
being restricted by non-agricultural uses, such as residential (lawns)
or recreational (golf courses) uses.'' Id, P.15. The authors coincide
with Dr. Sotomayor's comments on the importance of the preservation of
remaining agricultural land to ensure food security for future
generations.
Dr. Sotomayor's comments emphasize the advantages and the important
role of rooftop or on-site solar systems to preserve agricultural land
in Puerto Rico. However, as indicated in my written testimony dated
October 4, 2021, there is a backlog in interconnection of rooftop solar
and storage installations. LUMA Energy claims that it is addressing the
backlog however a document prepared by LUMA acknowledges that the
interconnections are incomplete. The attached document titled, Net
Metering Program Update indicates that, ``The Final completion of
projects and Service Agreement still awaits completion of remaining
steps in the Portal (Study, Supplemental Study, etc)'' Id, p.8. LUMA's
delays in completing interconnections and issuing the requisite Service
Agreements has a chilling effect on the deployment of rooftop solar in
Puerto Rico and aggravates the energy crisis.

Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions.

Sincerely,

Ruth Santiago,
Salinas, Puerto Rico

______

The Case for Preserving Agricultural Land Area in Puerto Rico and
Green-Energy Projects

David Sotomayor-Ramirez, Ph.D.
Professor of Soil Science
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez
College of Agricultural Sciences
PO Box 9000
Mayaguez, PR 00680-9000

14 October 2021

A major portion of this brief essay was taken from: Sotomayor-Ramirez,
D., G. Martinez, F. Garcia, G. Gouveia. 2021. Nutrient management for
sustainable agriculture in the Caribbean. In Preparation, to be
submitted to J. Agric. Univ. P.R.

Puerto Rico presents an interesting case scenario for current and
potential food production. After the 1950s, the island experienced a
dramatic structural transformation from an agricultural to an
industrial-based economy. The process involved population migration to
cities and a gradual abandonment of agricultural lands in rural areas
(Rudel et al., 2000; Lopez et al., 2001; Martinuzzi et al., 2006). For
example, in 1964 the agricultural land area was estimated at 1,595,866
acres and in 2018 at 474,332 acres (USDA-NASS, 2018) (Figure 1). This
dramatic reduction amounts to an agricultural land-area loss of about
70% of that in 1964. In the last five years Puerto Rico lost 94,534
acres, part of which was associated with inventory loss due to
Hurricanes Irma and Maria. The Puerto Rico 2015 Plan de Uso de Terrenos
(2015 PUT),\1\ separated near 636,000 acres of land area for
agricultural production. The current agricultural land-area inventory
suggests that a major part of the agricultural land area that was
identified and separated in the 2015 PUT will now never be available.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2015 Puerto Rico Land-Use Plan. Junta de Planificacion de
Puerto Rico. 2015. Reglamento conjunto para la evaluacion y expedicion
de permisos relacionados al desarrollo y uso de terrenos. 1090 p.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At present, Puerto Rico has one of the highest land-area carrying
capacities in the Caribbean with 3.4 people/ha-total area and 15.7
people/ha-agricultural land area (Table 1). The consistent decrease in
agricultural land area in Puerto Rico has occurred as a result of urban
expansion into agricultural areas, and agricultural land-area
abandonment and reversion to secondary forests (Lopez et al. 2001;
Pares-Ramos et al. 2008; Yuan et al. 2017). Although potential working
lands could reach as high as 42% of the land-area (Gould et al. 2017),
current agricultural land area in Puerto Rico is 22% of the total land
area (USDA-NASS, 2018). This proportion is lower than most countries
with greater land area in the Caribbean and Central America, which have
similar crops, flora, fauna, landscape characteristics and climate
(Figure 2), and for the continental United States in general.
Prior to 2017, Puerto Rico was estimated to import 80% of its food
supply (Comas-Pagan, 2009) making its food security vulnerable to
fluctuations in global food prices, shortages, climate phenomena and
climate change. Puerto Rico's economic stability, food security and
availability of fresh and quality products can be enhanced by
maintaining or increasing land-area for agricultural production and by
increasing agricultural productivity. Agricultural intensification
through sustainable nutrient management practices can reduce the
agricultural footprint and maintain ecologically sensitive areas
(Cassman and Grassini, 2021). Preliminary work by Baez et al. (2021)
demonstrates that Puerto Rico could easily be self-sufficient in
selected commodities of major consumption. The agricultural sector in
Puerto Rico has a very important role in the local economy, even with a
gross agricultural income at the farm level estimated at near $900 M.
Agriculture contributes to direct and indirect employment. Current
estimates suggest that agricultural activities could support up to
50,000 jobs in the local economy. The Puerto Rico dependence on
imported food supplies makes the island vulnerable to natural disasters
and global economy market fluctuations and dependent on the US
Government for food-aid transfers.
It is unknown the current land-area dedicated to green energy solar
and wind projects. Estimates range from 2,100 to 4,200 acres of land
area. Sotomayor-Ramirez et al. (2015) described the negative impact of
wind-energy project in Santa Isabel municipality on high-valued
agricultural land-area. Preliminary evidence suggests that there may be
as many as 16 solar energy projects in the pipeline, projected to
generate near 1,800 MW-AC (Siemens Industry, 2019). The agricultural
land-area that could be directly impacted could be as much as 13,500
acres. Puerto Rico needs to achieve a greater proportion of energy
generation on green energy and decrease dependence on fossil fuels.
Yet, agricultural land-area cannot be sacrificed for green energy
generation as this will further exacerbate Puerto Rico's dependence on
imported food and aid transfers from the federal government, among
other negative consequences.
Various studies recommend the siting of photovoltaic equipment on
rooftops to provide the bulk of energy demand in Puerto Rico (Telos
Energy, 2020; O'Neill-Carrillo et al. 2018; Mooney and Waechter, 2020).
The advantages of on-site, rooftop solar or solar installations close
to the point of use are many. They include the use of existing
sprawling housing development and commercial rooftops to avoid further
impacts to open spaces, agricultural land and ecologically sensitive
areas. Rooftop solar eliminates the need for large investments in
transmission infrastructure. It avoids transmission losses. Grid
maintenance costs are reduced and impacts to tropical forests and
vegetation as a result of tree cutting and pruning are minimized. The
on-site solar alternative doesn't require establishing extensive
easements or servitudes on private property while helping to lower
temperatures within the structures and providing protection to the
buildings. Rooftop solar installations add value to the structures and
promote local wealth. Distributed renewable generation on rooftops
creates greater reinvestment in the local economy than utility-scale
projects. It enables ratepayers to become producers or `prosumers' of
energy.

Literature cited

Baez, F., D. Sotomayor-Ramirez, M. Cortes. 2021. A preliminary analysis
of land-use needed to satisfy local consumption in Puerto Rico. In
preparation.

Cassman, K.G. and P. Grassini. 2020. A global perspective on
sustainable intensification research. Nature Sustainability. 3: 262-
268.

Comas-Pagan, M. 2009. Vulnerabilidad de las cadenas de suministros, el
cambio climatico y el desarrollo de estrategias de adaptacion: El Caso
de las cadenas de suministros de alimento de Puerto Rico. Doctoral
Dissertation. University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras. 235 p.

Gould, W.A., F.H. Wadsworth, M. Quinones, S.J. Fain, N.L. Alvarez-
Berrios. 2017. Land use, conservation, forestry and agriculture in
Puerto Rico. Forests. 8: 242. doi:10.3390/f8070242.

Lopez, T. del M., T.M. Aide, and J.R. Thomlinson, 2001. Urban expansion
and the loss of prime agricultural lands in Puerto Rico. Ambio 30: 49-
54.

Martinuzzi, S., W.A. Gould, O.M. Ramos-Gonzalez, 2006. Land
development, land use, and urban sprawl in Puerto Rico integrating
remote sensing and population census data. Landscape and Urban
Planning. 79. 288-297. Doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2006.02.014.

Mooney, M., and K. Waechter. 2020. Puerto Rico Low-to-Moderate Income
Rooftop PV and Solar Savings Potential, National Renewable Energy
Laboratory. Available at: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/78756.pdf.

O'Neill-Carrillo, E., I. Jordan, A. Irizarry-Rivera, R. Cintron. 2018.
The long road to community microgrids. IEEE Electrification Magazine.
12 p.

Pares-Ramos, I., W.A. Gould, T.M. Aide. 2008. Suburban growth and
forest expansion following agricultural abandonment n Puerto Rico
(1991-2000). Paper prepared for presentation at: 2008 Berlin Conference
``Long-Term Policies: Governing Social-Ecological Change''
International Conference of the Social-Ecological Research February 21-
23, 2008. 24 p.

Rudel, T.K., M. Perez-Lugo, H. Zichal. 2000. When fields revert to
forest: Development and spontaneous reforestation in post-war Puerto
Rico. Professional Geographer 52: 386-397.

Siemens Industry. 2019. Puerto Rico Integrated Resource Plan 2018-2019.
Draft for the review of the Puerto Rico Energy Bureau. Prepared for the
Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority. 330 p.

Sotomayor Ramirez, D., R. Rodriguez Perez, I. Pagan Roig. 2015.
Terrenos agricolas y energia renovable: Caso de estudio Pattern Energy
Inc. en Santa Isabel. 2015. Revista de Administracion Publica. 45: 1-
27. Volumen especial bajo el tema ``La Administracion Publica de la
Energia: Clave para la Sostenibilidad Puertorriquena''.

Sotomayor-Ramirez, D., J. Barragan, J. Caraballo, G. Lozada-Ramirez.
2013. Trends in fertilizer consumption in Puerto Rico. J. Agric. Univ.
P.R. 97(1-2):15-32.

Telos Energy. 2020. Estudio de Integracion de Recursos Energeticos
Distribuidos para Puerto Rico. Telos Energy. 113 p.

Vicente-Chandler. 1993. Una agricultura para los 90. Prepared for
Department of Agriculture of Puerto Rico. 185 p.

Yuan, F., J.J. Lopez, S. Arnold, A. Brand, J. Klein, M. Schmidt, E.
Moseman, M. Michels-Boyce. 2017. Forestation in Puerto Rico, 1970s to
present. Journal of Geography and Geology; 9(3): 30-41.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
