- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 660, ``SHOVEL-READY RESTORATION GRANTS FOR COASTLINES AND FISHERIES ACT OF 2021''; H.R. 1415, ``TRIBAL COASTAL RESILIENCY ACT''; H.R. 1689, ``OFFSHORE WIND FOR TERRITORIES ACT''; H.R. 2750, ``BLUE CARBON FOR OUR PLANET ACT''; H.R. 3160, ``KEEP AMERICA'S WATERFRONTS WORKING ACT''; H.R. 3228, ``NATIONAL COASTAL RESILIENCE DATA AND SERVICES ACT''; H.R. 3692, ``MARINE MAMMAL CLIMATE CHANGE PROTECTION ACT''; H.R. 3748, ``BLUE GLOBE ACT''; H.R. 3764, ``OCEAN-BASED CLIMATE SOLUTIONS ACT OF 2021''; H.R. 3817, ``REGIONAL OCEAN PARTNERSHIP ACT''; H.R. 3864, ``CHESAPEAKE BAY OYSTER RESEARCH ACT''; H.R. 3892, ``NATIONAL OCEANS AND COASTAL SECURITY IMPROVEMENTS ACT''; AND H.R. 3906, ``BLUE CARBON PROTECTION ACT''

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 660, H.R. 1415, H.R. 1689, H.R. 2750,
H.R. 3160, H.R. 3228, H.R. 3692, H.R. 3748,
H.R. 3764, H.R. 3817, H.R. 3864, H.R. 3892,
and H.R. 3906

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, June 22, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-6

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-957 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Chair
JESUS G. ``CHUY'' GARCIA, IL, Vice Chair
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, CNMI, Vice Chair, Insular Affairs
BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Ranking Member

Grace F. Napolitano, CA              Don Young, AK
Jim Costa, CA                        Louie Gohmert, TX
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Doug Lamborn, CO
CNMI                             Robert J. Wittman, VA
Jared Huffman, CA                    Tom McClintock, CA
Alan S. Lowenthal, CA                Paul A. Gosar, AZ
Ruben Gallego, AZ                    Garret Graves, LA
Joe Neguse, CO                       Jody B. Hice, GA
Mike Levin, CA                       Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Katie Porter, CA                     Daniel Webster, FL
Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM           Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR
Melanie A. Stansbury, NM             Russ Fulcher, ID
Nydia M. Velazquez, NY               Pete Stauber, MN
Diana DeGette, CO                    Thomas P. Tiffany, WI
Julia Brownley, CA                   Jerry L. Carl, AL
Debbie Dingell, MI                   Matthew M. Rosendale, Sr., MT
A. Donald McEachin, VA               Blake D. Moore, UT
Darren Soto, FL                      Yvette Herrell, NM
Michael F. Q. San Nicolas, GU        Lauren Boebert, CO
Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, IL         Jay Obernolte, CA
Ed Case, HI                          Cliff Bentz, OR
Betty McCollum, MN
Steve Cohen, TN
Paul Tonko, NY
Rashida Tlaib, MI
Lori Trahan, MA

David Watkins, Staff Director
Sarah Lim, Chief Counsel
Vivian Moeglein, Republican Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, June 22, 2021...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Panel 1

Beyer, Hon. Donald S. Jr., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia......................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Gonzalez-Colon, Hon. Jenniffer, a Resident Commissioner in
Congress from the Territory of Puerto Rico.................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    21
Pingree, Hon. Chellie, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Maine.............................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Plaskett, Hon. Stacey E., a Delegate in Congress from the
Territory of the U.S. Virgin Islands.......................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13

Panel 2

Guertin, Stephen, Deputy Director for Policy, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Falls Church, Virginia...................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Questions submitted for the record.......................    29
LeBoeuf, Nicole, Acting Administrator, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.................    30
Prepared statement of....................................    32
Questions submitted for the record.......................    38

Panel 3

Guardado, Mauricio, General Manager, United Water
Conservation District, Oxnard, California..................   100
Prepared statement of....................................   101
Gutierrez-Graudins, Marce, Founder and Executive Director,
Azul, San Francisco, California............................    95
Prepared statement of....................................    96
Questions submitted for the record.......................    99
Johnson, Ayana Elizabeth, Co-Founder, Urban Ocean Lab........    75
Prepared statement of....................................    77
Lee, Chris, State Senator, Hawaii State Legislature,
Honolulu, Hawaii...........................................    67
Prepared statement of....................................    69
Questions submitted for the record.......................    73
Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva
Letter of support signed by 136 organizations............     4
Letter of support signed by 19 leading aquariums.........     8
National Parks Conservation Association, Letter of
support................................................   123

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman
Stronger America Through Seafood, Letter of concern......   124

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 660, ``SHOVEL-READY RESTORATION GRANTS FOR
COASTLINES AND FISHERIES ACT OF 2021''; H.R. 1415, ``TRIBAL COASTAL
RESILIENCY ACT''; H.R. 1689, ``OFFSHORE WIND FOR TERRITORIES ACT'';
H.R. 2750, ``BLUE CARBON FOR OUR PLANET ACT''; H.R. 3160, ``KEEP
AMERICA'S WATERFRONTS WORKING ACT''; H.R. 3228, ``NATIONAL COASTAL
RESILIENCE DATA AND SERVICES ACT''; H.R. 3692, ``MARINE MAMMAL CLIMATE
CHANGE PROTECTION ACT''; H.R. 3748, ``BLUE GLOBE ACT''; H.R. 3764,
``OCEAN-BASED CLIMATE SOLUTIONS ACT OF 2021''; H.R. 3817, ``REGIONAL
OCEAN PARTNERSHIP ACT''; H.R. 3864, ``CHESAPEAKE BAY OYSTER RESEARCH
ACT''; H.R. 3892, ``NATIONAL OCEANS AND COASTAL SECURITY IMPROVEMENTS
ACT''; AND H.R. 3906, ``BLUE CARBON PROTECTION ACT''

----------

Tuesday, June 22, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:59 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Raul M. Grijalva [Chairman of the Committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Grijalva, Huffman, Lowenthal,
Porter, Stansbury, Dingell, McEachin, Soto, Case, Cohen, Tlaib;
Westerman, Young, Gohmert, Graves, Radewagen, Gonzalez-Colon,
Stauber, Tiffany, Carl, Moore, Herrell, Boebert, and Bentz.

The Chairman. Thank you. The Committee on Natural Resources
will come to order.
The Committee is meeting today to hear testimony on ocean
climate legislation. Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral
opening statements at the hearing are limited to the Chair and
the Ranking Member or their designees. This will allow us to
hear from our witnesses sooner and help Members keep to their
schedules.
Therefore, I am asking unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted to the Clerk by 5 p.m. today or at the
close of the hearing, whichever comes first.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I also want to welcome today Representative Melanie
Stansbury to the Committee. Representative Stansbury has
extensive experience on issues under the Committee's
jurisdiction. Before being elected to the House of
Representatives, Representative Stansbury served in the New
Mexico legislation where she advanced many forward-thinking
climate and natural resource policies.
The Representative also reported on natural resources
issues at the White House Council on Environmental Quality, the
Office of Management and Budget, and the Senate Energy and
Natural Resources Committee where she oversaw western water
issues and other issues that fall under this Committee she'll
be serving under. Representative Stansbury will bring valuable
experience to the Committee, and we are very lucky to have her
join us, and we welcome her.

I will now recognize myself for an opening statement on the
legislation before us today.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

The Chairman. Today, during World Oceans Month, the
Committee is meeting about the new and improved Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act. In November 2020, at that hearing, it
introduced many of us to the concept of ocean-based climate
solutions which we learned can provide up to 21 percent of the
annual emissions cuts we need to address climate change.
With ocean climate action, we will protect coastal
communities and their ecosystems from dangerous symptoms of
climate change, capture and reduce greenhouse gases, and
achieve justice for underserved communities. And while we are
at it, we can build back better, bolstering the economy and
putting people to work in green or blue careers.
There are several changes in the Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act that I would like to highlight for you today.
Some of the sections were removed because they have already
been signed into law such as the Digital Coast Act or the
Integrated Coastal Ocean Observation System. Other sections
were removed because the Biden administration is already acting
on the initiative to protect 30 percent of our ocean by 2030
and reinstating the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience
Area.
A new title places a 5-cent excise tax on virgin plastic
manufactured for single-use products, which will help pay for
ocean conservation. Taxing plastic will also discourage this
wasteful material that chokes our marine life, contributes to
climate change, and creates environmental injustices.
Other new additions to this version of the bill will
include: a report on the United States' progress and plans
toward achieving the targets of our United Nations Sustainable
Development Goal to conserve and sustainably use the oceans and
marine resources; a new grant program in the National Marine
Sanctuary System to support climate research and resilience
with Indigenous and local knowledge of marine and natural
areas; a requirement that NOAA develop and coordinate data,
products, and services regarding coastal flooding, sea level
rise, and Great Lakes water levels; a study on black carbon,
quantifying black carbon emissions and examining its impact on
Indigenous communities and arctic wildlife; and a study on
public access to our Nation's coasts, including the Great
Lakes, because, unfortunately, there are many barriers and
obstacles for underserved communities accessing our coasts, and
climate change is only making that more difficult.
Throughout the bill, we made technical changes based on
feedback from stakeholders and environmental groups as well as
NOAA and the Fish and Wildlife Service, who are with us today
to provide further feedback. We talked to a wide array of
stakeholders, ensuring our solutions are solutions for
everyone.
I greatly look forward to the hearing from today's panel of
witnesses, who are leading ocean climate and justice efforts at
grassroots, local, state, and national levels. With 29 co-
sponsors already on, we are proud of this bill and the momentum
for ocean climate solutions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, Chair, Committee on
Natural Resources
Today, during World Oceans Month, the Committee is meeting about
the new and improved Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
Our November 2020 hearing introduced many of us to the concept of
ocean-based climate solutions, which we learned can provide up to 21
percent of the annual emissions cuts we need to address climate change.
With ocean climate action, we will protect coastal communities and
ecosystems from dangerous symptoms of climate change, capture and
reduce greenhouse gases, and achieve justice for underserved
communities. And, while we're at it, we can build back better,
bolstering the economy and putting people to work in green--or blue--
careers.
There are several changes in the new Ocean-Based Climate Solutions
Act that I'd like to highlight for you.
Some sections were removed because they have already been signed
into law, such as the Digital Coast Act and the Integrated Coastal
Ocean Observation System.
Other sections were removed because the Biden administration is
already acting on the initiative to protect 30 percent of our ocean by
2030 and reinstating the Northern Bering Sea Climate Resilience Area.
A new title places a 5-cent excise tax on virgin plastic
manufactured for single-use products, which will help pay for ocean
conservation. Taxing plastic will also discourage this wasteful
material that chokes our marine life, contributes to climate change,
and creates environmental injustices.

Other new additions to this version of the bill include:

a report on the United States' progress and plans toward
achieving the targets of our United Nations Sustainable
Development Goal to conserve and sustainably use the ocean
and marine resources;

a new grant program in the National Marine Sanctuary
System to support climate research and resilience with
Indigenous and local knowledge of marine and natural areas;

a requirement that NOAA develop and coordinate data,
products, and services regarding coastal flooding, sea-
level rise, and Great Lakes water levels;

a study on black carbon, quantifying black carbon
emissions and examining its impacts on Indigenous
communities and Arctic wildlife;

and a study on public access to our nation's coasts,
including the Great Lakes--because unfortunately, there are
many barriers and obstacles for underserved communities to
accessing our coasts, and climate change is only making it
more difficult.

Throughout the bill, we made technical changes based on feedback
from stakeholders and environmental groups, as well as NOAA and the
Fish and Wildlife Service, who are with us today to provide further
feedback.
We talked to a wide array of stakeholders, ensuring that our
solutions are solutions for everybody.
I greatly look forward to hearing from today's panel of witnesses,
who are leading ocean-climate and justice efforts at the grassroots,
local, state, and national levels.
With 29 co-sponsors already signed on, we are proud of this bill
and the momentum for ocean climate solutions.
Finally, I would like to enter into the record two letters of
support for the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act. One is signed by
more than 135 organizations and businesses, representing millions of
Americans. Another is from 19 of the nation's leading aquariums.

______

The Chairman. Finally, I would like to enter into the
record two letters of support for the Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act. One is signed by more than 135 organizations and
businesses representing millions of Americans. The other is
from 19 of the Nation's leading aquariums.

[The information follows:]

June 22, 2021

Nancy Pelosi, Speaker         Kevin McCarthy, Minority Leader
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Speaker Pelosi and Minority Leader McCarthy,

Our ocean is a source of solutions and hope when it comes to
addressing climate change. The undersigned businesses and organizations
are writing to express our strong support for ocean climate action and
the inclusion of ocean-based solutions in any larger climate
legislation.
Major scientific reports such as the Special Report on the Ocean
and Cryosphere and the High Level Panel Report on a Sustainable Ocean
Economy have shown us not just the devastating toll climate change has
had on the ocean, but also the incredible role it has to play as a
source of climate solutions with the potential to provide a fifth of
the greenhouse gas emission reductions needed globally to limit
temperature rise to 1.5+C.

Support for ocean climate action is at an all time high. Since
January, the Biden Administration has made impressive progress on ocean
climate action, through promoting ocean-based renewable energy; pausing
offshore oil and gas leasing for a rigorous review; prioritizing
environmental justice in ocean and climate decision making; advocating
for investments in coastal restoration and resilience; and supporting
ocean sanctuaries for fish and wildlife to thrive in a changing
climate.
Now, Congress has the opportunity to act and turn the vision for
ocean climate action into durable solutions. The Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act of 2021 (H.R. 3764), led by House Natural Resources
Committee Chair Raul Grijalva, will codify many of the proposals made
by the Biden Administration, and includes many other innovative
provisions to leverage the power of the ocean to address climate
change. By implementing a full suite of ocean-based climate solutions,
the legislation would bolster frontline communities, increase the
resilience of ocean ecosystems, and demonstrate much-needed leadership
in the global effort to address the climate crisis.

Specifically, the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 will:

Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions by supporting the transition to a
clean energy economy through promoting ocean-based renewable energy.
The bill also prohibits oil and gas development activities in most
areas of the Outer Continental Shelf.

Increase Carbon Storage in Blue Carbon Ecosystems by capitalizing
on the carbon storage potential and other co-benefits provided by
``blue carbon'' ecosystems like salt marshes, sea grasses, and
mangroves. These ecosystems absorb carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere
and safely store it at a rate of up to four times that of forests on
land. They also protect coastal communities by limiting the impacts of
coastal erosion, flooding, and storms--all while providing habitat for
marine wildlife and fisheries.

Promote Coastal Resiliency to protect our coasts and communities
from the climate impacts we can't avoid; mandate the establishment of a
strategic task force to coordinate federal efforts around voluntary
relocation; and recognize and support tribal and Indigenous knowledge
and expertise. It also authorizes a $10 billion investment in coastal
restoration and resilience that is a win-win-win for our economy, our
frontline communities, and our environment.

Improve Ocean Protection by supporting the Biden Administration's
goal to protect at least 30% of our ocean by 2030. Marine protected
areas, like our protected areas on land, are a key tool for protecting
biodiversity, which is more critical than ever in the face of the
nature and climate crises.

Support Climate-Ready Fisheries by encouraging the development and
implementation of strategies to improve the management of fisheries in
a changing climate. The bill will help to promote U.S. seafood sourced
from environmentally and climate-friendly fisheries and eliminate
fishing subsidies in trade agreements for countries that contribute to
overfishing or illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.

Tackle the Ocean and Human Health Challenges of ocean acidification
and harmful algal blooms and the impacts of plastic pollution by
establishing a manufacturers fee on virgin single-use plastic
production.

The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 would bolster
frontline communities most at risk from climate change; increase the
resilience of ocean ecosystems; and help demonstrate much-needed
leadership in the global effort to address the climate crisis. We urge
you to act quickly to implement the measures detailed in this
legislation--before it's too late.

Signed,

350 Maine                     Inland Ocean Coalition Great
Lakes Chapter

Acadia Center                 Inland Ocean Coalition Illinois
Chapter

AFGE Local 704                Inland Ocean Coalition Montana
Chapter

Alaska Wilderness League      Inland Ocean Coalition North
Texas Chapter

ALRAS Digital                 Inland Ocean Coalition University
of Michigan Chapter

American Littoral Society     Inland Ocean Coalition Washington
DC Chapter

Audubon Delta                 Inland Ocean Coalition Wyoming
Chapter

Audubon Florida               International Fund for Animal
Welfare

Audubon Great Lakes           International Marine Mammal
Project of Earth Island Institute

Audubon New York              League of Conservation Voters

Audubon Society Lincoln
City                          Lopez-Wagner Strategies

Audubon South Carolina        Marine Conservation Voters

Audubon Washington            Maine Council of Churches

Azul                          Maine Unitarian Universalist
State Advocacy Network

Bay Area Youth Climate
Summit                        Marine Conservation Institute

Benitez Strategies            Marine Mammal Alliance Nantucket

Blue Frontier                 Maryland League of Conservation
Voters

California League of
Conservation Voters           Milwaukee Riverkeeper

Californians for Western
Wilderness                    Mystic Aquarium

Center for American
Progress                      National Aquarium

Center for the Blue Economy   National Audubon Society

Cetacean Society
International                 National Ocean Protection
Coalition

Clean Water Action            National Parks Conservation
Association

Climate Law & Policy
Project                       Natural Resources Defense Council
(NRDC)

Climate Strong Islands
Network                       NC League of Conservation Voters

Coastal Conservation League   New Mexico Wildlife Federation

Colorado Ocean Coalition      NY4WHALES

Conservation Law Foundation   Ocean Conservancy

Conservation Voters PA        Ocean Conservation Research

Conservation Voters South
Carolina                      Ocean Defense Initiative

Corazon Latino                Ocean River Institute

CT League of Conservation
Voters                        Ocean Visions, Inc.

Defenders of Wildlife         Oceana

EarthEcho International       Oceanic Preservation Society

Endangered Species
Coalition                     Only One

Environment America           Oregon League of Conservation
Voters

Environmental Action
Committee of West Marin       Patagonia

Environment California        Philadelphia Zoo

Environment Connecticut       Restore America's Estuaries

Environment Florida           Rivers Alliance of Connecticut

Environment Georgia           Sachamama

Environment Maine             Sanctuary Education Advisory
Specialists (SEAS)

Environment Massachusetts     Save the Manatee Club

Environment New Jersey        Save the Sound

Environment North Carolina    Seattle Aquarium

Environment Oregon            Seven Circles Foundation

Environment Texas             Shedd Aquarium

Environment Virginia          Sierra Club

Environment Washington        Sierra Club National Marine Team

Environmental Defense
Center                        South Shore Audubon Society

Environmental Law & Policy
Center                        Southern Environmental Law Center

Environmental League of MA    Surfrider Foundation

Florida Bay Forever           Sylvia Earle Alliance/Mission
Blue

Friends of Casco Bay          TAO

Gotham Whale                  The FREED Peoples

Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    The Ocean Foundation

GreenLatinos                  The Ocean Project

Greenpeace USA                The Rachel Carson Council

Hannah4Change                 The Rewilding Institute

Healthy Ocean Coalition       The Whale Guitar Project

Hispanic Access Foundation    The Wilderness Society

Inland Ocean Coalition        The Years Project Inc.

Inland Ocean Coalition
Alaska Chapter                Tropical Audubon Society

Inland Ocean Coalition
Arizona Chapter               Urban Ocean Lab

Inland Ocean Coalition
Buffalo NY Chapter            Virginia Aquarium & Marine
Science Center

Inland Ocean Coalition
Central Texas Chapter         Waterkeeper Alliance

Inland Ocean Coalition CSU
Fort Collins Chapter          Wildlife Conservation Society

Inland Ocean Coalition CU
Boulder Chapter               World Wildlife Fund

______

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.001

.epsJune 14, 2021

Hon. Raul Grijalva            Hon. Bruce Westerman
Chair                         Ranking Member
Committee on Natural
Resources                     Committee on Natural Resources
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Peter DeFazio            Hon. Sam Graves
Chair                         Ranking Member
Committee on Transportation
and Infrastructure            Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515
Dear Chair Grijalva, Chair DeFazio, Ranking Member Westerman and
Ranking Member Graves:

As the nation's leading aquariums committed to ocean and freshwater
conservation, we thank you for your climate leadership and express our
support for strong ocean-climate action included in the Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act of 2021 (H.R. 3764).
We recognize that climate change is the greatest threat to the
future of our planet, of people, and of our ocean and freshwater
systems. For the well-being of people and all life on Earth, we must
take immediate and significant action to address the climate crisis.
Climate action can produce local economic benefits, generate new jobs,
restore public lands and waters, and engage current and future
generations to help rebuild our infrastructure and create a clean-
energy future. We must also ensure that communities disproportionately
bearing the brunt of climate impacts are engaged in designing equitable
strategies for a path forward and derive environmental and economic
benefits from their engagement.
To fight climate change, we need a healthy ocean. According to the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, oceans absorb
approximately 25 percent of the carbon dioxide generated by human
activities, and more than 90 percent of the excess heat. But these
services have come at a tremendous cost. By altering the chemistry and
temperature of the ocean, we have put marine ecosystems and wildlife at
increasing risk. The life-giving benefits we derive from ocean and
freshwater systems--including food and water, transportation, defense,
tourism, and cultural values--underpin our global prosperity and
community identities.
Our ocean, lakes, and rivers are also sources of climate solutions.
Together, we can build resilience to the impacts of climate change by
restoring and conserving natural habitats, curbing pollution, and
managing fisheries and other natural resources in sustainable ways. We
also can protect and restore our tidal marshes, seagrasses, wetlands,
and mangroves that sequester atmospheric carbon, and develop new
offshore sources of renewable energy in an environmentally responsible
way.
Our aquariums, which make up the Aquarium Conservation Partnership,
play unique and powerful roles in promoting climate solutions. We are
trusted science-based communicators, conservation stewards, and local
business leaders. We are committed to working with our communities,
government leaders, business partners, and public audiences to meet
these challenges and accelerate the pace of progress for our planet.
Our aquariums appreciate your leadership on ocean-climate action
and we stand ready to work with you to address the causes of climate
change and find solutions to the impacts it is having on ocean and
freshwater life and ecosystems.

Sincerely,

Ron Forman,                   John F. Calvelli,
President and CEO             Exec. VP, Public Affairs
Audubon Nature Institute of
New Orleans                   Wildlife Conservation Society, on
behalf of the New York Aquarium

Scott D. Sampson, PhD,        Vikki Spruill,
Executive Director            President & CEO
California Academy of
Sciences                      New England Aquarium

Jerry Borin,                  Dennis Pate,
Interim President & CEO       CEO
Columbus Zoo and Aquarium     Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo &
Aquarium

Roger Germann,                Alan Varsik,
President/CEO                 Director
The Florida Aquarium          Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium

Dr. Alistair D.M. Dove,       Robert Davidson,
VP of Research, Cons. &
Nutrition                     CEO
Georgia Aquarium              Seattle Aquarium

Jason Patlis,                 Bridget C. Coughlin, PhD,
President & CEO               President and CEO
The Maritime Aquarium at
Norwalk                       John G. Shedd Aquarium

Julie Packard,                Kevin Mills,
Executive Director            President and CEO
Monterey Bay Aquarium         South Carolina Aquarium

Stephen Coan,                 Keith Sanford,
President & CEO               President and CEO
Mystic Aquarium               Tennessee Aquarium

John Racanelli,               Cynthia Whitbred-Spanoulis,
CEO                           Executive Director
National Aquarium             Virginia Aquarium & Marine
Science Center

Kurt Strand,
President & CEO
The National Mississippi
River Museum & Aquarium

______

The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member
for his statement, and I believe it is Congressman Bentz, as
designee for Ranking Member Westerman. Sir, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me begin by welcoming
Members and witnesses to today's hearing. We are considering 13
bills, 12 of which are included in some form in Chair
Grijalva's larger 290-page, 14 title bill, H.R. 3764. These
bills reflect a broad set of concerns including climate,
resilience to higher ocean levels, conservation, restoration,
tribal issues, wind leases, waterfront task forces, Great Lakes
water levels, and improvement of circumstances of marine
mammals, to name just some of the bill's many topics.
But will this bill address and help our Nation also face
one of the major challenges with us today, that being the
greatest drought in modern day history, affecting some 70
million people across the western United States? Do these bills
contain provisions for and possibly solutions that the ocean
might offer, such as desalinization, to offset long-term
drought? Perhaps our witnesses today will tell us.
Additionally, as this bill title suggests, it is ocean-
based, but obviously, the bill carries with it serious
implication for land and inland waters. Take, for example, the
national blue carbon ecosystem map mandated in the bill. This
provision would require that NOAA identify upstream structures
or pollution sources that affect the watershed and potential
for blue carbon sequestration. This requirement has no limits
of how far upstream that process might reach. For example, the
Columbia River watershed includes the landlocked states of
Idaho and Montana and parts of Canada, including some 182
million acres and tens of thousands of miles of waterways. Do
those who support this bill understand the extent, not
necessarily oceans-linked, of this bill's impact?
Equally concerning are new consultation requirements
contained in this bill for all Federal agencies where a
proposed action has the potential to cause an adversarial
impact to blue carbon areas of significance or marine mammal
climate impact management plans. Will these new requirements
cause delay in activities adjacent to such waterways such as
construction of needed bridges, roads, wind energy projects,
and other infrastructure? Could adding red tape to the siting
of energy projects and energy transmission drive up consumer
costs?
Indeed, these requirements will understandably create yet
another layer of environmental bureaucracy that will be used to
block Federal actions such as maintaining or building new
infrastructure of any and all kinds that might be adjacent to
waterways. It could also be used as a reason or a justification
for removal of essential existing water infrastructures, or
cause more litigation, and that is coming from me, an attorney.
The upstream impacts of this bill will no doubt make any
activity with Federal involvement slower and more difficult.
There are several areas of this bill that cause concerns due to
potential far-ranging and uncertain impacts to water management
for communities of millions of people in the western United
States. The last thing this half of the United States needs is
yet another demand for diminishing volumes of water caused by
Federal legislation. We are fortunate to have a witness
representing the Family Farm Alliance with us today who will
discuss some of these important issues. I want to welcome this
witness, Mr. Mauricio Guardado, from Oxnard, California, who
will testify about his concerns over the far-reaching
authorities contained in this bill.
In conclusion, I am hopeful that these bills will
ultimately advance our Nation's interests, directing Federal
agencies to explore how to conserve our seas and the creatures
and structures in them, while at the same time, helping people
cope with the on-land challenges of drought and ever more
expensive energy. While we have had an oversight hearing on
drought almost a month ago which the 70 million people affected
by the drought and the 115-degree temperatures I am sure
appreciate, I hope that this or that hearing is not the only
thing Congress will do regarding this drought because it is
only getting worse.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Bentz follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Cliff Bentz, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Oregon
Let me begin by welcoming Members and witnesses to today's hearing.
We are considering 13 bills, 12 of which are included in some form in
Chairman Grijalva's larger 290-page, 14 title bill, H.R. 3764. These
bills reflect a broad set of concerns including climate, resilience to
higher ocean levels, conservation, restoration, tribal issues, wind
leases, waterfront task forces, Great Lake water levels, and
improvement of the circumstances of marine mammals, to name just some
of the bill's many topics.
But will this bill help our nation also address one of the major
challenges facing us today--that being the greatest drought in modern
day history affecting some 70 million people? Do these bills contain
solutions that the ocean might offer (such as desalination) to offset
long-term drought? Perhaps our witnesses will tell us.
Additionally, as this bill's title suggests it's ``ocean based''
but obviously the bill carries with it serious implications for lands
and inland waters. Take, for example, the national blue carbon
ecosystem map mandated in the bill. This provision would require that
NOAA identify upstream structures or pollution sources that affect the
watershed and potential for blue carbon sequestration. This requirement
has no limits of how far upstream that process might reach. For
example, the Columbia River watershed includes the landlocked states of
Idaho and Montana, and parts of Canada--some 182 million acres and tens
of thousands of miles of waterways. Do those who support this bill
understand the extent, not necessarily oceans-linked, of this bill's
impact?
Equally concerning are new consultation requirements contained in
this bill for all federal agencies where a proposed action has the
potential to cause an adversarial impact to ``blue carbon areas of
significance'' or ``marine mammal climate impact management plans.''
Will these new requirements cause delay in activities adjacent to
waterways, such as construction of bridges, roads, wind energy
projects, and other infrastructure? Could adding red tape to sitting
key energy projects and energy transmission drive up consumer costs?
Indeed, these requirements will undoubtedly create yet another layer of
environmental bureaucracy that will be used to block federal actions,
such as maintaining or building new infrastructure of all kinds near
water including water supply infrastructure that could help in meeting
demand caused by drought in the West. Importantly, the processes found
in this bill could also be used as a reason or justification for
removal of essential existing water infrastructure. Or it could cause
more litigation, and that's coming from a lawyer.
The upstream impacts of this bill will no doubt make any activity
with federal involvement slower and more difficult. The last thing the
Western half of the U.S. needs is yet another demand for diminishing
volumes of water caused by federal legislation. We are fortunate to
have a witness representing the Family Farm Alliance who will discuss
some of these important issues. I want to welcome this witness, Mr.
Mauricio Guardado from Oxnard, California, who will testify about his
concerns over the far-reaching authorities in this bill.
In conclusion, I am hopeful that these bills will ultimately
advance our nation's interests by directing the federal agencies to
explore how to conserve our seas and the creatures and structures in
them, while at the same time helping people cope with the on-land
challenges of drought and even more expensive energy. While we had an
oversight hearing on drought almost a month ago (which the 70 million
people affected by the drought and 115 degree temperatures I'm sure
appreciated) I hope that that hearing is not the only thing Congress
will do regarding the drought because it is getting worse. We need to
act now.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.

______

The Chairman. We will begin. The first panel is the
Congressional panel. It is featuring the bill sponsors from
today's agenda. As was noted, 12 individual pieces of
legislation have been integrated into the overall climate
solutions legislation, and we have some of our colleagues with
us today to speak to their piece of the legislation that have
been incorporated to the bill.
Let me begin now by recognizing Representative Plaskett for
her statement on H.R. 660. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. STACEY E. PLASKETT, A DELEGATE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE TERRITORY OF THE U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS

Ms. Plaskett. Good afternoon to my colleagues, and good
afternoon, Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Bentz, acting
for Congressman Westerman. Thank you for holding this
legislative hearing on ocean-based climate action and providing
me the opportunity to lend support for my legislation, H.R.
660, the Shovel-Ready Restoration Grants for Coastlines and
Fisheries Act.
I am pleased that the Committee is holding today's hearing
on the important issue of improving our coastlines and oceans.
Healthy coastal ecosystems provide critical social and
environmental benefits in addition to playing important roles
to the fishing industries and broader economies of coastal
communities across the country. According to the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA, our coastal
economy supports 2.3 million jobs and contributes approximately
$373 billion to our Nation's gross domestic product.
Sadly, we are losing these habitats at rapid rates, and we
are seeing losses across habitat types, from coral reefs to
wetlands to kelp. Coral reefs and mangroves are extremely
important in places like my home in the Virgin Islands and
other coastal communities. They protect our shorelines by
reducing 90 percent of wave energy during storm surges. They
feed our families by providing habitat for our fisheries, and
the quiet beaches and bays they create support our economy by
attracting millions of tourists each year. They also provide
adaptation to climate changes by reducing damage due to storm
surges caused by more frequent and intense storms.
Our response to these losses needs to address the causes of
decline and accelerate recovery through the restoration and
resilience projects that my bill, H.R. 660, would authorize.
During the last major recession, Congress provided $167
million through the Americans Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 for NOAA to support coastal resilience projects that
create jobs. This program was highly successful in advancing
coastal and marine restoration while also spurring economic
recovery.
As we work to recover from the coronavirus pandemic and the
related economic recession, I believe it is very important that
we support projects that can both stimulate the economy and
make strides in advancing coastal restoration. Economies in
coastal communities like my home tend to be highly reliant on
tourism, and consequently, have some of the hardest-hit
communities during the coronavirus pandemic.
That is why Congressman Don Young, Dean of the House, and I
re-introduced the Shovel-Ready Restoration Grants for
Coastlines and Fisheries Act. This bipartisan legislation is
modeled after and expands on the temporary program originally
established by ARRA.
Our bill would meet the need for coastal restoration and
economic recovery projects by creating a $3 billion NOAA grant
program to fund shovel-ready projects that restore and improve
coastal habits, coastal resiliency, and the economy of coastal
communities.
Under the program, priority projects are those that would
stimulate the economy and would begin within 90 days of the
grant award. Additionally, these priority projects would also
provide compensation to fishermen for either their labor or use
of fishing vessels.
It is important to note that the bill would not only
support remote coastal communities neighboring the oceans, but
would also support those coastal communities that border the
Great Lakes.
In addition to being included in Chairman Grijalva's Ocean-
Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021, H.R. 3764, with the
funding raised to $10 billion, the Shovel-Ready Restoration
Grants for Coastlines and Fisheries Act was also passed by the
House of Representatives last year as part of H.R. 2.
And I would like to thank Dean Young for working with me on
this initiative, and I invite other members of this Committee
to co-sponsor the bill.
Investing in coastal restoration is good policy. It is not
just the right thing to do for the environment; it is the right
thing to do for coastal communities, vulnerable coastal
populations, and the U.S. economy.
I urge the Committee to move this legislation through the
House to final passage by the Senate to strengthen our coastal
resiliency and help countless Virgin Islanders and other
coastal community residents who are out of work through no
fault of their own.
Thank you again for your consideration.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Plaskett follows:]

Prepared Statement of the Hon. Stacey E. Plaskett, a Delegate in
Congress from the Territory of the U.S. Virgin Islands

Good afternoon, Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman.
Thank you for holding this legislative hearing on ``Ocean-Based Climate
Action'' and for providing me with the opportunity to lend support for
my legislation, H.R. 660, the Shovel-Ready Restoration Grants for
Coastlines and Fisheries Act.
I am pleased that the Committee is holding today's hearing on the
important issue of improving our coastlines and oceans. Healthy coastal
ecosystems provide critical social and environmental benefits, in
addition to playing important roles to the fishing industries and
broader economies of coastal communities across country. According to
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), our coastal
economy supports 2.3 million jobs and contributes approximately $373
billion to the nation's gross domestic product.
Sadly, we're losing these habitats at a rapid rate, and we're
seeing losses across habitat types--from coral reefs to wetlands to
kelp. Coral reefs and mangroves are extremely important to places like
my home of the Virgin Islands and other coastal communities. They
protect our shorelines by reducing 90% of the wave energy during storm
surges; they feed our families by providing habitat for our fisheries;
and the quiet beaches and bays that they create support our economy by
attracting millions of tourists each year. They also provide adaptation
to climate change by reducing damage due to storm surge caused by more
frequent and intense storms. Our response to this loss needs to address
the causes of decline and accelerate recovery through the restoration
and resilience projects that my bill, H.R. 660, would authorize.
During the last major recession, Congress provided $167 million
through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to support coastal
resilience projects that created jobs. This program was highly
successful in advancing coastal and marine restoration while also
spurring economic recovery. In fact, the program created an estimated
17 jobs for every million dollars spent, and it generated $15 dollars
in net economic benefits for every dollar invested. However, the
program was so popular that it received about $3 billion in proposed
projects from communities across the country--far more applications
than were initially anticipated.
As we work to recover from the coronavirus pandemic and the related
economic recession, I believe it is very important that we support
projects that can both stimulate the economy and make strides in
advancing coastal restoration. Economies in coastal communities--like
my home of the Virgin Islands--tend to be highly reliant on tourism,
and have consequently been some of the hardest hit communities during
the coronavirus pandemic.
That's why Congressman Don Young, Dean of the House, and I
reintroduced the Shovel-Ready Restoration Grants for Coastlines and
Fisheries Act. This bipartisan legislation is modeled after and expands
on the temporary program originally established by ARRA. Our bill will
meet the need for coastal restoration and economic recovery projects by
creating a $3 billion NOAA grant program to fund shovel-ready projects
that restore or improve coastal habitats, coastal resiliency, and the
economy of coastal communities. Under the program, priority projects
are those that would stimulate the economy and could begin within 90
days of the grant award. Additionally, these priority projects would
also provide compensation to fishermen for either their labor or use of
a fishing vessel. It is also important to note that the bill would not
only support remote coastal communities neighboring the ocean, it would
also support those coastal communities that border the Great Lakes.
This bill would go far to provide the resources and labor needed to
protect our shorelines, improve our fisheries, and attract more
tourism. These projects are reinvestments in our communities.
In addition to being included in Chairman Grijalva's Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act of 2021 (H.R. 3764), with the funding raised to
$10 billion, the Shovel-Ready Restoration Grants for Coastlines and
Fisheries Act was also passed by the House of Representatives last year
as part of H.R. 2, the Moving Forward Act. I would like to thank Dean
Young for working with me on this initiative, and I invite the other
members of this Committee to co-sponsor this bill.
Investing in coastal restoration is good policy. It's not just the
right thing to do for the environment; it's the right thing to do for
coastal communities, vulnerable coastal populations, and the U.S.
economy. I urge that the Committee move this legislation through the
House to final passage by the Senate, to strengthen our coastal
resiliency and help countless Virgin Islanders--and other coastal
community residents--who are out of work through no fault of their own.
Thank you for your consideration.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Representative, and I
appreciate your comments.
Let me now recognize a member of the Committee. I want to
recognize Representative Gonzalez-Colon for her statement on
H.R. 1689. Representative, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JENNIFER GONZALEZ-COLON, A RESIDENT
COMMISSIONER IN CONGRESS FROM THE TERRITORY OF PUERTO RICO

Miss Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate you and Ranking Member Westerman, now Bentz, for the
opportunity to testify on my bill, H.R. 1689, the Offshore Wind
for Territories Act.
This is a bipartisan legislation that would apply the Outer
Continental Shelf Lands Act to the submerged lands off the five
U.S. territories for renewable energy purposes. It further
requires the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with
the appropriate Federal and local stakeholders, to study the
potential for offshore wind energy development in these Federal
waters off the territories. Should a study determine that a
wind lease is viable, the Secretary is directed to conduct a
lease sale.
By allowing us to tap into potential offshore wind
resources, H.R. 1689 would help territories address high energy
costs, diversify our fuel sources, and end our reliance on
foreign petroleum imports. In Fiscal Year 2020, just for an
instance, only 2.5 percent of Puerto Rico's electricity came
from renewables.
The bill would also guarantee each territory a state
equivalent share of all royalty payments made to the Federal
Government by offshore wind developers. Territories would
receive 37.5 percent of qualifying revenues, consistent with
the revenue sharing structure established for the Gulf Coast
states under GOMESA.
Lastly, H.R. 1689 directs that 12.5 percent of the revenues
be deposited into a Coral Reef Conservation Fund, thus
providing dedicated funding for coral reef conservation efforts
at no additional cost to the American taxpayer.
Last Congress, this Committee passed a previous version of
this Offshore Wind for Territories Act with unanimous support.
Similarly, in the 115th Congress, the House approved this
legislation under suspension. If enacted, the Offshore Wind for
Territories Act would boost revenues and provide Americans in
the territories access to cleaner, renewable energy sources,
and help protect our coral reefs.
I, therefore, hope that we can once again work in a
bipartisan manner to move H.R. 1689 out of the Committee and
finally get it across the finish line.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Miss Gonzalez-Colon follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, a Resident
Commissioner in Congress from the Territory of Puerto Rico
Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on my bill, H.R. 1689, the Offshore Wind for
Territories Act.
This bipartisan legislation would apply the Outer Continental Shelf
Lands Act to the submerged lands off the five U.S. territories for
renewable energy purposes. It further requires the Secretary of the
Interior--in consultation with appropriate federal and local
stakeholders--to study the potential for offshore wind energy
development in these federal waters off the territories. Should a study
determine that a wind lease is viable, the Secretary is directed to
conduct a lease sale.
By allowing us to tap into potential offshore wind resources, H.R.
1689 would help the territories address high energy costs, diversify
our fuel sources, and end our reliance on foreign petroleum imports. In
Fiscal Year 2020, for instance, only 2.5% of Puerto Rico's electricity
came from renewables.
The bill would also guarantee each territory a state-equivalent
share of all royalty payments made to the Federal Government by
offshore wind developers. Territories would receive 37.5% of qualifying
revenues, consistent with the revenue sharing structure established for
the Gulf Coast States under GOMESA.
Lastly, H.R. 1689 directs that 12.5% of revenues be deposited into
a Coral Reef Conservation Fund, thus providing dedicated funding for
coral reef conservation efforts at no additional cost to the American
taxpayer.
Last Congress, this Committee passed a previous version of the
Offshore Wind for Territories Act with unanimous support. Similarly, in
the 115th Congress, the House approved this legislation under
suspension.
If enacted, the Offshore Wind for Territories Act would boost
revenues, provide Americans in the territories access to cleaner,
renewable energy sources, and help protect our coral reefs. I therefore
hope we can once again work in a bipartisan manner to move H.R. 1689
out of Committee and finally get it across the finish line.
Thank you, I yield back.

______

The Chairman. Thank you for your legislation. It is
appreciated and has far-reaching impacts. As we did in the
past, I hope we can move that on to the Senate so they can do
their part of the job.
Now I want to recognize Representative Pingree for her
statement on H.R. 3160. The Representative is recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHELLIE PINGREE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MAINE

Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Chairman Grijalva and
Ranking Member Bentz, for giving me the opportunity to speak in
support of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act, and thank you
for having this hearing today.
This legislation includes my bipartisan bill with
Congressman Wittman, the Keep America's Waterfronts Working
Act. Throughout my time in Congress, I have advocated for the
needs of coastal communities and those who use our working
waterfronts. I am grateful to have a chance to talk a little
bit about this bill with you today.
I know members of this Committee hear regularly from
constituents who make their living from the water, whether they
are boat builders from the West Coast, seafood buyers and
processors across America, recreational fishing guides in the
Gulf of Mexico, or commercial fisherman and aquaculture
business owners in New England. The refrain is always the same.
Water-dependent businesses from coast to coast need our help.
They want us to preserve access to the working waterfronts that
make their livelihoods possible and keep our coastal economies
thriving.
More than 30,000 Mainers rely on marine-related industries
for their livelihoods. In fact, in our state, we refer to this
as a ``heritage industry'' because it is so ingrained in the
fabric of the state. Yet, out of 5,000 miles of coastline, just
20 miles of working waterfronts remain in my state.
Across the country, working waterfronts are rapidly
disappearing due to heavy development pressure. When fishermen
must grapple with the loss of wharves, processing facilities,
and other essential infrastructure in addition to navigating
the challenge of climate change, it threatens the very survival
of coastal communities.
Congress can contribute to the great work that states are
already doing by expanding access to funding and resources. We
don't need to duplicate efforts, but we can provide more
support for states to preserve coastal economies. I have been
proud to work across the aisle with my colleagues, including
Congressman Wittman of Virginia, to create bipartisan solutions
that can work for America's coastal communities.
This bill will help reverse a worrying trend of shrinking
waterfronts, while simultaneously protecting jobs and
preserving the character of our coastal communities. It
establishes a Working Waterfront Grant Program for waterfront
preservation and sets up a task force within the Department of
Commerce to identify and prioritize critical needs for the
Nation's working waterfronts. Through the task force, the bill
will also help communities identify and mitigate the impacts of
the climate crisis.
These programs are voluntary, so states can opt into the
program this bill would create. Through the creation of
statewide working waterfront plans, each state can identify
their own needs and create their own plans to address the
unique challenges facing their working waterfronts.
It has been gratifying to hear so many proposals to solve
the problems facing our coastal communities today. Working
waterfronts are an integral part of our coastal communities,
economies, and traditions. We must all do our part to ensure
they survive into the future. I would welcome the opportunity
for the Committee to move this bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, and I yield
back.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Pingree follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Maine
Thank you, Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman for
giving me the opportunity to speak in support of the Ocean Based
Climate Solutions Act. This legislation includes my bipartisan bill
with Congressman Wittman, the Keep America's Waterfronts Working Act.
Throughout my time in Congress, I have advocated for the needs of
coastal communities and those who use our working waterfronts. I am
grateful to have a chance to discuss this bill with you today.
I know members of this Committee hear regularly from constituents
who make their living from the water. Whether they are boatbuilders
from the West Coast, seafood buyers and processors across America,
recreational fishing guides in the Gulf of Mexico, or commercial
fishermen and aquaculture business owners in New England, the refrain
is the same: water-dependent businesses from coast to coast need our
help. They want us to preserve access to the working waterfronts that
make their livelihoods possible and keep our coastal economies
thriving.
More than 30,000 Mainers rely on marine-related industries for
their livelihoods. In fact, in our state we refer to this as a
``Heritage Industry'' because it is so ingrained in the fabric of our
state. Yet out of 5,000 miles of coastline, just 20 miles of working
waterfronts remain in my state.
Across the country, working waterfronts are rapidly disappearing
due to heavy development pressure. When fishermen must grapple with the
loss of wharves, processing facilities, and other essential
infrastructure in addition to navigating the challenge of climate
change, it threatens the very survival of coastal communities.
Congress can contribute to the great work that states are already
doing by expanding access to funding and resources. We don't need to
duplicate efforts, but we can provide more support for states to
preserve coastal economies.
I have been proud to work across the aisle with my colleagues,
including Congressman Wittman of Virginia, to create bipartisan
solutions that can work for America's coastal communities.
This bill will help reverse a worrying trend of shrinking
waterfronts, while simultaneously protecting jobs and preserving the
character of our coastal communities.
It establishes a Working Waterfront Grant Program for waterfront
preservation and sets up a Task Force within the Department of Commerce
to identify and prioritize critical needs for our nation's working
waterfronts.
Through the task force, the bill will also help communities
identify and mitigate the impacts of the climate crisis.
These programs are voluntary, so states can opt into the
programming this bill would create. Through the creation of statewide
working waterfront plans, each state can identify their own needs and
create their own plans to address the unique challenges facing their
working waterfronts.
It has been gratifying to hear so many proposals to solve the
problems facing our coastal communities today. Working waterfronts are
an integral part of our coastal economies, communities, and traditions.
We must all do our part to ensure they survive into the future. I would
welcome the opportunity for the Committee to move this bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. I yield back.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Representative. Your
legislation is appreciated and I am very happy to be supporting
it and helping move it along.
Let me now recognize Representative Beyer for his statement
on H.R. 3892, his legislation.
Sir, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DONALD S. BEYER, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Beyer. Chairman Grijalva, thank you very much, and
thank you and Congressman Bentz for having this legislative
hearing. I am honored to be here today. It is always a thrill
to be back with the National Resources Committee.
I just recently re-introduced the bipartisan National
Oceans and Coastal Security Improvements Act. I worked on this
in the last session with Congressman Francis Rooney and this
session with my colleague, Representative Brian Mast. This bill
aims to improve the ability of coastal communities to become
resilient.
Resilience is the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb,
recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events,
such as extreme weather and long-term changing environmental
conditions. This bill is intended to reduce the vulnerability
of coastal communities and infrastructure from the impacts of
extreme weather events, climate hazards, and changing ocean
conditions.
Currently, there is insufficient Federal attention to the
necessary coastal research, resiliency, conservation, and
restoration work that coastal communities need, so this bill
aims to address those needs. The bill improves on NOAA's
existing National Coastal Resilience Fund with improved
definitions. It applies a formula for improved distributions
for state block grants and a national competitive grant
program.
It clarifies specific projects that would be eligible for
the fund's grant programs, including things like technical
assistance to help develop comprehensive resilience and
mitigation plans as an eligible funding effort.
Eligible recipients include state, local, tribal, and
territorial government agencies and non-profits. They use these
funds to increase the ability to prepare for and recover from a
variety of coastal threats, including hurricanes, tsunamis, and
sea level rise.
I have been working on coastal resilience funding since I
first got to Congress. You know, I live just across the river
in Alexandria, and I hear from constituents daily about the
nuisance flooding that has only gotten worse over time. I have
been working to address these concerns and build up the
resources that can respond, but unfortunately, resource needs
greatly outpace the funds that are historically available.
To competitively fund projects across the 35 coastal and
Great Lakes states, as well as territories, this bill will also
direct 30 percent of offshore wind revenues to the program. It
is critical that we protect our coastal communities and
ecosystems and help them more effectively adapt and prepare for
sea level rise and changing ocean conditions. According to the
4th NCA, shoreline counties hold 49.4 million housing units,
while homes and businesses worth at least $1.4 trillion sit
within an eighth of a mile of the coast. Flooding from rising
sea levels and storms is likely to destroy, or make unsuitable
for use, billions of dollars of property by the middle of the
century, with the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts facing greater-than-
average risk compared to other regions of the country.
In 2018 alone, there were 14 separate billion-dollar
weather and climate disasters in the United States with a total
cost of at least $91 billion. The cost of weather disasters has
illustrated the need to plan for these risks and invest in
resilience. This can reduce the need for far more costly steps
in the decades to come.
So, Mr. Chairman, this bill is intended to meet those
funding needs and reduce the vulnerability of coastal
communities. Thank you for letting me be here today. I hope we
can advance this bipartisan bill and help our coastal
communities.
With that, I yield back, sir.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Beyer follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Donald S. Beyer, Jr., a Representative
in Congress from the State of Virginia
Thank you Chair Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman for having
this legislative hearing.
I am honored to be here today and always glad to be back with the
Natural Resources Committee.
I just recently reintroduced the bipartisan National Ocean and
Coastal Security Improvements Act that I worked on with former
Congressman Rooney last Congress with my colleague Representative Mast
this Congress.
The bill aims to improve the ability of coastal communities to
become resilient.
Resilience is the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover
from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events such as extreme
weather or long-term changing environmental conditions.
This bill is intended to reduce the vulnerability of coastal
communities and infrastructure from the impacts of extreme weather
events, climate hazards, and changing ocean conditions.
Currently, there is insufficient federal attention to the necessary
coastal research, resiliency, conservation, and restoration work that
coastal communities need.
This bill aims to meet those needs.
This bill improves on NOAA's existing National Coastal Resilience
Fund with improved definitions, applies a formula for improved
distribution for state block grants and the national competitive grant
program, and clarifies specific projects that would be eligible for the
Fund's grant programs, including things like technical assistance to
help develop comprehensive resilience and mitigation plans as an
eligible funding effort.
Eligible recipients include state, local, tribal and territorial
government agencies and nonprofits who use these funds to increase the
ability to prepare for and recover from a variety of coastal threats,
including hurricanes, tsunamis, and sea level rise.
I have been working on improving our coastal resilience response
and funding since my first years in Congress.
I live in Alexandria and I hear from constituents daily about
nuisance flooding that has only gotten worse over time.
I have been working to address these concerns and build up the
resources that can respond. Unfortunately, resource needs greatly
outpace the funding that has been historically available.
To competitively fund projects across the 35 coastal and Great
Lakes states as well as territories, this bill also directs 30 percent
of offshore wind revenues to the program.
It is critical that we protect our coastal communities and
ecosystems and help them more effectively adapt and prepare for sea
level rise and changing ocean conditions.
According to the 4th NCA, shoreline counties hold 49.4 million
housing units, while homes and businesses worth at least $1.4 trillion
sit within about 1/8th mile of the coast.
Flooding from rising sea levels and storms is likely to destroy, or
make unsuitable for use, billions of dollars of property by the middle
of this century, with the Atlantic and Gulf coasts facing greater-than-
average risk compared to other regions of the country
In 2018 alone, there were 14 separate billion-dollar weather and
climate disasters in the United States, with a total cost of at least
$91 billion.
In the GAO's own words, federal investments in resilience to reduce
fiscal exposures have been limited.
The cost of recent weather disasters has illustrated the need to
plan for these risks and invest in resilience.
Investing in coastal resilience can reduce the need for far more
costly steps in the decades to come.
This bill is intended to meet those funding needs and reduce the
vulnerability of coastal communities and infrastructure from the
impacts of extreme weather events, climate hazards, and changing ocean
conditions.
Thank you for letting me be here with you today and I hope we can
advance this bipartisan bill to help our coastal communities.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Congressman Beyer. Much
appreciated. And you should have stayed on the Committee,
Beyer. I am telling you. We miss you like you miss us.
Mr. Beyer. I do miss you.
The Chairman. I now want to recognize the Subcommittee
Chair of the Committee of jurisdiction, Representative Huffman,
for his statement on H.R. 3906.
Chairman, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and we do, indeed,
have Beyer's remorse. We miss Don Beyer. And I want to thank
you for your leadership in bringing this legislation together.
Thank you for including my bill in the package.
The concept behind the Blue Carbon Protection Act is
simple. It aims to protect and restore blue carbon ecosystems
across the country. My bill invests in blue carbon ecosystems
so that the carbon sequestration potential of these important
areas can be sustained as a key tool in tackling the climate
crisis.
Blue carbon is the carbon stored in coastal and marine
ecosystems, like mangroves, tidal marshes, and seagrass beds.
Coastal and ocean blue carbon ecosystems can naturally capture
and store quantities of carbon for hundreds of years. And they
can do that 10 times more effectively per area than terrestrial
forests, really, a remarkably powerful tool.
Not only are these ecosystems excellent at storing carbon
and helping our climate, they are also some of the most
productive ecosystems in the world. They are important grounds
for feeding, spawning, breeding, and nesting for an incredibly
diverse community of animals. These ecosystems are also
critical natural buffers that protect shorelines, coastal
communities, and property.
However, these ecosystems are threatened by coastal
development, climate change, and pollution. In the last 50
years, up to 50 percent of some global blue carbon ecosystems
have already been converted or degraded. When these ecosystems
are destroyed, not only does the carbon that was stored in them
get released into the atmosphere, but significant sequestration
capacity is also lost. And the importance of these ecosystems
for carbon sequestration makes their protection and restoration
essential for nature-based climate solutions.
My bill directs NOAA to establish a new program to research
and evaluate blue carbon storage and to protect and restore
blue carbon ecosystems, including through a new blue carbon
grant program.
In addition, it directs NOAA to designate blue carbon areas
of significance. These areas would be prioritized for
protection, and the bill requires consultation and mitigation
requirements for proposed agency actions that may cause adverse
impacts to these areas of significance.
And lastly, my bill authorizes funding for NOAA, the Fish
and Wildlife Service, and the National Park Service, all of
which have some blue carbon areas under their jurisdiction, to
conduct coastal and marine restoration and protection
activities to sequester carbon and to reduce methane emissions
from degraded wetlands.
The Blue Carbon Protection Act would provide NOAA the tools
needed to ensure these important ecosystems are part of the
fight to tackle the climate crisis.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today, and
again, thank you very much for your leadership, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Huffman follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Jared Huffman, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California
Thank you Chair Grijalva for including my bill, the Blue Carbon
Protection Act, in today's hearing and in your climate legislation. I'd
also like to thank you, my colleagues on the Committee, and other
Members who have co-sponsored the bill.
The concept behind the Blue Carbon Protection Act is simple--it
aims to protect and restore blue carbon ecosystems across the country.
My bill invests in blue carbon ecosystems so that the carbon
sequestration potential of these important areas can be sustained as a
key tool in tackling the climate crisis.
Blue carbon is the carbon stored in coastal and marine ecosystems,
like mangroves, tidal marshes, and seagrass beds. Coastal and ocean
blue carbon ecosystems can naturally capture and store large quantities
of carbon, often for hundreds of years, and they are 10 times more
effective at sequestering carbon per area than terrestrial forests.
Not only are these ecosystems excellent at storing carbon and
helping our climate, they are also some of the most productive
ecosystems in the world. They serve as important grounds for feeding,
spawning, breeding, and nesting for an incredibly diverse community of
animals. These ecosystems are also critical as natural buffers to
protect shorelines, coastal communities, and property.
However, these ecosystems are threatened by coastal development,
climate change, and pollution. In the last 50 years, up to 50% of some
global blue carbon ecosystems have already been converted or degraded.
When these ecosystems are destroyed, not only is the carbon that was
stored released into the atmosphere, but significant sequestration
capacity is also lost. The importance of these ecosystems for carbon
sequestration makes their protection and restoration essential for
nature-based climate solutions.
My bill directs NOAA to establish a program to research and
evaluate blue carbon storage and protect and restore blue carbon
ecosystems, including through a new blue carbon grant program.
In addition, it directs NOAA to designate ``blue carbon areas of
significance.'' These areas would be prioritized for protection, and
the bill requires consultation and mitigation requirements for proposed
agency actions that may cause adverse impacts to these areas of
significance.
Lastly, my bill authorizes funding for NOAA, the Fish and Wildlife
Service, and National Park Service, which all have some blue carbon
areas under their jurisdiction, to conduct coastal and marine
restoration and protection activities to sequester carbon and reduce
methane emissions from degraded wetlands.
The Blue Carbon Protection Act would provide NOAA the tools needed
to ensure these important ecosystems are part of the fight to tackle
the climate crisis.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today. Thank you, and
I yield back.

______

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Much appreciated.
And that concludes our Member panel. I thank all the
Members and their staffs for their collective work in bringing
these good pieces of legislation forward, and we look forward
to moving it comprehensively and also the standalone ability of
each one of these pieces of legislation. Thank you.
We now transition to the second panel which will feature
Administration witnesses. Our first witness will be Mr. Stephen
Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy at the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.
Our second witness will be Ms. Nicole LeBoeuf, Acting
Administrator for the National Ocean Service at the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Let me just quickly remind the witnesses that under
Committee Rules, their oral statements are limited to 5
minutes. Their entire written statement will appear in the
hearing record.
The lights will turn green on the witness table, after 4
minutes, yellow, and then red. Your time will have expired when
the red light comes on, and I will ask you to please complete
your statement. I will also allow the entire panel to testify
before questioning from the Members.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Guertin for him to testimony
and welcome him. Sir, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN GUERTIN, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR POLICY, U.S.
FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA

Mr. Guertin. Good afternoon, Chairman Grijalva, Congressman
Bentz, and members of the Committee. I am Steve Guertin, Deputy
Director of Policy for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on H.R.
3764, the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
My written testimony provides detailed comments on the
specific provisions of the bill related to the Service. I would
like to focus my remarks here on the climate crisis and how the
Service is stepping up to meet the challenges that it presents
to our wildlife conservation mission.
The Administration has set ambitious goals that will ensure
America and the world can meet the urgent demands of climate
change, and the Service is a key player in advancing those
goals.
We are integrating climate change considerations into
nearly all of our actions from at-risk species conservation
decisions to invasive species prevention and response to
prescribed fire activities.
The Service is working to reduce and mitigate the impacts
of climate change on our trusted resources. We are actively
combating this threat by increasing carbon sequestration
through the maintenance and restoration of healthy ecosystems
and by reducing our own carbon footprint to more efficient
facilities and vehicles.
Our mission is working with others to conserve, protect,
and enhance fish, wildlife, and plants and their habitats for
the continuing benefit of the American people. Climate change
presents a profound and growing challenge for this conservation
mission. Warming temperatures, changing weather patterns, and
other climatic changes are having far-reaching impacts on
species and ecosystems.
The impacts of climate change are especially apparent along
our Nation's coasts. Our coasts face rising sea levels,
saltwater intrusion, and increasingly frequent and intense
storms.
These climate stressors can have cascading and cumulative
impacts on species and their habitats. Increasing coastal
development further compounds these risks by reducing available
habitat and making our coast less resilient in the face of
storms.
Despite these challenges, there are ample opportunities to
mitigate the effects of climate change and create a more
resilient future for people and wildlife along the coast. The
potential for oceans and coasts to absorb and hold on to
atmospheric carbon, also known as blue carbon, is easily
overlooked, even though it is a critical tool in the fight
against climate change.
The Service manages extensive coastal and marine resources
and works with partners to restore and protect coastal wetlands
and ecosystems across the country. Section 109 of this bill
complements our existing work and will increase our capacity to
harness the potential of blue carbon ecosystems.
The protection of our Nation's coastal barriers is another
highly effective strategy to combat climate change. Congress
had great foresight when it enacted the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act nearly 40 years ago. Using a broadly supported,
free market approach, CBRA removes Federal incentives to build
in risky coastal areas. The law saves taxpayers millions of
dollars each year in what would be wasteful expenditures.
In addition, these areas which were relatively undeveloped
40 years ago remain relatively undeveloped today--3.5 million
acres of the coast barrier resource system provide significant
benefits to coastal communities and wildlife. They serve as
natural buffers against storm surge and sea level rise, habitat
for countless fish and wildlife species, improved water
quality, and enhanced recreation and tourism opportunities.
As the impacts of sea level rise and storm surge due to
climate change continue to increase, CBRA is more relevant and
important than ever. This bill recognizes CBRA's role in
mitigating the coastal hazards associated with climate change
and in reducing development pressure along the coast.
In order to address the growing threat of climate change,
it is essential that we consider all available tools to build
climate resiliencies in communities, species, and habitats. By
investing in coastal restoration, green infrastructure, and
nature-based solutions, we can create and improve more fish and
wildlife habitat, sequester more carbon, and more effectively
protect coastal communities from severe storms.
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act recognizes the
important role that oceans and coasts play in addressing
climate change and its impacts on the people and natural
resources that depend on them. The bill seeks to strengthen the
Federal Government's response to climate change through its
stewardship of our Nation's marine and coastal resource. The
Service appreciates the Committee's attention to this important
issue.
We are committed to meeting the challenge that the change
in climate presents to fish and wildlife resources, and we look
forward to working with this Committee and Congress to advance
this important work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Guertin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior
Good afternoon Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and
members of the Committee. I am Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for
Policy for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) within the
Department of the Interior (Department). I appreciate the opportunity
to testify before you today on the Service-related provisions contained
in H.R. 3764, the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act. This testimony
provides comments on the provisions of greatest relevance to the
Service's areas of jurisdiction and does not include comments on other
provisions of the legislation, which continue to be under review by the
Department and the Administration.
The Service's mission is ``working with others to conserve, protect
and enhance fish, wildlife, and plants and their habitats for the
continuing benefit of the American people.'' As we work to carry out
this important charge, climate change presents a profound and growing
conservation challenge. Warming temperatures, changing weather
patterns, and other climatic changes are having far-reaching impacts on
species and ecosystems, causing shifts and contractions in species
ranges, changes in the timing of breeding and migration events, and
declines in fish, wildlife, and plant populations.
The impacts of greenhouse gas emissions and climate change are
especially apparent along our nation's coasts, which face rising sea
levels, saltwater intrusion, warming ocean temperatures, ocean
acidification, and increasingly frequent and intense storms. These
stressors can have cascading and cumulative impacts to species and
their habitats. Increasing coastal development further compounds these
risks by reducing available habitat and making our coasts less
resilient in the face of storms. With population growth and
urbanization projected to increase along the American coastline, the
people, assets, and natural resources exposed to these risks will
increase significantly.
Despite these challenges, our coasts present a tremendous
opportunity to address climate change and its effects, and create a
more resilient future for people and wildlife alike. By investing in
green infrastructure and coastal protection and restoration, fish and
wildlife habitat can be created and improved, more carbon can be
sequestered, and coastal communities can be more effectively buffered
from severe storms. The Service deploys these strategies in coastal
habitats across the country to capture and store carbon, mitigate the
impacts of climate change, and help wildlife and people adapt to our
changing world. The Ocean-Based Climate Solution Act recognizes the
important role that oceans and coasts play in addressing climate change
and its impacts on the people and natural resources that depend on
them. The bill authorizes new programs and expands upon existing ones
with the goal of better tackling the impacts of climate change on
coastal and marine communities and ecosystems.
title iv--coastal barrier resources act amendments
Undeveloped coastal barriers and their associated aquatic habitat
provide a number of benefits to the economy and society. These lands
and waters serve as natural storm buffers; provide habitat for
countless fish and wildlife species, including many at-risk species;
support recreationally and commercially important fisheries; improve
water quality; and create recreation and tourism opportunities that
help support local economies. Development of these dynamic areas,
however, often puts people in harm's way and can disrupt the natural
movement and functions of the barriers, degrading fish and wildlife
habitat and increasing shoreline erosion. The impacts of sea level rise
and storm surge due to climate change will increase both the risk
associated with developing coastal barriers and the value of these
areas as cost-effective buffers to protect mainland communities against
coastal storm damage.
With the passage of the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (CBRA) in
1982, Congress recognized that certain actions and programs of the
Federal Government have historically subsidized and encouraged
development on coastal barriers, resulting in the loss of natural
resources, threats to human life, health, and property, and the
expenditure of millions of tax dollars each year. The purposes of the
law are to save taxpayers' money, keep people out of harm's way, and
remove federal incentives to develop coastal barriers. The law
accomplishes these purposes by restricting most new federal
expenditures and financial assistance, including federal flood
insurance, in areas designated as the John H. Chafee Coastal Barrier
Resources System (CBRS).
The CBRS now encompasses about 3.5 million acres along the
Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico, Great Lakes, U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto
Rico coasts. The Service is responsible for administering CBRA, which
includes maintaining and updating the official maps of the CBRS and
consulting with federal agencies that propose to spend funds within the
CBRS. Congress plays an important role in the implementation of the law
by considering and adopting the Service's recommended maps into law.
CBRA does not prohibit or regulate development; however, it removes
the federal incentives to build on these unstable and environmentally
sensitive areas. By removing federal incentives for such development,
CBRA uses a nonregulatory and free-market approach to conserve and
maintain these hurricane-prone, biologically rich coastal barriers.
Over its nearly 40-year history, CBRA has been successful in achieving
its goals. One recent study evaluating the effectiveness of CBRA in
discouraging development on coastal barriers found that the Act has
been successful in its intention of decreasing development rates and
densities of hazard-prone coastal areas.\1\ Another study found that
CBRA reduced federal coastal disaster expenditures by $9.5 billion
between 1989 and 2013.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Kyle Onda et al., ``Does removal of federal subsidies
discourage urban development? An evaluation of the US Coastal Barrier
Resources Act,'' PLoS ONE 15, no. 6 (June 2020): e0233888, accessed
March 25, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0233888.
\2\ Andrew S. Coburn and John C. Whitehead, ``An analysis of
federal expenditures related to the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(CBRA) of 1982,'' Journal of Coastal Research 35, no. 6 (November
2019): 1358-1361, accessed March 25, 2021, https://doi.org/10.2112/
JCOASTRES-D-18-00114.1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maintaining these natural storm buffers will be even more important
as the nation prepares for more severe coastal flooding, erosion, and
other anticipated effects associated with climate change and sea level
rise. Title IV of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act recognizes
CBRA's role in mitigating these hazards associated with climate change
and reducing development pressures along our coasts. The bill makes
several amendments to the law to expand its geographic scope and to
enhance compliance with and awareness of CBRA. The Service supports the
provisions of this title, which are outlined below, and looks forward
to working with the Committee on technical changes.
Section 401. Undeveloped coastal barrier
The Service supports Section 401, which revises the definition of
an ``undeveloped coastal barrier'' to remove restrictive language
regarding the impact of ``man's activities'' on coastal barriers.
Section 401 also modifies the definition of a coastal barrier to
accommodate the geomorphology of the Pacific Coast and address sea
level rise.
Section 402. Coastal hazard pilot project
The Service supports Section 402, which authorizes a pilot project
to examine application of the free market CBRA approach to certain high
hazard coastal areas that are not currently a part of the CBRS. The
longer-term purpose of this project is to better address coastal
hazards that are increasing, such as sea level rise and storm surge.
This section directs the Service to consider including within the CBRS,
certain vulnerable coastal areas that would not otherwise meet the
criteria of CBRA and submit to Congress a subset of draft maps
delineating those areas. This pilot project could lead to future
Congressional action to add such areas to the CBRS under certain
conditions and may result in enhanced coastal resiliency for the longer
term.
Section 403. Report on expanding Coastal Barrier Resources Act to the
Pacific coast
Section 403 authorizes a study on expanding the CBRS to include
areas along the Pacific coast, including Alaska, Pacific Territories,
and Freely Associated States. The Service supports the intent of this
provision to increase the resiliency of the Pacific coastline and save
taxpayer dollars. There are, however, significant geological and
climatic differences between the Pacific coast and those areas of the
Atlantic and Gulf coasts that meet the definition of coastal barrier
under CBRA. Additionally, large portions of the Pacific coast of the
contiguous United States are already either highly developed and
therefore would not meet criteria for inclusion in the CBRS, or are
currently protected for conservation purposes, and therefore at low
risk of development. Given these significant differences between the
Pacific coast and other coastlines currently subject to CBRA, the
Service does not believe that CBRA is the most effective tool to
achieve the goal of this section. If enacted, we would interpret
Section 403 to allow for the consideration of coastal high hazard areas
similar to those considered in Section 402. To ensure that the
potential impacts on federally-recognized tribes, indigenous
communities, and cultural and historic resources are fully considered,
the Service would coordinate with the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
Interior's Office of Insular Affairs on a study of expanding CBRA to
the Pacific Coast.
Section 404. Require disclosure to prospective buyers that property is
in the CBRS
Section 404 requires that sellers of real property disclose to
buyers when property is within the CBRS and would require the
Department to create an online reporting system for such transactions.
The Service supports the goal of this provision to increase awareness
of CBRA. A CBRS designation can limit the availability of federal flood
insurance and other federal subsidies. When prospective buyers are not
aware of a property's inclusion in the CBRS, they are unable to make
informed decisions that consider the increased costs of obtaining
private flood insurance. Because many sellers (and buyers) may not be
aware of existing CBRS designations, the disclosure system established
under Section 404 may not have the full desired effect. The Service
suggests modeling this disclosure requirement after the Residential
Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, which has been highly
effective at increasing awareness of lead-based paint and lead-based
paint hazards before the sale or lease of most housing.
Section 405. Improve Federal agency compliance with CBRA
The Service supports Section 405, which requires the Secretary of
the Interior (Secretary) to annually certify to Congress whether
federal agencies are in compliance with CBRA. This builds upon an
existing requirement that affected agencies certify annually to the
Secretary that they are in compliance with the Act. Section 405 also
directs affected agencies to update their regulations and guidance, as
necessary, to comply with CBRA.
Section 406. Excess Federal property
The Service supports Section 406, which expands upon the existing
authority for the Secretary to administratively add to the CBRS excess
federal property that qualifies as an ``undeveloped coastal barrier''
to also allow for the inclusion of any excess federal property
regardless of the degree of development.
Section 407. Emergency exceptions to limitations on expenditures
The Service supports Section 407, which modifies the emergency
exemption to CBRA's limitations on expenditures to better provide for
critical response activities to alleviate an immediate emergency.
Section 6 of CBRA provides several exceptions to the law's limitations
on expenditures for federal assistance. These exemptions are divided
into two broad categories--those exempted activities and projects that
must be consistent with the purposes of CBRA and those that are
exempted regardless of consistency.
Currently, the law's exemption for emergency actions essential to
saving lives and protecting property and public health and safety
requires that the exempted actions be consistent with the purposes of
CBRA. The Service supports removing this requirement, as it is not
practical for urgent life-saving emergency actions. The Service also
agrees that this exception should be limited to expenditures necessary
to alleviate the ``immediate'' emergency, consistent with the original
spirit of the exception. It is the Service's view that the emergency
exception should not be used to facilitate federal expenditures for
property protection activities that exceed the scope and needs of the
true and immediate emergency.
Section 408. Authorization of appropriations
The Service supports Section 408, which reauthorizes CBRA through
2026 at an increased level. Fulfillment of this section will better
position the Service to help mitigate the effects of climate change. In
addition to supporting the implementation of the above provisions, the
increased authorization level will allow the Service to increase its
capacity to maintain and update the maps, improve public awareness of
CBRA, and engage in consultation with other federal agencies.
Additional opportunities for enhancement of CBRA
The Service proposes the following additional amendments to CBRA to
complement and enhance the efforts contained in Title IV, H.R. 3764,
the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
Incentivizing federally-funded buyouts to enhance long term coastal
resiliency
With the heightened risk of sea level rise and coastal flooding,
federally-funded buyouts that remove properties from the development
cycle and allow them to return to their natural state are becoming an
increasingly important component of federal disaster policy. As
coastlines become more vulnerable to the effects of climate change,
federal, state, and local governments are offering incentives in
certain areas to help keep people and property out of harm's way. Such
efforts can result in a patchwork of acquired properties when some
property owners decline buyout offers. Because buyout programs are
generally consistent with the purposes of CBRA, the Service recommends
amending Section 4 to allow the Service to administratively add to the
CBRS coastal barrier areas that have been offered federally-funded
buyouts. This authority would build upon CBRA's free-market approach
and allow property owners a choice to be fairly compensated by the
federal government for transferring ownership of their property and
removing it from the development cycle; or to maintain their homes in
high-risk areas, but to do so at their own expense, without future
federal financial assistance.
Mapping progress and timely adoption of recommended maps
An important step in solidifying CBRA's conservation legacy is the
digitization and modernization of the maps upon which the law is based.
The official maps of the CBRS were first created more than 40 years
ago. Today's technology produces more refined maps and digital data
that are more easily accessed and understood by the public. Congress
recognized the challenges associated with the outdated maps and,
through the 2000 and 2005 CBRA reauthorizations, directed the Service
to prepare digital maps for the entire CBRS and make recommendations
for its expansion. The Service agrees that the maps should be
modernized and is working diligently on that effort.
To date, the Service has transmitted comprehensively revised maps
for approximately 14 percent of the CBRS to Congress for consideration
and Congress has adopted modernized maps for 9 percent of the acreage
within the CBRS.
The Service is actively remapping an additional 26 percent of the
CBRS. This includes the Hurricane Sandy Remapping Project, through
which the Service is modernizing and remapping the official maps of the
CBRS for the nine states affected by Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The
Service is also undertaking smaller mapping projects to address mapping
errors and make technical corrections, including revising the maps for
certain units in Florida and South Carolina. The maps associated with
these projects recently underwent public review and we look forward to
delivering the Service's final recommended maps to Congress in the near
future.
Congress' adoption of final recommended maps produced by the
Service will help enhance coastal resiliency and sustainability by
improving federal agency compliance with CBRA and by adding other
vulnerable coastal areas that qualify as undeveloped coastal barriers
to the CBRS. Many of these revised maps also correct mapping errors
affecting property owners and provide more accurate and accessible CBRS
data for planning coastal infrastructure projects, habitat conservation
efforts, and flood risk mitigation measures. We would appreciate the
opportunity to brief the Committee on the process and on outstanding
maps.
title vii--strengthening marine mammal conservation
The Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) of 1972 established a
federal responsibility for the management and conservation of marine
mammals and was the first statute to call for an ecosystem approach to
natural resource management and conservation. Jurisdiction under the
MMPA is shared between the Service and the National Marine Fisheries
Service, with the Service having authority over the conservation and
management of sea and marine otters, walrus, polar bear, three species
of manatee, and dugong.
Despite the significant conservation gains since the passage of the
MMPA nearly 50 years ago, many marine mammal populations continue to
face declines due to habitat loss and other anthropogenic impacts such
as boat strikes and entanglement in marine debris. The Service supports
efforts to strengthen MMPA implementation and enhance conservation
delivery for marine mammals, such as those in Title VII of the Ocean-
Based Climate Solutions Act. We offer the below comments on the
sections in this title and look forward to working with the Committee
on this and other marine mammal legislation.
Section 701. Conservation of marine mammals adversely affected by
climate change
Section 701 directs the Administrator of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to designate a list of marine mammal
species and stocks that may be negatively impacted by climate change
and to develop climate impact management plans for the entities on that
list. The Service supports the intent of this section to increase the
consideration of climate change impacts in marine mammal management and
conservation and recommends that this section direct coordination with
the Service for those species under Service jurisdiction. All Service-
managed stocks are already facing the effects of climate change,
including loss of sea ice and changes in the range and abundance of
important prey species. As such, the Service recommends that the
listing process be struck from this section so that agencies can focus
limited resources on developing and implementing measures to address
the impacts of climate on marine mammals.
Section 701 also recognizes the inherent connection between climate
impact management plans and similar plans under Section 115 of the MMPA
(conservation plans) and Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act
(recovery plans) and encourages the integration of such plans. The
Service appreciates the Committee's consideration of these
complementary plans and recommends that the requirements of Section 701
be incorporated into existing requirements for similar plans under the
MMPA and other conservation statutes to avoid duplicative efforts. Many
of the components of climate impact management plans are already
considered in existing species planning efforts. By incorporating the
concepts of this section into existing management and recovery plans,
we can achieve more effective and efficient conservation for marine
mammals.
Additional Marine Mammal Sections

Section 702. Vessel speed restrictions in marine mammal
habitat

Section 703. Monitoring ocean noise for marine mammal
protection

Section 704. Grants for seaports to establish programs to
reduce the impacts of vessel traffic and port operations on
marine mammals

Section 706. Grants to support technology that reduces
underwater noise from vessels

Section 707. Naval technology transfer for quieting
Federal non-combatant vessels

The risks and challenges that marine mammals face due to climate
change are exacerbated by other human-caused stressors, including
vessel strikes and noise pollution. We have seen the harmful effects of
these stressors on Service-managed species. Sea otters may alter their
behavior in the face of noise pollution, with high levels of noise
causing temporary and permanent hearing loss. Slow-moving manatees may
be injured or killed by accidental collisions with watercraft, an
ongoing threat that the Service is working to reduce in coordination
with state and local authorities.
Sections 702, 703, 704, 706, and 707 of the Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act authorize NOAA and the U.S. military to pursue various
studies, grant programs and regulations with the goals of reducing and
mitigating the impacts of ocean noise and vessel strikes. The Service
supports these goals and recommends that these sections be carried out
in coordination with the Service and, when appropriate, the relevant
state, Tribal, and local governments. Coordination among the many
agencies responsible for marine mammal conservation is essential in
order to provide the best management strategies and practices for
marine mammals.
title i--blue carbon
Section 109. Federal coastal and marine blue carbon restoration and
protections; funding
Section 109 directs the Service, the National Park Service, and
NOAA to conduct coastal and marine restoration and protection
activities to support blue carbon ecosystems. The Service manages
extensive coastal and marine resources, including 760 million acres of
Marine National Monument submerged lands and waters, and has vast
experience in restoring and protecting coastal wetlands and ecosystems
across the country. Many lands and waters of the National Wildlife
Refuge System are strategically located along our coasts and estuaries
where blue carbon ecosystems are located, and the Service's Coastal
Program provides key financial and technical assistance to federal,
state, and local agencies as well as local communities for projects
that have blue carbon co-benefits. As a result, the Service is well-
positioned to execute the Service-related provisions of Section 109 and
to further the goals of restoration and protection of our nation's blue
carbon ecosystems.
conclusion
Warming from anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions will accelerate
the rate of climate change, which will in turn have significant
consequences for people and natural resources across the globe. In
order to address this growing threat, it is essential that we consider
all available tools to build climate resilience for communities,
species, and habitats. The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act recognizes
the dual vulnerability and resilience of our coastal and marine
resources and proposes, through the policies discussed above, to
strengthen the Federal Government's response to climate change through
stewardship of these resources. The Service is committed to meeting the
challenge a changing climate presents to fish and wildlife resources,
and we look forward to working with this Committee and the Congress to
enhance this important work.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Stephen Guertin, Deputy
Director for Policy, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan
Question 1. Several parts of this bill call upon the Department of
the Interior to leverage their resources and improve the resilience of
the insular areas, tribes, and Indigenous communities to the rapidly
worsening effects of climate change. How will focusing on equity while
lifting up these historically neglected and under-represented areas and
communities benefit everyone in our fight against climate change?

Answer. Although climate change affects everyone, we know that it
disproportionately affects historically disadvantaged and
underrepresented communities. These communities are often hit the
hardest by climate stressors like sea level rise and flooding but have
the fewest resources available to address or prevent climate impacts.
In addition, there are many communities that have been underrepresented
in discussions about how to address climate change.
To advance climate adaptation and resilience in these areas, we
will first listen. Then, we will work together and leverage our
resources to support climate adaptation and resilience projects in
these communities. These projects will improve the health and safety of
populations in the most vulnerable situations, prevent damage to homes
and infrastructure, minimize economic losses, and create new jobs,
recreational opportunities, and access to nature to support healthy
ecosystems, thriving fish and wildlife populations, and vibrant
communities. These social, economic, and environmental outcomes benefit
all Americans.

Questions Submitted by Representative Graves
Question 1. South Louisiana is home to a truly unique ecosystem--
the coastal forest. These forests comprise over 1 million acres of
cypress-tupelo swamp, and represent the final stretch of land connected
to the Mississippi River Watershed before it deposits into the Gulf of
Mexico. The forests were formed over centuries from the hydrologic
patterns of the Mississippi River, which provided alternating periods
of drying followed by several months of seasonal flooding on an annual
basis. The net result of these hydrologic patterns over thousands of
years was an environment uniquely adapted for bald cypress and water
tupelo trees to establish and thrive.
However, due to a multitude of natural and man-made changes to the
landscape over the past century, these forests are declining at a
staggering rate. The loss of these valuable ecosystems represents a
significant loss of biodiversity, valuable wildlife habitat, floodwater
retention and control, and hurricane and storm surge buffering. Yet
perhaps most alarming, these forests would convert from a beneficial
carbon sink to a detrimental carbon source.
Restoring the coastal forests of south Louisiana would fulfill many
of the enumerated goals of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
Moreover, the grant programs included in this legislation could provide
a valuable lifeline to these forests. Unfortunately, I am worried they
will not be included in these programs because they are 100% freshwater
systems.

Would these forests be considered ``blue carbon'' under the Ocean-
Based Climate Solutions Act and, if not, how can we work to have them
included in these future grant programs?

Answer. H.R. 3764 defines ``blue carbon ecosystem'' to mean
``vegetated coastal habitats including mangroves, tidal marshes,
seagrasses, kelp forests, and other tidal or salt-water wetlands that
have the capacity to sequester carbon from the atmosphere for a period
of not less than 100 years.'' The Service does not believe this
definition includes freshwater systems like the coastal forests
referenced in your question.
The Service agrees that these ecosystems can provide numerous
ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration. While freshwater
systems do not appear to qualify as blue carbon under the Ocean-Based
Climate Solution Act of 2021, the Service has financial and technical
assistance programs that can support conservation of these coastal
forests, including our Coastal Program and Partners for Fish and
Wildlife Program. We would be happy to work with your office to
identify existing financial assistance programs available to these
ecosystems.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much for your comments. Much
appreciated.
Let me now turn to Ms. LeBoeuf, Acting Administrator,
National Ocean Service, NOAA, for your comments. You are
recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF NICOLE LEBOEUF, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL
OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. LeBoeuf. Chairman Grijalva, Congressman Bentz, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the bills comprising the Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act of 2021. I am Nicole LeBoeuf, Acting NOAA
Assistant Administrator for Ocean Services and Coastal Zone
Management.
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act addresses many of the
challenges facing the ocean coastal resources and coastal
communities as well as economies and industries upon which our
entire Nation depends. I thank the Committee for shining a
light on ocean and coastal health and for connecting the
contributions of NOAA's long-standing programs and technical
expertise to new and innovative approaches to climate
readiness.
The Act highlights the dual roles of the ocean and coasts
in both expressing and in reducing the impacts of climate
change. Beyond intensifying hurricanes, the ocean's heat and
circulation influence our inland weather patterns, including
dangerous droughts and wildfires occurring far from the water's
edge. At the same time, ocean and coastal ecosystems will be
essential to creating climate resilient solutions via carbon
sequestration or as buffers from hazardous conditions.
These bills have substantial implications for NOAA's
mission and operations and are timely as the demand for our
climate and ocean-related services is rapidly increasing.
Today, I will briefly touch on key areas of alignment between
the various bills and NOAA's interest and capabilities,
including those found within NOAA's FY 2022 budget request.
One of NOAA's long-standing and increasingly important
missions is safeguarding communities, industry, and critical
infrastructure in the coastal zone.
Along our coasts and Great Lakes, Americans are already
experiencing changes in the intensity, duration, and frequency
of extreme weather, as well as the chronic threat of sea level
rise which already impacts lives, homes, and our essential
built-in natural environments.
NOAA must be empowered and sufficiently resourced to build
on its foundational ocean and coastal data and services to
produce timely, authoritative observations and predictions and
to facilitate Federal coordination and integration of coastal
risk data.
NOAA's FY 2022 request includes upgrading our ocean and
coastal observing systems and better integrating NOAA's marine
navigation, weather, and environmental information into public
and private sector decision making to ensure that we are
planning for changing conditions in this urgent and historic
opportunity to make significant investments in our Nation's
future.
Because underserved communities are especially vulnerable
to climate change, NOAA proposes targeted investments related
to historically underserved populations, including enhancements
to the development and delivery of coastal hazard products like
our weather and climate tool kit and our sea level rise viewer.
With NOAA's unique emphasis on research-to-operations, our
Fiscal Year 2022 budget proposals expand key flagship programs
to help communities prepare for the impacts of a changing
climate, and it seeks to empower on the ground expertise via
Sea Grant, NOAA's Coastal Zone Management Program, and our
regional observing partners.
NOAA proposes to enhance our work with nature-based
resilience solutions via coastal habitat and research, engaging
communities and creating local jobs through significant new
investments in coral reef conservation programs and the
National Coastal Resilience Fund.
NOAA proposes to augment our pioneering research on blue
carbon sequestration for places that provide fish habitat,
storm and erosion protection, and water quality improvements.
And NOAA is actively seeking input from key stakeholders such
as tribes and regional fishery management councils on how to
create climate resilient fisheries as well as how to conserve
species and special places through investments in our national
marine sanctuaries and our National Estuarine Research Reserve
System.
NOAA proposes to dedicate more research toward biological
observing and modeling to inform conservation and restoration
adaptation strategies that project climate impacts and then
incorporate this knowledge into our next generation
observations and forecasting modeling systems and tool
development.
This includes NOAA's proposed new investments in our
capacity to support the planning, siting, and permitting of
offshore wind development so that Americans may expand clean
energy usage while protecting marine resources, fisheries, and
other important ocean activities.
NOAA is a proud leader in delivering authoritative climate
and ocean science and services in service of the Nation's
coastal communities and in ensuring responsible stewardship of
our ocean and coastal resources.
We share the Committee's interest in advancing the role of
ocean and coasts in tackling the climate crisis, and we welcome
the opportunity to work with you to enhance NOAA's unique
mission and capabilities to help all Americans prepare for
climate change.
Thank you for your support of NOAA, and I look forward to
any questions that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. LeBoeuf follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Nicole R. LeBoeuf, Assistant Administrator
for Ocean Services and Coastal Zone Management (Acting), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
``Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021.'' NOAA appreciates the
Committee's strong commitment to addressing climate impacts to our
ocean and coasts and to sustaining their health and resilience for this
and future generations. Today, my testimony will focus on key NOAA
priorities that align with and complement provisions of this
legislation. We look forward to continued collaboration with the
Committee throughout the legislative process.
It is fitting that this hearing is being held during the month of
June as President Biden recently designated June 2021 as National Ocean
Month, in continuance of one of our nation's modern traditions. The
world's ocean is critical to our Nation and to life on Earth. The ocean
powers our economy, provides food for billions of people, supplies 50
percent of the world's oxygen, offers recreational opportunities for us
to enjoy, and regulates weather patterns and our global climate system.
Likewise, our coastal habitats and ecosystems provide essential
protection from coastal hazards for large population centers and are
home to many commercially and recreationally important marine species.
While human activities are impacting the ocean environment, resulting
in ocean warming, rising sea levels, and ocean acidification, the ocean
environment and the associated ocean economy also present critical
opportunities to strengthen our efforts to mitigate and adapt to the
impacts of climate change.
NOAA's science and services are the bedrock of efforts to
understand these changes and to enhance resilience and efficient
operations of many sectors of the economy, including ports, shipping,
transportation, agriculture, seafood and fishing, and ocean-based
tourism and recreation. In 2018, our ocean and coastal economies
contributed $397 billion or 45 percent of the U.S. GDP.\1\ Investing in
climate-resilient, reliable coastal infrastructure--including modern
ports and waterways--that can withstand the impacts of rising seas and
powerful storms will keep our economy competitive in the global
marketplace while safeguarding our communities and their livelihoods.
Conserving and restoring coastal wetlands and habitats will improve the
resilience of coastal communities, support climate mitigation efforts,
and help restore nursery areas that are important to our essential
commerce and recreational fisheries and other marine wildlife.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/data/coastaleconomy.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
noaa's priority initiatives align with the ocean-based climate
solutions act
NOAA's mission is science, service, and stewardship. Our reach goes
from the surface of the sun to the depths of the ocean floor as we work
to keep the public informed of the changing environment. NOAA manages
fisheries, coastal habitats and species, and protected areas around the
Nation and administers key authorities, such as the Coastal Zone
Management Act and others, based on the best scientific information
available. The broad portfolio of environmental science, tools, and
services that NOAA provides are crucial to carrying out our mission and
to ensuring that future generations can enjoy the benefits of healthy
ocean and coastal communities, economies, and ecosystems. NOAA's
capabilities to observe, monitor, and predict changes in our oceans and
along our coasts are more important than ever given the unprecedented
rate with which those changes are occurring.

At this critical time in our planet's history, many of NOAA's ocean
and coastal priorities are aligned with the goals of the Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act of 2021 and can be summarized in the following
categories:

1.  Improving the resilience of critical infrastructure and services;

2.  Mobilizing the next generation of workers to equitably advance
climate solutions;

3.  Improving environmental and community resilience; and

4.  Scaling up climate science and services, innovation, and research
& development.

While this is not an exhaustive list, these four categories
highlight some of NOAA's priority ocean and coastal activities to
address climate change.
(1) Improving the resilience of critical infrastructure and services
The science is clear. The impacts of climate change are happening
now and are projected to worsen over the coming decades, not only here
in the United States but around the world. Coastal communities and
critical infrastructure are particularly vulnerable and are already
experiencing adverse impacts. These impacts include changes in the
intensity, duration, and frequency of certain extreme-weather events,
as well as sea level rise and coastal flooding, which are increasingly
threatening lives, homes, and the natural environment. We must
safeguard investments in infrastructure, bringing to bear NOAA's
essential observation and prediction capabilities to help others assess
and plan for climate risks in both the near and long term.
NOAA plays an increasingly important role in understanding our
changing coastal environment and strengthening and protecting coastal
infrastructure and economies.
National Coastal Resilience Data and Services
Improved understanding of coastal flood risk, sea level rise,
changing Great Lakes water levels, and land subsidence is an urgent
national priority due to their significant negative environmental,
economic, and social impacts. The scope of this challenge requires a
long-term, whole-of-government commitment, with NOAA science and
service delivery at its center. NOAA's long-standing observational
infrastructure, such as the National Water Level Observation Network
(NWLON), the National Bathymetric Source, and the National Spatial
Reference System, represent foundational national assets, that
undergird the ability of public and private sector partners to monitor,
model, predict, and warn communities about climate-related impacts.
This information is already enabling city and community planners to
revise building codes and land use plans on decadal and longer
timescales. For example, with more flooding expected in the future,
NOAA's foundational and climate data have the potential to play an
increasing role in helping our nation decide how and where to build.
This legislation would authorize NOAA to build on these services
and develop a comprehensive suite of data, products, and services,
which would produce and maintain timely, authoritative observations,
predictions, and maps to allow coastal communities to understand and
plan for floods and other risks. NOAA's science and services are
central to our nation's ability to make climate-informed decisions,
both when it comes to weather- and climate-ready infrastructure and
safeguarding and investing in more vulnerable communities. We are
working to assess and eliminate any inequalities that exist in the
coastal flooding products and services available to users due to
regional gaps in data coverage. For example, in remote or rural
communities in particular, the distance between water level or vertical
land motion observations, modeling, and analysis can exceed 200 miles.
NOAA's FY 2022 Budget Request lays the framework for success in service
delivery equity moving forward.
Furthermore, we have an historic opportunity to make significant
investments in our nation's infrastructure as we prepare for coastal
change; however, that will require more than just pouring concrete. For
example, the capacity and efficiency of our Nation's seaports must be
sustained and enhanced given their major role in supporting our
economic livelihood and the global competitiveness of U.S. goods,
generating $5.4 trillion in economic activity, and supporting the
employment of more than 31 million people. NOAA's integrated suite of
timely and accurate information, products, and services enhance
understanding of our ports and waterways, their connections to our
coastal communities and intermodal transportation networks, and their
vulnerability to current and future weather and climate hazards.
Regional Ocean Partnerships and U.S. IOOS Regional Associations
NOAA's mission could not be fully carried out without our long-
standing and trusted local and regional partnerships. The Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act 2021 authorizes the establishment of new Regional
Ocean Partnerships on request from the governor of a coastal state.
Regional Ocean Partnerships are state-driven, voluntary forums that
identify shared priorities and take action on a diversity of ocean,
coastal and Great Lakes issues. These long-standing interstate
partnerships are also an effective means of fostering interagency
coordination, data-informed ocean and coastal management, and
thoughtful engagement with regional constituents. For example, NOAA is
the federal co-chair of the Northeast Regional Ocean Council (NROC), a
15-year-old federal-state partnership that addresses challenges at a
regional scale around ecosystem health, coastal hazards, and
infrastructure. Through NROC, NOAA has established a 10-year credible
ocean management forum trusted by both regulators and ocean users, who
use data on the robust Northeast Ocean Data Portal to inform decision-
making. The Council continues to learn and improve in real time by
sharing best practices and hosting informative webinars on topics such
as regional offshore wind transmission and coastal resilience.
NOAA administers other critical programs, including the U.S.
Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS) and its 11 Regional
Associations (RAs), which provide ocean observations, data management,
regional knowledge and technological expertise, and outreach and
engagement to advance the development of products that meet regional
and local stakeholder needs. Since 2019, NOAA has supported joint ROP
and RA collaborative efforts to enhance our collective capacity for
sharing and integrating Federal and non-Federal data into public-facing
data portals to better inform regional coastal, ocean, and Great Lakes
decision-making.
(2) Mobilizing the next generation of workers to advance climate
solutions
There are numerous provisions of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions
Act of 2021 that prioritize ensuring that communities of color, low-
income communities, tribal communities, and other underserved
communities have the tools and resources they need to both effectively
mitigate and adapt to effects of climate change. As described in our FY
2022 Budget Request, NOAA is investing in our internal capacity to
better respond to the needs of vulnerable populations, assessing key
services to identify and address barriers to access for all Americans,
funding targeted investments in historically underserved communities,
and enhancing NOAA's capabilities, such as our award-winning Weather
and Climate Toolkit and the Sea Level Rise Viewer. With NOAA staff
living and working throughout the United States, NOAA is well
positioned to efficiently and effectively deliver our products and
services and to actively solicit feedback about needed improvements.
NOAA is aware that underserved communities are especially vulnerable to
weather, water and climate events, with large disasters causing poverty
rates to increase. NOAA also provides education, training, and hands-on
research opportunities to individuals from traditionally
underrepresented minority communities through internship programs like
the Jose E. Serrano Educational Partnership Program with Minority
Serving Institutions. Their research has significantly contributed to
the understanding of communities as they prepare for and adapt to
climate change as well as better respond to severe weather events.
Through programs such as National Sea Grant, National Estuarine
Research Reserve System, Coastal Zone Management Program, Coral Reef
Conservation Program, GulfCorps, EarthCorps, and Vet Corps, NOAA will
continue to empower local communities and mobilize the next generation
of workers to advance climate solutions through grants, fellowships,
training, and short-term employment opportunities. These efforts will
support natural infrastructure projects, such as wetland and coral reef
restoration, which curb storm impacts, reduce flooding, absorb excess
carbon dioxide, and provide essential fish and wildlife habitat, while
also supporting tourism, recreation, and other economic benefits.
(3) Improving environmental and community resilience
We know that addressing climate change is crucial for the
environment, people, and economy. We have long-standing, distributed
programs across NOAA that deliver services like habitat restoration,
research, and community engagement as a part of our core activities. We
note that a number of provisions in the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions
Act of 2021 would aim to tackle climate change by supporting adaptation
for industry and for communities and by promoting sustainable job
opportunities. Similarly, our FY 2022 Budget Request proposes
significant investments in NOAA programs that connect scientists and
local decision makers around climate resilience, such as the Regional
Integrated Sciences and Assessments Program, as well as efforts to
restore coastal habitats and protect communities, such as the National
Coastal Resilience Fund.
Healthy coastal habitats, such as mangroves, salt marshes, and
seagrass beds benefit natural and human communities through protections
from storms, providing fishing and tourism opportunities, capturing
carbon, among other benefits. Restoration of these habitats creates an
average of 15 jobs per $1 million invested \2\ and require a diverse
set of skills that directly and indirectly employ a wide variety of
people, including construction workers, engineers, fishermen,
ecologists, project managers, veterans, and heavy equipment operators.
As an example of NOAA's work in this area, NOAA's Restoration Center
has successfully executed a Shovel-Ready Restoration Grant Program
similar to what is described in the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act
of 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/15030.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coastal Zone Management Act
NOAA appreciates the continued interest in the Coastal Zone
Management Act. Our state coastal zone managers provide frontline
leadership in protecting, restoring, and responsibly managing the
diverse resources along our coasts. NOAA recognizes that Indigenous
communities face unique coastal challenges, including those related to
climate change and the conservation of natural, cultural, and
historical resources and sacred sites.
Conserving Resilient Living Marine Resources
At the heart of NOAA's stewardship mission is species and place-
based conservation, authorized by multiple statutes. Like other aspects
of NOAA's mission, however, our changing climate and other pressures
facing our ocean and coasts will require NOAA to adapt our programs and
services. For example, NOAA is currently developing a process that will
seek input from ocean and coastal stakeholders on how to implement and
measure additional place-based conservation, particularly in light of
climate change. NOAA proposes utilizing our National Marine Sanctuary
System and the National Estuarine Research Reserve System to enhance
conservation of our nation's ocean and coasts. Indeed, NOAA is
advancing the designation of new national marine sanctuaries while also
considering initiating the designation process for nominated sites in
the inventory. In addition, NOAA is collaborating with states and
territories on potential new National Estuarine Research Reserve
designations. If approved, they would join a network of coastal sites
managed in partnership with coastal states and local partners for the
protection and research of essential estuarine systems.
NOAA's National Marine Sanctuary System and our National Estuarine
Research Reserves System conserve and protect habitats and resources
that enhance the resilience of and make positive economic contributions
to the coastal communities that they serve. Diverse activities within
national marine sanctuaries, such as commercial fishing, research,
education, recreation and tourism support billions of dollars in output
within local sanctuary economies. Similarly, pilot studies at three
national estuarine research reserves have demonstrated that these sites
contribute to local economies by supporting jobs; through visitor
spending, partnerships, and stakeholder engagement; and investments in
reserve staff salaries, facility maintenance, and operations. Each of
these contributions has ripple effects that lead to greater economic
impacts.
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 requires NOAA to
update the NOAA Marine Protected Areas Inventory, and authorizes NOAA
to maintain a baseline assessment of how much ocean and Great Lakes
waters in the United States are currently protected, conserved, and
restored. As a complement to our traditional place-based conservation
programs, NOAA recognizes the important contributions of regional
fishery management councils and their conservation and management
measures under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management
Act and is committed to investing in ecosystem-based management of
species through the U.S. Marine Biodiversity Observation Network to
advance biological observing, modeling, and other innovative tools to
inform adaptation strategies.
Ensuring More Resilient Fisheries and Protected Resources
Changing climate and oceans affect nearly every aspect of our
mission, from fisheries management and aquaculture, to conservation of
important protected resources and vital habitats. To address these
growing impacts, NOAA is gathering and integrating information on
climate and ecosystem changes into its resource management decisions.
For example, with respect to fisheries management, NOAA is implementing
a NOAA Fisheries Climate Science Strategy, Regional Climate Action
Plans, and an Ecosystem-based Fisheries Management Road Map. In
partnership with the regional fishery management councils, interstate
fishery commissions, and states, we are taking steps to help fisheries
and protected species prepare for and respond to changing climate and
ocean conditions by ensuring well-managed fish stocks with a
sustainable biomass and stock structure; producing regional ecosystem
status reports to track and provide early warnings of climate and
ecosystem changes in each region; using climate vulnerability
assessments of major fish stocks, habitat and protected species to
better understand their vulnerability and support management actions;
and using scenario planning and other tools to identify effective
fishery management strategies and protected species recovery actions
under current and future conditions. NOAA is also reviewing input from
fishermen, regional ocean councils, regional fishery management
councils, scientists, and other stakeholders on how to make fisheries
and protected resources more resilient to climate change, including
changes in management and conservation measures, and improvements in
science, monitoring, and cooperative research. NOAA will consider these
stakeholder recommendations in future policy, guidance or management,
affecting programs discussed in this testimony.
Through proactive partnerships with industries and other
stakeholders, NOAA has led the advancement of new methods for reducing
negative human impacts on protected species and places. These
advancements may also have the added benefit of reducing the carbon
footprint of marine industries. For example, partnerships with the
shipping industry have spurred a new field of innovation in that
sector, and are now poised to study vessel design and operation methods
that can both reduce greenhouse gas emissions and reduce underwater
noise in places that matter to the marine animals and protected areas
in our trust. In recognition of the transboundary nature of both the
species we manage and maritime transport operations, NOAA will seek to
build on past collaborations, with our interagency partners, through
international forums such as the UN's International Maritime
Organization and the Arctic Council.
(4) Scaling up climate science and services, innovation, and R&D
NOAA's climate science and services contribute greatly to the
United States leadership in climate science, clean energy technology,
and clean energy jobs. NOAA has long-standing research and technology
programs, with an emphasis on research-to-operations, providing the
foundation for smart policy and decision making in a changing world.
NOAA develops and runs world class research and operational
weather, hydrologic, ocean, Great Lakes, climate, and Earth System
Modeling systems. These and other physical science research and
development capabilities and programs at NOAA Laboratories, Cooperative
Institutes and Centers--as well as access to partners like the IOOS
Regional Associations, academia, and other research groups through NOAA
grants programs--provide a solid foundation for much-needed research,
regional/local application development, and numerical, statistical, and
hybrid modeling improvements to advance understanding of coastal flood
risk, including sea level rise. This applied research, and the
expertise in transitioning research into operations, directly enhances
the operational products and decision-support services that NOAA and
our partners provide to help communities adapt to and mitigate the
impacts of a changing climate.
NOAA will continue to provide climate data, tools, and services to
Federal agencies, state and local governments, tribes, and the
commercial sector. However, to ensure that our services continuously
reflect the most current understanding of our changing climate, it is
imperative that NOAA dedicates more research toward understanding and
projecting coastal inundation from rising seas, high lake levels,
heavier precipitation, and more frequent extreme weather events and
incorporate this knowledge into the next-generation modeling systems
and tool development. NOAA's goal, as reflected in our FY 2022 Budget
Request, is to scale up efforts to research the climate system and
inform solutions to the climate crisis through investments in research,
observations and forecasting, restoration and resilience. This includes
support for ecologically sound offshore wind development and equitable
services through multiple programs that touch everyday lives.
Offshore Wind
Offshore wind development is rapidly expanding in the United
States, particularly in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic, and West Coast,
and there is renewed interest along the Gulf of Mexico as well. This is
a relatively new use of our marine waters and will require continued
and substantial scientific and regulatory review to balance energy
production with protecting marine resources, fisheries production,
Department of Defense testing and training that supports national
security requirements, and NOAA sensors, like radar, that are sensitive
to wind turbine interference.
In this vein, the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021
describes the importance of increasing electricity production from
offshore wind while addressing key issues such as increasing funding
for scientific research and developing strategies to protect wildlife
and be compatible with other ocean uses. Working in partnership with
other key federal agencies, NOAA's science and stewardship missions
will be critical to helping our nation fully utilize our ocean as a
producer of offshore wind energy in a way that is environmentally and
scientifically sound. As reflected in NOAA's FY 2022 Budget Request,
NOAA's expertise and capabilities will have to keep pace with this
growing industry and will require investing in several key areas to
appropriately engage in Federal interagency planning, siting, and
environmental review and permitting of offshore energy projects to
responsibly evaluate, monitor, and minimize impacts on our trust
resources and constituencies.
Blue Carbon
The Ocean-Based Climate Solution Act of 2021 highlights the
contributions coastal ecosystems can make to climate mitigation and
adaptation efforts and authorizes a Blue Carbon Program in NOAA to
advance understanding, conservation and restoration of these ecosystems
for their climate services. This program would build on NOAA's existing
pioneering research on blue carbon, with the primary focus on carbon
sequestration and storage in coastal habitats (e.g., coastal wetlands,
including seagrasses, salt marshes, and mangroves). These habitats have
been a focus of NOAA research, restoration and conservation for many
years because of their importance in providing essential fish habitat,
wildlife habitat, storm and erosion protection, and water quality
improvements; and align with the climate-oriented activities described
in the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021. NOAA's coastal blue
carbon activities are a collaborative effort across the agency and with
other Federal agencies. Other initiatives that Primary topics include
greenhouse gas inventory and accounting; habitat restoration and
protection; research, monitoring and mapping; the management of coastal
blue carbon in National Estuarine Research Reserves, national marine
sanctuaries, and the coastal zone; technical assistance and outreach;
and international cooperation and capacity building. NOAA can also
support Advanced Research Projects Agency-Climate (ARPA-C) through its
observations, monitoring and advanced climate research. A better
understanding of coastal and deep seabed blue carbon habitats and their
role in climate change mitigation will assist NOAA and other partners
and stakeholders to better manage and maintain these ecosystems and
provide multiple, critical benefits to communities and species.
Ocean Acidification and Harmful Algal Blooms
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 also describes
activities to address ocean acidification and harmful algal blooms
(HABs). As the lead federal agency for both ocean acidification and
HABs, NOAA is committed to identifying knowledge gaps and potential
adaptation strategies needed to address the increasing severity of both
ocean acidification and HABs being driven by climate change.
Climate change is one of the drivers of the increasing frequency,
toxicity, and duration of harmful algal blooms. Warmer waters, changes
in salinity and carbon dioxide levels, sea level rise, and coastal
upwelling are creating conditions in which HABs thrive. Toxic blooms
threaten human and marine mammal health, drinking water, tourism, and
commercial and recreational fisheries. Some blooms kill fish and
shellfish directly, causing millions in losses to the aquaculture
industry. NOAA is the lead federal agency for marine HABs and shares
jurisdiction for the Great Lakes with the Environmental Protection
Agency. NOAA's role is understanding, detecting, monitoring, and
forecasting HABs, and in helping communities with decision-making
related to their prevention, control, and mitigation. NOAA's HAB
programs are national in scope but targeted to different regional
needs.
Through our research, forecast, monitoring, and response
activities, NOAA provides actionable information about HABs to
decision-makers responsible for water treatment, aquaculture, public
health, tourism, and coastal resource management. NOAA provides funding
and technical training to state and local partners to build HAB
monitoring capacity, and most HAB observing networks are a
collaboration between NOAA and non-NOAA partners. NOAA and our partners
provide long-term operational HAB forecasts for Lake Erie, Florida, and
Texas that support public drinking water managers, and the fishing and
tourism industry sectors. Additionally, NOAA runs HAB forecasts in
several other regions of the country, including California, the Pacific
Northwest, and the Gulf of Maine, that have not yet been
operationalized (i.e., they provide a sustained service while remaining
in research mode).
Additionally, NOAA is the lead federal agency for understanding the
impacts of coastal and ocean acidification and chairs the Interagency
Working Group on Ocean Acidification. NOAA's efforts are led by the
Ocean Acidification Program (OAP) in partnership with the Integrated
Ocean Observing System (IOOS) and the IOOS Regional Associations, and
others. The OAP seeks to better prepare society to respond to changing
ocean conditions by expanding our understanding of ocean acidification,
a fundamental change in the ocean's chemistry caused by absorbing
carbon dioxide. OAP created and continues to partner extensively with
the regional coastal acidification networks to understand and work to
mitigate the impacts of acidification at the local level, where it is
felt most severely. We have also created the Ocean Acidification
Information Exchange \3\ portal that makes data and tools on coastal
and ocean acidification available to partners to assist them in
understanding and preparing for this dramatic element of a changing
climate. OAP also partners with the National Sea Grant College Program
to provide heavily impacted stakeholders, such as the aquaculture
industry, with adaptation techniques for acidification and a changing
climate broadly. Finally, OAP is working with the National Centers for
Coastal Ocean Science on ongoing research to fill knowledge gaps in the
linkages between acidification and HABs, identify potential research
products, and stakeholder needs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ oainfoexchange.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ocean-based climate solutions act of 2021
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 is a broad bill aimed
at addressing many challenges facing ocean and coastal wildlife and
habitats as well as coastal communities and economies. As such, the
bill has substantial implications for NOAA's mission and operations.
With the exception of the provisions that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service addresses in its statement, the Administration has not taken a
position on this bill. We are happy to provide technical suggestions on
the bill as needed.
conclusion
NOAA is proud to continue to lead the world in ocean science, serve
the nation's coastal communities and industries, and ensure responsible
stewardship of our ocean and coastal resources. With our expertise and
unique capabilities, NOAA can help our nation better understand our
changing planet and make better decisions to prepare for, adapt to, and
tackle the climate crisis. Together, we can meet the moment. Thank you
and your staff for your work to support NOAA's mission.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Nicole LeBoeuf, Acting
Administrator, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan
Question 1. Title VI of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act
directs NOAA's Office for Coastal Management to provide technical
assistance to the insular areas to enhance their coastal management and
climate change programs. Can you describe what that technical
assistance might look like and why it is important that we include this
language?

Answer. NOAA's Office for Coastal Management (OCM) provides
technical assistance in a number of ways to help coastal communities
access and apply tools, technology, policy, science, and other
knowledge to address coastal management issues. NOAA also provides
subject-matter expertise that allows coastal decision-makers to make
the best use of tools and techniques to answer specific questions or
resolve issues. A few examples of NOAA's technical assistance include:

Training on topics, tools, and processes. The OCM has
recently provided training on topics such as nature-based
solutions for coastal hazards and climate adaptation
planning to the territories, and demand for these trainings
continues. For example, Puerto Rico has interest in more
nature-based solutions trainings. The OCM also provides
demos of different Digital Coast tools such as the sea
level rise viewer and the coastal flood exposure mapper and
can help insular areas apply those tools to their location
in order to assess vulnerabilities and prioritize
adaptation actions.

Providing geospatial support: The OCM helps insular areas
acquire geospatial data by partnering on data acquisition
under our existing geospatial contract. The OCM also
provides technical assistance accessing and applying data
on the Digital Coast, such as lidar, shoreline, and land
cover change data. The OCM also offers training on coastal
inundation mapping that helps local staff with GIS
expertise learn how to do specialized mapping.

Facilitating and/or assisting in planning partner
workshops and meetings: The OCM has expertise in planning
and facilitating meetings, and can support insular areas in
identifying desired outcomes, applying different process
techniques such as breakout groups, and executing a well-
run event.

Supporting Coastal Zone Management (CZM) and Coral
programs: The OCM liaison positions support the territories
as they apply for, execute, and report out on their use of
NOAA grant funds, and they share lessons and best practices
from other states and territories. One liaison serves Coral
and CZM programs in each territory. Also, the OCM supports
fellowships that build capacity in territories' coastal and
coral programs.

Regional networking: By maintaining a strong regional
presence in the Southeast and Caribbean as well as the
Pacific, the OCM often serves as the first point of contact
for coastal programs looking for partners in the
continental U.S. For example, the OCM helps connect
partners in other NOAA programs, federal agencies,
academia, and non-profit organizations.

Importance of technical assistance language being included:

The territories often face more significant capacity
limitations than their stateside counterparts due to
historic inequities. Providing technical assistance is
critical to ensure insular areas can access and apply
available science and data, can learn from others in the
coastal management field, and can maximize the impact of
grant funding they receive. Over time, this technical
assistance builds on-the-ground capacity and enables
partners to take full advantage of not only NOAA funding
but other federal, non-profit, or foundation funding.

Insular areas need access to online data, tools, and
references, as well as high-touch delivery of the science
that enables them to apply it in decision-making.

Another important aspect of technical assistance is taking
the time to listen to and understand needs. The OCM has
staff living in the territories and working directly with
partners. That enables the OCM to learn about the
challenges faced, the capacities and expertise available
locally, and the opportunities to make gains. Then,
assistance can be tailored to best fit needs.

Questions Submitted by Representative Graves
Question 1. South Louisiana is home to a truly unique ecosystem--
the coastal forest. These forests comprise over 1 million acres of
cypress-tupelo swamp, and represent the final stretch of land connected
to the Mississippi River Watershed before it deposits into the Gulf of
Mexico. The forests were formed over centuries from the hydrologic
patterns of the Mississippi River, which provided alternating periods
of drying followed by several months of seasonal flooding on an annual
basis. The net result of these hydrologic patterns over thousands of
years was an environment uniquely adapted for bald cypress and water
tupelo trees to establish and thrive.
However, due to a multitude of natural and man-made changes to the
landscape over the past century, these forests are declining at a
staggering rate. The loss of these valuable ecosystems represents a
significant loss of biodiversity, valuable wildlife habitat, floodwater
retention and control, and hurricane and storm surge buffering. Yet
perhaps most alarming, these forests would convert from a beneficial
carbon sink to a detrimental carbon source.
Restoring the coastal forests of south Louisiana would fulfill many
of the enumerated goals of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
Moreover, the grant programs included in this legislation could provide
a valuable lifeline to these forests. Unfortunately, I am worried they
will not be included in these programs because they are 100% freshwater
systems.

Would these forests be considered ``blue carbon'' under the Ocean-
Based Climate Solutions Act and, if not, how can we work to have them
included in these future grant programs?

Answer.

The forests in question would need to be tidal and salt-
water to fall within the definition of ``blue carbon
ecosystem'' in the current draft bill. Congress would need
to modify this definition and/or the grant program
description to more broadly include other aquatic
ecosystems that capture and store carbon resulting in net
greenhouse gas reduction in order to include Cypress-tupelo
swamps.

Also, as currently drafted in the Act in Section 104(d)
(selection criteria), an applicant would need to show how
their project would result in long-term protection and
sequestration of carbon stored in coastal and marine
habitats.

______

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Let me now begin questions by Members. Let me turn to the
Chairman of the Subcommittee, Mr. Huffman, for your questions.
You have 5 minutes, sir. You are recognized.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks very much
to this panel of witnesses.
Ms. LeBoeuf, I would like to begin with you, please. One of
the key aspects of the Blue Carbon Protection Act, Title I of
the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act, is a partnership grant
program.
I want to just ask if you could speak to how grants to non-
Federal entities to restore blue carbon ecosystems fit into the
Administration's goals to build back better.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes. Thank you, Congressman Huffman.
Investments in on-the-ground restoration activities are really
good spends for taxpayer dollars. Coastal economies depend on
coastal environments to be healthy and resilient to climate
change, but our entire nation depends on the ability of our
industries and economies and infrastructure along the coastal
zone, both nature-based and hardscape, to survive the climate
impacts that they are already facing.
At NOAA, we have been doing coastal restoration and habitat
restoration for decades. We have been studying carbon
sequestration. And we verified what we heard already, that
coastal environments like salt marshes can sequester as much as
10 times the amount of carbon as terrestrial forest habitats.
But they also provide habitat and nurseries for recreational
and economically important species of fish and shellfish. They
also provide places for people to recreate and to call home.
And what we also heard just from Members today is the
importance of these coastal environments as protection from
erosion and storms and storm surge and other coastal hazards.
So, every time we invest in coastal restoration and in coastal
ecosystems, we are building back better those environments for
people, for the animals, for the plants, and for future
generations.
I will say also that we know that habitat restoration
creates jobs. For every $1 million invested in habitat
restoration, we estimate at least 15 jobs across a wide range
of industries from project management to engineering. This is
something that NOAA is very eager to expand and continue to
invest in.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you. I am glad you brought that up
because this bill also includes a $10 billion program to
support shovel-ready coastal restoration projects. And my
understanding is a similar program was put in place after the
2009 recession.
Can you briefly speak to the success of that program as an
example of what we might expect.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes. Absolutely. And the demand for that work
has grown so much since 2009. In 2009, NOAA was able to scale
up its existing restoration grant programs and provide funds
for over 100 projects in 24 states and territories around the
country, really not only jump starting and kick starting those
economies through job creation, and again, through all kinds of
other ecological services that those habitats provide but also
have really helped local communities invest in the restoration
and recovery of habitats that are important to them and
important to their local traditions and cultures.
So, it has really provided a model, not only for the
benefits of habitat restoration, but within NOAA, how we can
quickly scale up our grant programs to meet the demand which is
really outstripping our abilities right now.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
In the time I have left, Mr. Guertin, I would like to ask
you to speak to how the goal of conserving blue carbon
ecosystems aligns with protecting wildlife in our National
Refuge System.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Conservation of blue carbon ecosystems aligns very well with
our conservation issues with wildlife and fisheries restoration
and protection on the National Wildlife Refuge System. The
refuge system conserves these species and habitats on a
landscape scale. There are about 180, 182 coastal refuges
encompassing more than 740 million acres of coastal and marine
habitat.
They feature a wide range of blue carbon opportunities of
salt grass, kelp beds, and mangroves, and they are critical to
the conservation of many Federal trust species including
manatee, sea turtles, and migratory water fowl, so there is a
very good alignment, sir.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Thank you very much, sir.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bentz, you are the Ranking Member, Congressman. You are
recognized, sir.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A question for Ms. LeBoeuf on the Interagency Task Force
created by H.R. 3764. It identifies 19 Federal agencies, but
notably missing is the Bureau of Reclamation. As you know, that
agency maintains critically important water supply projects,
many located on the rivers and streams that ultimately run into
the ocean. Considering the task force has the potential to
impact the Bureau of Reclamation's work, wouldn't it make sense
to include them in that task force?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you for your question, Congressman
Bentz. And we are still reviewing the bills in their entirety
and have not taken a position on them at this time. What I will
say, when it comes to coastal resilience and climate action, we
are going to need all hands on deck.
We are going to need to be consulting with those with the
expertise and those that will be impacted from other Federal
agencies to communities on the ground to all be a part of the
solutions.
And I would say to use one more analogy, we need to put as
many tools in our toolbox as possible. So, as I am saying to
other Federal agencies, if you have something to bring to this
conversation, let's hear it.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. And while we are talking about
consultation, H.R. 3764 creates several new consultation
requirements such as blue carbon areas of significance, marine
mammal climate impact management plans, and changes to
consultation requirements under ``essential fish habitat.''
Would your agency need to complete three different
consultations, should a Federal action affect these
designations?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you for that question as well. I will
speak mostly to the climate aspects of those consultations.
Again, conversations are needed to make sure we are not being
duplicative across Federal agencies and that we are bringing
taxpayers' dollars to bear in the best way possible. I know we
consult with, for example, the Marine Mammal Commission on a
number of activities because they can look across the Federal
agencies, identify best practices or gaps in information, and
help queue us in on those activities.
So, I would welcome continued work with you and other
Committee members to ensure that we are bringing the right
folks to the table and having the right kinds of conversations.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. And the question that often comes up
in dealing with consultations is how long is it going to take,
and that brings us almost immediately into how much information
you have already developed that applies to these types of
consultation.
Do you anticipate that these bills will require additional
studies before you are able to correctly engage in such
consultations?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Well, of course, we would want to have as much
information as necessary to make meaningful decisions,
particularly when it comes to predictive decision making and
climate change in the future.
What I will say is that consultations across the board,
whether they be for essential fish habitat or other means, are
designed to bring the right agencies to bear so that we are not
missing anything and we're not making mistakes along the way.
I do believe that there are many opportunities across NOAA
and the Federal agencies to further empower us to bring good
information to the table so that we can enable, for example,
infrastructure choices as an example for promotion of wind
energy development, for the promotion of other industries along
the coastline.
And without the ability to bring the right agencies the
right information together, we could very well be doing things
in a duplicative manner or could be missing important vital
information for those choices.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. And while we are talking about
consultation, the bill also amends the essential fish habitat
provisions of the law. It would trigger secretarial
consultation on any federally permitted action on essential
fish habitat.
If information or determinations were to come from regional
councils, federal or state agencies, and then ``or from another
source,''--it is this last phrase I am interested in. Can you
please tell us your interpretation of what this means to your
agency and whether you think it will expose the agency to a
proliferation of essential fish habitat-related petitions.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes. Thank you. My agency does not have a
position on that particular interpretation. I will say that we
are very much looking forward to working with the Committee on
refinement of language where we do need to discuss that kind of
interpretation. There are a lot of shared interests here, and
healthy fish populations are just one of those. But at this
time, I would say, sir, we are still reviewing that
interpretation.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. And
your point on the involvement of the Bureau of Reclamation is
well taken, Congressman, and I appreciate that suggestion, and
your comments regarding that.
With that, let me now--Chairman Lowenthal. Sir, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for
holding this very, very important hearing on really protecting
and preserving our oceans and our ecosystems around the ocean.
What I am interested in is a number of critically important
protections within the legislation to help marine mammal
populations rebound. Two protections that I would like to
highlight. One is the creation of a quiet sky--the Quiet Seas
and Clear Skies, the vessel speed reduction award program. And
the second is a study directing NOAA to analyze fishing gear,
marine debris, and issue recommendations on management measures
to address this issue.
I was hoping that both of you or either one of you,
although I will ask specifically a question to each of you, can
deal with this issue. One, the issue of abandoned fishing gear.
I will start with that one and then come back to ship strikes.
And this is for Assistant Administrator LeBoeuf. Can you
briefly touch on how such a study from NOAA can help shed light
on the domestic and international problem of abandoned fishing
gear? And what do you see as the best management practices that
you are aware of to help address this issue.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Congressman Lowenthal, thank you very much,
and thank you for your long-standing support of NOAA and for
your background, although that doesn't look like the LA Long
Beach area to me. What I will say is----
Mr. Lowenthal. It is a little bit further, further west.
Ms. LeBoeuf. It is a little further west. OK.
Mr. Lowenthal. That is right.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Any additional information we can obtain on
best practices for, first, prevention and then recovery of
derelict fishing gear would be an advancement. This, like ship
collisions, are best prevented rather than clean up on the
other end, but we are looking to develop best practices and
would welcome further investigation into that.
Of course, you know there are some methods employed now.
There are ways to tag gear so that it can be tracked and
retrieved. And, of course, we are looking to expand our marine
debris grants program to actually employ fishermen to be a part
of the solution to retrieve fishing gear once it has become
loose in the water. And we would welcome to continue to work
with you to better assess what that problem is.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I don't think many people are
aware of how large the problem is on abandoned fishing gear and
the impacts of it, so I just really wanted to raise this issue,
and I know that NOAA is working really hard on this issue. And
I think it is critical that as we are talking about protection
of our oceans that we look at some of what we are throwing into
the ocean, what we are leaving in the ocean.
Deputy Director Guertin, I have a question. Can you briefly
touch on how a voluntary program to reduce ship speeds can help
minimize ship strikes on whales and other marine mammals? And
does a program like this work?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. Our
nexus to this issue is largely with some of the in shore
species like manatee and sea otters. Unfortunately, about a
quarter of the mortality every year is caused by ship strikes.
We do a lot of work as this is a listed species with the state
boating industry, recreational and commercial fishermen to put
in place a lot of buoys, markers, mapping products, and public
information. We also have three law enforcement officers in the
Service deployed to Florida to work specifically on working
with the boating recreational folks on awareness and
management.
These voluntary things we believe go a long way toward
helping these animals. We know largely where they are going to
be, but they move around a lot on their own, and we try to
focus our efforts to keep people away from the known corridors
and known foraging areas and do a lot of public awareness.
And, certainly, many of the provisions in this bill that
address some of the wound-related stress on marine mammals,
habitat conservation, and resiliency would go a long way toward
our ongoing efforts for manatee and other sea mammal
recoveries, sir.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
I am going to yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, and I recognize
the Dean of the House, Congressman Young. You are recognized,
sir.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. God bless you.
Interesting hearing. I am sorry I am a little late. I had
another meeting I had to go to. It was not a Zoomer, but
anyway.
Ms. LeBoeuf, H.R. 3764 requires the creation of national
grant programs to support U.S. fisheries, including the motion
of domestic products for climate friendly fisheries and
fisheries with low bycatch and low impacts on marine mammals.
My question is this: Currently, the NOAA and regional
council successfully manage their fisheries to reduce bycatch
as much as possible, and the MM&P requires very strict, some of
the most precautionary work in the world. Therefore, our
fisheries are, by and large, considered sustainable.
Wouldn't it be more beneficial to a greater portion of our
domestic industry and our Nation to allow access to our
national grant program promoting research and development for
as many products as possible rather than limiting access via a
subject list of qualifiers? The last part is the real question.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Oh. Yes, sir. I appreciate your question, and
thank you for raising this issue. We work very closely with the
fishery management councils, as you know, to make sure that
U.S. seafood is sustainably harvested and is safe to eat, quite
frankly, and is as delicious as it can possibly be. We don't
have a position on this particular provision of the Act.
I will say that working with our U.S. fishermen is a
complex business. They are very well invested in sustainability
of those fisheries, and then it is up to our folks at NOAA to
figure out how to work with them and work with the provisions
of the Marine Mammal Protection Act to make sure that their
fisheries are sustainable when it comes to marine mammal
conservation as well.
So, the Administration doesn't have a preference on one
approach or another, but we will continue to work with the
fishery management councils both under the Magnuson-Stevens Act
and under the Marine Mammal Protection Act to do the best thing
we can.
Mr. Young. Thank you. And keep us informed on this issue
because it has come up to me before, and I think we can improve
is what I am saying. I do believe that there is room for
improvement there.
Mr. Guertin, Section 701 of H.R. 3764 amends the Marine
Mammal Protection Act, whereby the Secretary is required to
publish and maintain a list of marine mammals negatively
impacted by climate change and requires the development of
climate impact management plans and 18 to 30 months to address
any activity that may contribute to population declines.
The provision also allows population projection using
climate projection data 100 years in the future, just as was
done with the polar bears, the original poster child of climate
change. I will never forget some of the scenes I saw. But we
have learned we got it wrong with the polar bears.
Statistically speaking, there are more polar bears today than
there were listed under the ESA Act of 2008, mostly due to the
impacts from climate change.
Based on this example, is it fair to say we may well get it
wrong again but only after we have implemented regulations
undermining commerce in the U.S. EEZ zone? What I am saying--
sorry. If you don't understand that question, I will make it
very clear. We sometimes made mistakes, and I don't like to
make mistakes when they affect the commerce part of our EEZ
zone.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. We
don't want to make mistakes either at the Federal Government
level, and our commitment to you is we will always use the best
available science. We will work closely with our state
partners. We will keep Congress informed as we move forward. It
is in our collective best interest to always use the best
available information to make any species determination.
Mr. Young. With all due respect, sir, best available
information sometimes isn't any information at all. And when
you do make a decision like with the polar bears, I do believe
the Secretary made a mistake, and I don't want that to happen
again.
And, by the way, where did you get that little elk behind
you? It looks like a 5-pointer or 10-pointer. I would be really
shocked--if I count the points right, it was illegal?
Mr. Guertin. That is just a painting, a reproduction of a
Olaus Murie painting, sir, just sentimental value. I didn't
shoot it----
Mr. Young. If you have been to my office, you would
understand what I am saying.
Mr. Guertin. Oh.
Mr. Young [continuing]. Real elk.
Mr. Guertin. So, that is just sentimental--a copy of a
thing from the visitor center out in Grand Teton that I keep.
Mr. Young. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I don't have any other questions. Thanks for
having this hearing, and I do appreciate it. God bless.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Young, and appreciate your
questions.
Let me now ask Congressman, the gentleman from Hawaii, Mr.
Case, sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Case. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And first of all, to the witnesses, I am a co-introducer of
this measure and so that will tell you where I am coming from.
I do want to say to Mr. Guertin and Ms. LeBoeuf, from Hawaii
and the Pacific, thank you for your efforts. The Fish and
Wildlife Service and NOAA have been great partners, and I look
forward to that all continuing, so really appreciate the
partnership.
Mr. Guertin, I am looking at your testimony, and I am
focusing on the Coastal Barrier Resources Act amendments, the
provision that basically calls for the 1982 approach that I
believe your testimony was to the effect that it has been quite
successful. And the goal of preserving our coastal barrier
areas in this bill, of course, proposes to expand that to the
``Pacific Coast,'' although, I am still unsure whether that
includes Hawaii, as well as to the territories and the Freely
Associated States.
And you made a comment that the coastal geology is
different, so it wouldn't be appropriate there. I just kind of
paused on that to ask myself whether I agree with that because
obviously anything we can do to preserve our coastal ecosystems
we should do.
And if it has been successful in the Atlantic Coast, why
wouldn't it be successful elsewhere? And if the answer is the
geology of the Atlantic Coast are barrier islands and you don't
have that in the other side of the country, then I will accept
that. But is that what you meant?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. We
can be kind of pin heads, I guess, when we write our testimony.
We take things very scientifically but in very general terms.
In our view, the Pacific Coast and the Hawaiian Islands, for
example, face different threats and challenges from the
Atlantic, Great Lakes, and Gulf Coast where the traditional
CBRA is.
We focus the traditional program more on these sand barrier
islands and offshore kind of things. When we look at the
Pacific Coast, a lot of it is already protected. Military bases
and state parks are very heavily developed, not a lot of
similar geology. Hawaiian Islands, we are not seeing so much
the traditional offshore sand barriers there necessarily.
That said, we are very open to working with Congress as you
interpret what the implementation will be going forward. There
are certainly many other factors in this legislation that would
apply to the Hawaiian Island chain out there and other sections
of the Pacific Ocean.
So, we are open to working with Congress as we work
forward, but apologize if our testimony was a little too
egghead for you. It is just we are looking at the traditional
meaning of what the CBRA program has gotten us so far and its
focus on these largely offshore complexes along these coast
lines.
Mr. Case. OK. I appreciate that, and understood. I would
comment back to you that I am not sure the geology should be
the determining factor here. I mean, we have clear erosion
going along our Pacific Coast and to include the Hawaiian
Islands and elsewhere in the Pacific.
Mr. Guertin. Sure, that is fine.
Mr. Case. The impact of climate change is what we are after
here, and some of the mechanisms that the Federal Government
employed in that 1982 law to disincentivize development in that
coastal region could well be applicable to a different geology
elsewhere. Anyway, I will leave it at that because I would like
to move on quickly to Ms. LeBoeuf.
I am noting that in the first part of your testimony, you
say that basically NOAA's ocean and coastal priorities are
aligned with the goals of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions
Act, and yet you conclude with the statement that the
Administration doesn't take a position on the bill other than
for the Fish and Wildlife portion, and I am not sure what that
means.
Does that mean you just haven't done it yet or generally it
is OK but you may take a different approach, or you have more
ideas for the Committee to consider, or how am I to interpret
that?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes, thank you for the clarifying question.
Alignment, in my mind, is that we have a lot of shared
interests in keeping our oceans healthy and our coastal
communities and economies safe and prosperous. We are still
analyzing the various aspects of the bill, and there are
several for which we have already provided technical drafting
assistance, and that was taken, and we are appreciative of
that.
We would just like more of an opportunity to examine some
of the refined versions that have just recently come out. But
when I say ``alignment,'' I mean it is very clear that there
are shared interests between NOAA's mission and the interests
of this Committee.
Mr. Case. OK. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Case.
Let me now recognize Congressman Gohmert for your
questions, sir. You are recognized.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am curious when I hear about wanting to help the fish
population. Growing up in Texas, I heard for years that, ``Gee,
if we allow oil and gas production off the Texas coast, we are
going to have big problems, and it is going to end up killing
off the fish.''
And then, over time, it turned out that actually when
people go fishing now, they like to go around where there is a
rig because it is an artificial reef, and fish have just really
populated the area extensively. So, all of those gloom-and-
doomers that were saying developing oil and gas and helping the
economy, that was all going to destroy fishing in the Gulf of
Mexico, it ended up having exactly the opposite effect.
And last I checked, there was a long wait, a long list of
places that wanted oil rigs that were actually discarded in
their area because of the artificial reef it created. I haven't
heard anything about how drilling of oil and gas actually can
proliferate fishing or fish population. I have just heard about
gloom and doom again, like I did when I was young in Texas.
I would just ask either one of you, have you taken that
into account at all, that actually the work of a vibrant
economy in producing oil and gas can actually help increase the
population of fish?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Congressman Gohmert, I will give a start at
that. And I also grew up in the Gulf Coast of Texas and did a
lot of fishing myself and found a love for the coastal
communities there, not just the beach, but the folks that live
near the beach and the industries that depend on them.
And your example is not one that I am aware of that we have
studied per se. I can absolutely take that as a question back.
I do know that we do find dive sites around rigs and, as you
have said, that rigs can turn into artificial reefs once they
are decommissioned.
There is information out there that fish like to aggregate
around things that are bigger than they are, right, and so if
it is a big pile of rocks or a rig, fish may not know the
difference.
What I will say, as you know being from Texas, the ocean
and the coast, that is a busy place. There are a lot of
industries out there that contribute to our Nation's entire
well-being. From sneakers to bananas to natural gas, people all
over the country require our coastal communities and economies
to be vibrant and to be ready for what is to come.
And one of the things that gets me excited when I talk
about coastal infrastructure is about all the information that
we can bring to bear from NOAA to make sure that our
infrastructure is climate ready so that all of those economies
and industries can prepare for what is to come.
Mr. Gohmert. I am a little surprised that there hasn't been
any looking at that and how man's productivity can work hand in
hand with the fish world. I am quite concerned that that hasn't
been looked at because what I have heard from sources in Texas
is that it has been a big boon for fishing growth and fishing
population, the growth of population.
And as we continue to try to take actions to change the
climate change, and we know that polar ice caps have melted, as
I understand Antarctica has actually expanded. But I understood
recently that it is for sure that the polar ice caps on Mars
are also melting, and I have a hard time believing that
anything we are going to do is going to change the climate on
Mars and stop the polar caps continuing to melt there. It is
just one thought.
But it also seems that the more we talk about giving
government more and more power, more and more money to battle
evil climate change that we have seen for millions of years, it
is a matter of giving up more and more private rights and
personal rights that the Constitution assured to us.
My time is expired. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
Let me recognize the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairman Grijalva, for this
important hearing today.
As we all are becoming increasingly aware, you don't have
to live near an ocean to feel the effects of our warming
planet. If we are going to fight the climate crisis with the
scale and urgency necessary to save our planet, we must look
toward ocean-based climate solutions as key pieces for our
efforts.
This question is for you, Mr. Guertin. Researchers predict
climate change will have a significant impact on the Great
Lakes system's natural resources, and for Michigan, that is
something critically important.
Creating new problems for our ecosystems and making
existing problems like rising water levels and algae blooms
worse, how do you anticipate the Fish and Wildlife Service will
balance existing problems, which also include habitat
degradation, pollution, erosion, invasive species, with actions
to address its issues that emerge with the increasing climate
change?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman. We
are integrating climate change and these other stressors on the
environment into nearly all of our management actions as an
agency. Many of the existing problems you have highlighted are
exasperated by climate change and the negative impacts of these
multiple stressors on wildlife can be cumulative and
compounding.
A number of the programs highlighted in today's bill,
including CBRA, restoration of blue carbon ecosystems, and
others, allow us to tackle both the existing problems as well
as these emerging threats of climate change.
We are a land manager. We manage our Nation's beautiful
National Wildlife Refuge System. We work with our state,
tribal, and private landowner partners, military base
commanders on a lot of habitat restoration projects. We can
bring a lot of capacity, know-how, and programs to the table.
And we come back to our defining mission statement. Working
with others, the Service will tackle these on behalf of the
American people. So, we believe a lot of these tenets included
in this legislation will help amplify our ongoing conservation
mission to get after some of the issues you have addressed.
Thank you.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you.
And, Ms. LeBoeuf, I love that I can actually hear your
passion and love for our oceans as you speak about growing up
near that kind of environment. We know the Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act and Rep. Velazquez's H.R. 3228 call for NOAA to
lead on improvements to products and services which enable
sound and science-based decisions in the face of climate
change. Can you discuss NOAA's vision for identifying data gaps
and adjusting vulnerabilities and investing in communities on
the front lines of climate change, please?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman Tlaib. And on
the front lines of climate change, we are here mostly talking
about coastal. We know that the changes on the coastal
environment in the ocean are happening more rapidly than
elsewhere and the rate of change is accelerating.
But on the front lines, I think also means communities that
have been historically underserved, communities that rely upon
the coastal environment for their lives and livelihoods. And we
spend a lot of time on the ground listening to those
communities and to their industry representatives and others
that can help us understand what their needs are, the questions
that they have, the problems that they are seeing coming their
way.
One of the best ways to provide for communities and
economies is to be able to predict and to provide them with the
right of informed decision making, and that is one of the
things that NOAA really works hard and prides ourselves in
doing for all Americans, is providing authoritative
information, not just for research or science's sake but for
solutions and for decision support for training and for
enabling communities to really make informed decisions for
themselves. And that is what we are looking forward to continue
doing. And where we see gaps, we are asking questions, and we
are finding some gaps, and we are addressing those right away,
particularly when it comes to underserved communities.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much.
And, Chairman Grijalva, I would love to really continue to
try to talk about--and I know this is Natural Resources, but we
never have public health experts in line in this conversation
about vulnerabilities of frontline communities. Because I think
it is so interconnected, and for us to truly understand the
impact for frontline communities is to understand the impact on
their public health.
It is not just what we are putting in our body from the
fishery, but we also very much rely on that kind of environment
for our air, our water, and those kinds of things. So, I hope
in some ways we can always bring that public health aspect to
it.
With that, I yield, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Tlaib, and your
point is really good. We anticipate soon to have a hearing on
EJ initiatives, overall EJ legislation, what the Administration
is doing and not doing with working groups and everything to
get an update on a very urgent issue, and integral to that--and
I appreciate your recommendation--integral to that to deal with
the consequences around public health for frontline communities
and impacted communities. So, yes, I appreciate it very much.
Thank you.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Congressman Graves, sir, you are recognized.
Representative Radewagen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And talofa lava,
good afternoon, and thank you for testifying today.
Ms. LeBoeuf, I have a couple questions for you. Title I of
the bill introduces two new types of coastal and marine
designations, coastal and marine blue carbon ecosystems, and
blue carbon areas of significance that the bill would enhance
the protection of.
But the bill also gives the Administrator of NOAA the
authority to identify vulnerable areas where management,
protection, and restoration effort should be focused, as well
as the authority to establish national coastal and marine
carbon ecosystem protection and restoration priorities.
Do you think the identification of these areas and the
requirement to protect and restore these areas will over-ride
existing habitat protection programs, such as those through the
Magnuson-Stevens Act, MSA, or add new criteria that are not
currently in the MSA? And if so, how will this affect fisheries
management in the United States, which is already lauded as the
gold standard of fisheries management?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you, Congresswoman, for your question.
Every time a new law is enacted, we seek to ensure that there
aren't any contradictory provisions, so we often have to
reconcile on the other side. And we will work with the
Committee to make sure that if there is anything we see that
could come our way that doesn't work with another law, that we
can identify that.
The habitat restoration efforts that we have had ongoing
for decades rely upon users on the ground in communities to
help identify and to apply for programs that can assist them in
that restoration. We have long-standing research programs on
carbon sequestration.
We have not yet been in the business of prioritizing over
those grant proposals, in addition to the grant proposals that
have already been provided to us, and into those evaluate
criteria. We would want to look more closely as to how those
existing programs might harmonize or marry up with the new
requirements that you speak of. Thank you.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. Title III appears to create an
independent international body to review countries' fishery
management practices and do assessments of the health of
fishery stocks in the United States. The Magnuson-Stevens Act
is already viewed as the most sustainable management system in
the world, yet this requirement, this legislation would require
an outside review to review our system. Is this really
necessary?
Ms. LeBoeuf. I will say that we have not taken a position
on that particular element of the legislation or the Act as a
whole. We do have a laudable fisheries management system in the
United States. I certainly have no problem eating U.S. seafood
myself and choose it every time that I can. So, I appreciate
your acknowledgment of the work that we have done to have
sustainable fisheries.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. As a follow-up, in addition,
this title would require that future trade agreements require
parties to the agreement to have a system of protected areas,
not just marine protected areas, that protects at least 30
percent and also that protects biodiversity. How do you believe
the WTO will view this language?
Ms. LeBoeuf. That is a great question. I am certainly not
an expert in the World Trade Organization or would never
speculate on its interpretations, but I am certain that NOAA is
looking at that. We have a lot of experts in WTO interpretation
and cases, but thank you for that question.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Let me now recognize Ms. Stansbury, the gentlelady from New
Mexico. Representative, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of our folks who testified today. My
question is about the provisions in this bill that would
benefit tribes, and I am not sure if this question should be
directed to the sponsors of the bill or to our agency experts
here, but could you talk a little bit more about the various
grant programs and provisions in here that would benefit tribes
in different regions and what those programs do?
The Chairman. The primary one, Representative, is the
Coastal Resilience Grant Program that targets and specifies
tribes and Indigenous communities. There are others in there
that deal with the consequences to some of these frontline
communities, but specifically to your answer, that would be the
one that would be primarily focused on that.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And are these
expansions of existing programs, or does this create new
programs that various tribes would be able to apply for?
The Chairman. It is codifying existing programs into law.
Ms. Stansbury. Got it. With that, I yield. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentlelady yields.
Let me recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Graves. I want to thank the witnesses for being here
today and appreciate your testimony.
I also want to welcome some of my friends to the 21st
century. It is great to finally hear you all talking about the
importance of resiliency in our coastal areas and protecting
our coastal communities and ecosystem because, for years now,
you all have fought us on some of those efforts. Every single
one of you have voted against efforts to make substantial
investments in our coastal communities, in the resilience for
our ecosystem, resilience for our coastal lands.
I am curious, Ms. LeBoeuf, I am from south Louisiana, and
the largest coastal wetlands loss in the Continental United
States occurs in my home state. The Government Accountability
Office found that 90 percent of the coastal wetlands loss
occurs in our state. And when you start looking at how and why
that is happening, the largest cause is attributable to how the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers manages the Mississippi River.
That is what used to cause our state to grow. It is what
created our state.
We, in the past, have actually gone and made inconsistency
determinations under CZM for the state--for the Corps of
Engineers management of the river system, and NOAA, even dating
back to the Obama administration, refused to come in and allow
for some type of mediation. Do you have any thoughts on maybe
how we could engage the Corps more constructively that would
result in a more sustainable coastal system in Louisiana
utilizing the river's resources?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes, thank you, Congressman Graves. You and I
have spoken. It has been a couple years, but we have spoken
about the need for really informed and durable solutions to
coastal resilience, including taking care of our economies and
the communities there.
We do work closely with the Army Corps of Engineers across
the board on their nature-based infrastructure initiatives as
well as their increasing incorporation of sea-level rise into
their projections and that kind of thing, so I know we have
really close relationships there. I can't speak to the history
of consultation of the CZ consultation there, and I can
absolutely look into that and be happy to follow up with you on
that specific area.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. I just want to ask, so think about
this for just a minute. We have the greatest coastal wetlands
loss. You all were just talking about the productivity, the
efficacy of these areas, the sequestration potential, and these
are the areas that are just completely being ignored, the
greatest loss of habitat, the most productive habitat, again,
this Committee fighting against us when we are trying to save
it, and having our own Federal Government that is undermining
our efforts at sustainability, which, of course, increases
disaster cost, implications on livelihoods in south Louisiana.
To see this is really confounding when it is our own sister
agency that is the primary cause of the problems, and NOAA
refusing to step in and sort of referee some type of discussion
that would allow for better sustainability. So, I do want to
ask that you would follow up with us on this and see if you
could be more helpful.
The second question I have, and I know I don't have much
more time, but for both of you--Mr. Huffman has legislation
regarding blue ocean sequestration opportunities, and I am just
curious when you start looking at the cost per ton of
sequestration opportunities, looking at what China is doing and
just exceeding everything that everyone else is doing in regard
to increasing emissions, shouldn't we be looking at where you
get the best bang for the buck?
I mean, where are the best opportunities, the lowest
hanging fruit for the greatest cost per ton--or not the
greatest, I guess the lowest cost per ton for sequestration as
opposed to--and I don't know the answer. I don't know the
comparison of Mr. Huffman's legislation, but shouldn't we be
looking at not just in the United States but globally
considering this is a global problem?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes, I am not going to speak to the
international question, but I do believe, and I said this
earlier, we should be developing and utilizing all the right
tools in the toolbox. You are absolutely right about the loss
of coastal wetlands and habitat around the United States. It is
a real loss for opportunity here at home to combat the climate
crisis and to keep these communities and economies durable and
prosperous.
I am with you. I don't think we can wait any longer to help
restore and preserve, particularly the areas where we know
there is potential of 10 times as much carbon sequestration as
a terrestrial habitat. We are kind of sitting on a pot of gold
when it comes to our coastal wetlands, and I think anything we
can do to preserve them and to restore them we should be
focused on.
Mr. Graves. Thank you very much.
I know I am out of time. Mr. Chairman, all I heard her say
is, ``I am with you,'' so I am just going to take that and go
to the bank. But, Members and Mr. Chairman, I hope we can work
together on some of these programs that you all have fought us
on in the past. It is great to see you all finally in the same
lane that we are. Take care.
The Chairman. I now recognize the gentleman, Mr. Cohen, for
5 minutes. Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to direct my question to Mr. Guertin. In your
written testimony, you discussed impacts on marine mammals
caused by humans, such as vessel strikes and noise pollution.
Can you elaborate on those stressors?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. We
have done a lot of work to see what is happening with these
animals. We know for a fact that over a quarter of the
mortality each year to our management population is due to
over-running by vessels. They are also very highly susceptible
to noise and other disruptions in their environment.
Our strategy to combat and try to address those stressors
is to be very proactive. We are working with states and
industry and recreationists and others to put a lot of buoys
and sensors out there. We do a lot of monitoring the
populations. We try to map out where the animals are going to
be moving, congregation areas, things like that, try to steer
people away from them so that they can go about their business
every day.
Mr. Cohen. How about the effect of sonar on the animals
that use sonar for direction, particularly dolphins, whales as
well?
Mr. Guertin. I would defer to NOAA for their expertise on
those animals, sir.
Mr. Cohen. NOAA?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you. I appreciate your question, sir. We
do know that acoustics and the auditory environment is the most
important for most whale and dolphin species, sort of like our
visual environment and visual cues are important for us.
And with the vessel strikes, of course, anything we can do
to slow vessels. We know that reducing, for example, vessel
speed by down to 10 knots cannot only decrease the probability
of vessel strikes of large whales but can decrease the
likelihood of serious injury and mortality when those vessel
strikes do occur.
So, we look to engage with the industry, the shipping
industry and others to make sure they are aware of the
potential harm to marine mammals from vessel strikes. And
through voluntary as well as required means, we try to slow
those boats down.
Mr. Cohen. And what is the main enemy of dolphins?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Well, when I was a kid, I thought it was
sharks, but what----
Mr. Cohen. And you are still a kid.
Ms. LeBoeuf. I am still a kid. I was told it was sharks.
Marine mammals are exposed to a wide range of threats from
water quality to habitat loss, including things in the ocean
that they can move away from, like sound, or sometimes water
quality, they can move.
In other cases, marine mammals, like bottlenose dolphins
along the coast, they get really loyal to certain places and it
is hard for them to leave. I think we kind of know where our
happy place is. Dolphins find a bay, for example, and they will
stay there despite the threats posed to them.
So, it is important to continue to try to minimize impacts
to those populations, whether it is through fishing or sound or
other things. And at NOAA, we provide a lot of the science and
the analysis to make sure that we can engage in a very busy
ocean, lots of activities, while minimizing impacts to their
populations.
Mr. Cohen. Mr. Guertin mentioned manatees, and I grew up
part of the time in Florida and lived on a canal, and we had
manatees. I know that boats can be a problem for manatees,
which you mentioned. How about humans that just have malevolent
motives?
Mr. Guertin. Could you repeat your question, sir?
Mr. Cohen. Manatees, are they more damaged by boats and
accidents by humans, or is it humans with intentional conduct
and people that are just not very humane?
Mr. Guertin. Again, sir, we turn to the evidence we can
see. We know that we are suffering enormous loss of manatees
this past year, particularly in the area of Indian River
Lagoon. That was caused by a very large mortality event, a lack
of forage for them. Over the winter, they congregated there.
The other major cause of loss is attributed to collisions with
pleasure boats, fishing boats, and things like that.
What we try to do is be proactive, put in place speed zone
regulations, enforcement signage, buoys, and things like that.
They are very docile creatures. People will go to Florida and
other places to swim with them where it is allowed. You are not
supposed to harass or harm them because they are endangered
species, so that doesn't happen much anymore, but they tend to
kind of shy away from any type of danger they see out there.
Our strategy for recovery is continuing to work on all levels
to give them the habitat they need, the room they need to move
around, and freedom of access to their areas.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Guertin. If I have the manatees,
I'll say thank you.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Cohen. The gentleman yields.
Let me recognize Representative Tiffany. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. LeBoeuf, H.R. 3764 would require NOAA to create a map
listing any upstream restrictions. Would that include the
Mississippi River watershed?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Are you asking if the Mississippi River
watershed would be included in the map?
Mr. Tiffany. Yes.
Ms. LeBoeuf. I would presume so, sir. I would have to
double check that, but I would assume so.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you think it is reasonable to include 40
percent of the United States with a map like that? I mean, that
is----
Ms. LeBoeuf. That is a lot of water. That is big territory.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you think it is reasonable?
Ms. LeBoeuf. We have not taken a position on that aspect of
the bill.
Mr. Tiffany. One of the concerns I have, Mr. Chairman, is
that this is a backdoor WOTUS, the Waters of the United States,
which the people of this country have rejected. And it really
concerns me that that is part of what is trying to be
accomplished here.
Mr. Guertin, you said in your conclusion that anthropogenic
global warming will accelerate. Are you guaranteeing that?
Mr. Guertin. Sorry, sir, I couldn't connect. Your question
was, am I guaranteeing that?
Mr. Tiffany. Yes. In your conclusion, you said
anthropogenic global warming will accelerate.
Mr. Guertin. That is what a lot of the models are showing,
sir, that we can anticipate that. As a land management agency,
we try to build in planning of some things going forward.
Mr. Tiffany. So, it is based on models?
Mr. Guertin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Tiffany. OK. Kind of the same question, Ms. LeBoeuf,
you said that impacts happening now are projected to worsen. Is
that for sure going to happen?
Ms. LeBoeuf. The worsening is for sure going to happen. The
degree of worsening and the localized impacts are what we are
still trying to understand. We know that the rates have changed
particularly along the coast and the ocean are accelerating,
not just changes, but the changes are accelerating.
But impacts of climate change are going to be highly
localized, so better understanding the various contributors to
those impacts and understanding what is happening in the
different places under different conditions is where we use our
modeling capabilities.
Mr. Tiffany. OK. So, it is based on models, and you believe
that model is a guarantee that this is going to happen, that
global warming will continue into the future?
Ms. LeBoeuf. It is modeling, but the models are fed by our
continuous observing. We have real-time observations at NOAA at
least in the coast and the oceans, in the atmosphere throughout
our country that are being used and coupled with one another to
better understand the processes. And as new data become
available, those data feed the models, groundproof them, and
the models are powered by modelers, right.
Mr. Tiffany. OK, yes.
Ms. LeBoeuf. There are a lot of people working on that.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, thank you. The only thing is,
Representative Young, the Representative from Alaska, brought
up a very good situation in regards to polar bears. He said the
science claimed from a couple decades ago that polar bears were
going to decrease in numbers has been wrong. So, public policy
decisions emanate from this, and we are seeing some significant
mistakes.
I mean, I would take you back to Newsweek and Time magazine
in 1975 when they were predicting global cooling will cause
much of the--I believe they said up to 2 billion people could
starve to death because we are not going to have enough
agricultural production. That is as recent at 1975. They got it
completely wrong. What if these models are wrong also?
And I just take a look at our backyard--I represent up to
the south shores of Lake Superior, and it was back in 2004,
2011, we had a significant drought in that region, and water
levels were very low. It was attributed to climate change.
Well, now we are here in 2021, and those water levels are
significantly high, higher than normal.
So, I sometimes wonder if we are seeing weather rather than
climate in some of the discussion that we have here, but there
are real-world impacts that happen as a result of some of the
recommendations that are given to us policy makers. And if we
are wrong, as Representative Young brought up in regards to the
polar bear, that really can create a significant problem.
Anyhow, with that, I am very skeptical of these models that
have been out there because we have seen this modeling now for
decades that predict global cooling, global warming. The
climate is always changing, and we should adapt to it, but we
should make sure that we are very circumspect about this and
that we don't take actions on the public policy front that
could end up harming not just our economy but also the
environment.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
I recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Westerman. Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
the witnesses for the testimony today.
I want to continue the questioning that Mr. Tiffany started
with Ms. LeBoeuf and talk more about the practical side, the
operational side of NOAA, and, first off, just to be clear,
this would be a new authority that would be given to your
agency. Is that correct?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Which authority, sir, for clarification?
Mr. Westerman. The monitoring of the--I am thinking about
the Mississippi watershed.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Oh, gotcha, the mapping, yes. Yes, that would
be a new requirement. I will say, we are already conducting a
lot of the research and observations that would go into that
kind of an exercise. It is different and new, but it is not
altogether foreign from the kind of expertise that we have.
Mr. Westerman. Yes. Have you had a chance to give any
thought to the impact of the workload and the new decision
authorities that would be required to add this to the scope?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Not this requirement specifically. I will say
that, when it comes to climate change and the impacts folks are
already feeling, our phones are ringing off the hook, and that
is why we have requested such a large increase in Fiscal Year
2022 to bring up our capacity to respond to industry. Whether
it is insurance reports to local economies and states, really,
across the board, the signal is very, very strong, and we take
much pride in providing trusted, authoritative data for
decision makers in industry and like yourselves so that you can
make your own predictions and make your own decisions based on
that information.
Mr. Westerman. Right. And making ports and harbors more
resilient, I think, is certainly an area where we could find
common ground on that.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Absolutely.
Mr. Westerman. When we look at the effects the oceans have
on carbon in these blue water areas, practically what would you
be looking at in the Mississippi watershed? I am from Arkansas.
The Arkansas River feeds the Mississippi River. Mississippi
borders the eastern side of our state, so basically every drop
of water that falls in Arkansas at some point--well, not all of
it, but most of it--makes its way into the Mississippi River,
but all of it makes its way into the Gulf.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes. We have to ask our colleagues at USGS for
some of that information. But NOAA is most concerned about the
coastal impacts of riverine runoff, but precipitation,
quantity, and quality is something that we are working with our
sister agencies to better understand.
We are looking to understand precipitation events or lack
of precipitation events such as drought conditions. We know
that the ocean is influencing those patterns. We are trying to
understand how much and how the ocean is influencing the inland
patterns, including precipitation and scale of runoff and
flooding. So, we would have to just keep looking to see how
much more resources it would require to carry out those
provisions in addition to everything else that we are getting.
Mr. Westerman. Where do you see the role of NOAA with the
Corps of Engineers? Because obviously the Corps of Engineers
controls a lot of the flow and the structures along the
Mississippi River, and they are not always the easiest agency
or group to work with. So, what would NOAA's role be in
conjunction with the Army Corps of Engineers?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Well, I would never speak ill about another
member of the Federal family, but what I will say is NOAA is in
a unique position as connective tissue between the science
agencies and the service agencies, because we are a science-
based service organization.
And we are working very closely with the other science
organizations, such as NASA, NSF, Department of the Interior,
and others, to better understand the kinds of data streams that
they have on climate change and how we can incorporate them
into our products and services.
When it comes to the service agencies, like Army Corps,
FEMA, and HUD, we are doing something very analogous by finding
out what they need from us to do their missions better. And in
the case of Army Corps of Engineers, for example, we are
working closely with them to understand the effects of their
projects on the coastal environments as well as the effect of
sea-level rise on their projects, so I would like to see an
expansion of that. And we do continue to work well with them,
but it is an evolving process, just as climate change is, for
sure.
Mr. Westerman. Would you say your role is to streamline the
process by the Corps, or would it take even longer to do a
Corps of Engineers project if NOAA was in the equation with
them?
Ms. LeBoeuf. I would hope that NOAA's expertise would
enable their projects to be more climate resilient and climate
smart so that they are not building something for conditions
that we believe are going to change over the life of that
project. I don't see it as slowing up or speeding up their
projects but making them more durable over time.
Mr. Westerman. So, my friends from Louisiana, just south of
Arkansas, one of the problems I hear them talk about a lot is
the loss of coastline. And some people want to blame the Corps
of Engineers on that for closing off the Atchafalaya Basin.
Where do you see issues like that down the road?
Ms. LeBoeuf. I think----
The Chairman. Ms. LeBoeuf, if you could respond in writing.
We are over, and we have four more people, if you don't mind,
Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. That is fine. I couldn't see the clock. I am
anxious for us to get back here in person, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. We will get a chance to be all cozy tomorrow.
That is tomorrow's hearing with Secretary Haaland will be our
first hybrid meeting, most of the people coming in person. I am
looking forward to that.
Let me now recognize Mr. Carl for 5 minutes. You are
recognized, Representative.
Mr. Carl. Good afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the chance.
There are 110 million red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico.
That is three times more than was previously estimated. A study
paid for by Congress using world-class scientists and
universities just made that determination this year. I have
seen videos where you can throw chicken bones off the back of
boats and they are catching red snapper, they are so plentiful.
And I just got back from a fishing trip with the University
of South Alabama where we took robotics, and we looked at three
or four of these reefs where there are 2,000 or 3,000 of these
man-made reefs that are in the Alabama waters, so the abundance
of snapper is just totally underestimated.
Folks back home, they get frustrated. They want to know why
they can only fish a certain amount of days when they can go
out and catch their limit in a matter of minutes. If we found
300 percent as many snapper in the Gulf this year, you would
think our season would be increased by that much. It sounds
like following the science to me, but that is not how it works.
We only get to fish 2 percent more this season versus 300
percent more. Try explaining that to a constituent.
What I have concluded is that NOAA has its own
environmental agenda, and they would rather see no fishing at
all. That is why I am concerned about the piece of this bill
that would create a new program, NOAA, to improve management
fishery under the current and expected impact of climate
change.
The climate change that we keep focusing on, the rising of
the water, has been going on for thousands and thousands of
years. It is not something that is new. If you don't believe
it, I can take you out, show you a petrified forest out in the
Gulf of Mexico. That is all the proof I need.
This is not about the environment because every fisherman
in Alabama, when they get in those Alabama waters, they are
environmentalists. They lost their chance of a lifetime of
fishing when we had the Deepwater Horizon. I saw grown men
crying because, in their eyes, they would never be able to get
back in speckled trout fish.
One of the positive things that came from the Deepwater
Horizon is they have turned every fisherman into an
environmentalist. They are picking up trash. They are reporting
oil spills. They are out there. They are boots on the ground,
eyes.
What I see, this is about taking America's resources away
from American people and giving more power to unelected
bureaucrats who probably have never even been fishing, and I
would encourage the handful of them to go with me sometime.
Mr. Guardado, your testimony highlighted several concerns
you had with giving NOAA more power. Can you highlight some of
those concerns and talk about what it has been like working
with NOAA so far?
The Chairman. The person you are addressing the question to
is in the next panel, and if you want to reserve that question
for then, and have one for the two witnesses that we have on
this particular panel, please do so, but he is on the third
panel.
Mr. Carl. OK. Well, let me ask about the snapper count, the
great red snapper count. Does NOAA agree with that count?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you, Congressman Carl, and NOAA does
incorporate that count and the data from that count into its
information. I am not a red snapper specialist. I did grow up
fishing on the Gulf Coast of Texas, but I am not here to answer
those kind of questions.
I do know that NOAA does provide the best information that
it can to manage those fisheries and does take into account the
data that is provided in the great red snapper count.
Mr. Carl. Let me ask you another question. Since sea level
is rising, do you think that is something we can stop?
Ms. LeBoeuf. I believe based on the science that is before
us, the conditions for the next few decades are, I hate to say
it, baked in. What we are trying to understand is the localized
impacts and how we can adapt to those so that our communities
and our economies can survive the next little while, while we
get under control what we can't predict as easily, and that is
our emission of greenhouse gases and our ability to sequester
carbon like we have been talking about through coastal
ecosystems.
Mr. Carl. So, you are looking at the ecosystem out in the
water. This is kind of a greenhouse, a New Green Deal in blue
water? Is that what we are talking about here?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Well, the ocean is an effective heat sink. She
is storing a lot of heat and carbon for us right now. We are
seeing that express itself through ocean acidification and
other problems with the ecosystems. We are just looking to find
any tool in the toolbox we can right now, quite honestly, and
the ocean and our coastal ecosystems can help us.
Mr. Carl. There are a lot of tools in the toolbox we don't
need to use, though, and that is what I am arguing. Your
mapping that we are talking about, is this mapping also the
Alabama river system?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Sir, I would assume that it is any river
system that is relevant to the request that the Committee has
provided to us. We have not taken a position on the bill yet.
Mr. Carl. So, you are talking about NOAA taking over every
river system, basically, across the Nation?
Ms. LeBoeuf. We have to work with the Committee to better
understand the requirements of that bill.
Mr. Carl. Wow.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is up.
Let me now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Soto,
for 5 minutes. Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you for putting
together this omnibus of multiple, amazing bills.
I want to start out with a question for Ms. LeBoeuf from
NOAA. Florida has the second largest coastline of all states
and territories and Freely Associated States. How will
investing in natural infrastructure bolster living shorelines
and coastal or blue carbon ecosystem resiliency to help protect
all Floridians, even communities located further from the
shore?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Soto. Florida has been a leader on climate resilience and
coastal resilience. And in heavily developed areas of south
Florida, for example, we will need to use a complement of
nature-based and hard infrastructure to make sure that
communities and infrastructure, resilient essential
infrastructure like airports and ports, remain climate
resilient and durable over time.
In terms of improving our ability to predict the conditions
along the coast of Florida, as you know, not just the coastal
Floridians are affected when there are large scale evacuations
from hurricanes or whether there is nuisance flooding at
airports or ports. That affects all of the state, and in some
cases, our entire Nation.
Coastal tourism in Florida is a huge economic source of
prosperity for the state of Florida, but the coastal
communities around the country, and Florida is the leading
example of this, make up a disproportionate amount of our
economy and population and a high level of population growth.
Forty percent of the U.S. population lives in coastal counties
which means that if something goes wrong with those populations
in those economies, something is going wrong for the rest of
the country. So, I see easy connections between coastal Florida
health and the rest of your constituents across Florida as well
as the rest of the Nation.
Mr. Soto. And my fellow Floridian, Representative Crist,
brought up the Regional Ocean Partnership Act. It is part of
the slate of bills that would make sure that we have more
regional ocean partnerships between Florida, Georgia, Alabama,
Mississippi, and other areas in the Southeast. How key is that
to help protect our living resources and expand and protect
valuable habitats and ocean ecosystems?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Yes. Thank you. NOAA is a proponent of
regional ocean partnerships and other type regional
partnerships that allow us to better serve communities' needs
because we are working with partners that are in those
communities, asking the questions and finding out what it is
that folks need for solutions.
We are active participants in the existing regional ocean
partnerships and other regional bodies and really rely upon
them, like you said, to get that intelligence from the users so
we can make sure that not only are we providing the right data
and tools but that they are able to scale down to the level of
specificity that their local stakeholders and users need, which
can mean that we don't need to. So, it is a wonderful
partnership to have those folks. It is almost like a workforce
multiplier.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
And, Mr. Guertin, there is a bipartisan concern about the
unusual mortality event among manatees in Florida. Both myself
and Representative Buchanan, Representative Murphy, and
Representative Mast have all put forward legislation and
letters about this. What is the U.S. Fish and Wildlife doing to
ensure that these mortality trends, like saving the manatees,
whether we can protect them in the future? What can we do to
help save the manatees in Florida?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. We
are working hard to ensure that all of our partners, including
the state, have the resources they need for rescue and
rehabilitation to address this ongoing unusual mortality.
Almost 800 animals lost this year in 6 months already, two-
thirds of those in the Indian River Lagoon area. They
congregated there because of the warm water during cold
weather.
We declared the unusual mortality event that allowed us to
unlock a lot more additional funding and capacity to give to
partner organizations to do a lot of rescue and rehabilitation
work. We just recently allocated another $100,000 to the state
of Florida to support that work, but that has gotten us through
June now. What we are doing now is focusing on what comes next
and preparing for the eventuality that we could have another
cold winter down there and face the same type of mortality
coming up again.
So, we are trying to do what we can to restore habitats.
What we can do is do some planting in seagrass beds, get that
restored, do a lot of early surveillance this time, make sure
our partners, particularly the rehab groups and others, have
the resources they need.
They are looking at an old hatchery down there to maybe
house some of them during the cold weather snaps, get them out
of harm's way, so to speak. Do a lot of public awareness. We
already know the manatee is stressed from other factors
including boat strikes and things like that. We have done a lot
of proactive community involvement, but we are very concerned
about this, and as you know, the manatees are due for a 5-year
status assessment next year. We will certainly give due
consideration to what we have learned from this unusual
mortality event, but very, very troubling for all of us in
conservation, sir.
Mr. Soto. Well, we hope you will consider raising it to
endangered again. And thank you, Chairman, for all your work on
coastal conservation and resiliency and saving the Florida
manatee.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Soto.
Let me now recognize Representative Moore. Five minutes are
yours. Thank you.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate the chance to
be here today.
While I appreciate the intent behind H.R. 3764, I have
concerns that it goes too far to accomplish its goals and
expands the size and scope of the Federal Government. I think
that is a fundamental piece in this, but again, I appreciate
the intent.
I have several questions for Mr. Guertin. In your
testimony, you said that you support incentivizing federally
funded buyouts to enhance long-term coastal resilience. The
question on this is, under this kind of an approach, what
protections would be provided to property owners living within
coastal barrier areas to ensure they are not compelled to give
up their property, and if they choose to do so, making sure
that they are fairly compensated?
Mr. Guertin. Sure. The whole premise behind the CBRA
legislation is to try to steer development away from high
hazard areas. So, building on that foundation, one area that we
are looking at is working with private landowners who wind up,
through no fault of their own, in a newly designated area or
just are not able to cope with the threats that they are facing
there. So, the concept here would be working on some type of
mechanism to offer them a voluntary buyout or incentive
program.
We don't have condemnation authority. We are not
envisioning anything like that. This would all be just a
proactive way to partner with private landowners and recognize
their property rights and try to bring the free market
principles of CBRA legislation to bear as well.
And, certainly, sir, we would not be the action agency to
do that. We are a conservation agency. There would probably be
other Federal agencies who would be stepping into that role.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Continuing on in that same sense, I
have concerns that in pursuing federally funded buyouts, that
we run the risk of triggering land speculation among developers
since it would basically guarantee them a buyer. Have there
been discussions around this? How would you propose avoiding
such speculation?
Mr. Guertin. We are just in the early stages of taking a
look at this proposed legislation, Congressman. That is
certainly a great point for us to take to heart as we move
forward. We will work on the Federal level with Committee staff
and your staff as this legislation gets further scoped out. And
that is certainly a key point that we need to take a look at,
but we also don't want to encourage a lot of speculative
purchases on some of these high hazard areas as well. It is in
no one's interest if that was how it turned out.
Mr. Moore. Yes. Excellent. I would agree that it is not in
anyone's interest. Have there been any potential buyout sites?
Have they identified any potential buyout sites at this point?
Mr. Guertin. Not that I am aware of, sir. This is all just
draft legislation.
Mr. Moore. All draft legislation. OK.
Mr. Guertin. Or introduced legislation. I am not an expert
on the rules up there, sir. Introduced legislation.
Mr. Moore. Any initial conversations in certain sites? Any
sense for how that process would be approached?
Mr. Guertin. We have not been involved in any, sir.
Mr. Moore. OK. The question that I would want to get to,
then, and I think I will hold off on that for right now, but
what the anticipated cost would be for these kind of buyouts.
So, I just want to kind of hit on those points. I look
forward to more discussion. Thank you.
And, Chairman, I will yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Moore. I appreciate it.
And Representative Boebert, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Boebert. Good afternoon, Chairman Grijalva and Ranking
Member Westerman and members of the Committee. I would like to
thank all the witnesses for taking time to testify today.
For me, it is really extremely unfortunate that we are
meeting to discuss these partisan bills that will hurt our
economy and add excessive red tape on the private sector. It is
no surprise that the House Democrats and their radical
environmental activists are pushing an agenda that falls
squarely in line with the Green New Deal, which the American
people do not want.
Chairman Grijalva's 290-page bill, H.R. 3764, is simply an
attack of the American energy industry and American consumers.
It is a big giveaway of $19 billion in new discretionary
spending and a pretext to lock up more land from development.
My screen is off also. One second. Sorry. Let me get that. I
will let you all see too.
Title I of H.R. 3764 creates a new blue carbon program
within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
NOAA, and it directs NOAA to create a national blue carbon
ecosystem map which requires the listing of any upstream
restrictions that are detrimental to the watershed processes
and conditions including dams, dikes, and levees. This is the
exact kind of provision that Washington bureaucrats will use to
expand their regulatory power into the private sector.
There are zero limits on just how far upstream the map can
extend. For all we know, the map can include over 30 states.
Under this bill, NOAA is required to designate in each coastal
state the blue carbon areas of significance.
These areas of significance are to include the coastal
zones, U.S. territorial waters, or U.S. exclusive economic
zones that provide long-term storage or sequestration of
significant amounts of ecosystem carbon. And among other
things, it provides a spawning, breeding, feeding, or nesting
habitat for wildlife, or to say it another way, a land grab by
the Federal Government and red tape headache for private
companies who want to develop coastal lands in the areas and
the people who benefit from these resources.
There is no content to lock up more land from productive
use, the bill outright ends all offshore oil and gas leasing in
the Outer Continental Shelf except for the western and central
Gulf of Mexico. While this probably plays well with the
millionaire and billionaire donor club in New York and
California, it is a recipe for higher energy bills, and the
cost will fall squarely on the middle class. This is a classic
example of how out of touch Democrats are hell bent on
destroying good-paying jobs.
Research conducted by the National Ocean Industry
Association, NOIA, studied the economic impact of the offshore
drilling ban and found that if no new permits are issued, the
offshore industry would lose 179,000 jobs in about two decades.
That is about half the jobs that are currently supported right
now by the industry. Again, I will never support this.
Finally, H.R. 3764 is full of unnecessary spending. Why is
the Federal Government spending money on underwater noise
mitigation? Think about that. We are proposing spending money
to reduce noise underwater where humans do not live. Is that
the proper role of the Federal Government? I don't think so.
This bill would spend $10 billion on coastal restoration
projects with a priority given to projects that will benefit
low income and communities of color. I don't think that the
government should pick winners and losers, especially on the
basis of race. We have seen the Democrat playbook insert race-
based spending in every program the Federal Government runs,
and there is a whole lot of it. There is no place, not your
home, not your school, not the places you work, not even
coastal restoration, that is off limits for the left's social
justice warriors.
Mr. Chairman, I have used up my time, but someone has to be
real with the American people and tell them what is up with the
kind of stuff that the Democrats would pass into Federal law.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields. Anyone else?
Let me ask a couple of questions. Mr. Guertin, updating the
Coastal Barrier Resource Act or CBRA is featured prominently in
the legislation. How does CBRA save taxpayers dollars while at
the same time enact smart climate policy?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Maintaining and conserving our Nation's undeveloped coastal
barriers is a time-proven, cost-effective strategy to protect
mainland communities against coastal storm damage and mitigate
negative impacts of climate change such as sea level rise and
saltwater intrusion.
CBRA has removed the Federal incentives to build on these
unstable and environmentally sensitive areas, which saves
taxpayers millions of dollars each year in what would otherwise
be wasteful expenditures. We believe using this non-regulatory
and free market approach, CBRA can guide smarter development in
stable, less risky areas.
The Chairman. So, in reality, what is done with CBRA, and
with the program, and now under the Act would be an enhanced
program to prevent the waste of money; and (2) prevent
development speculation in areas it shouldn't be, and end up
costing the taxpayers, states, and communities even more money
to attempt to mitigate or to remediate those areas.
This is a pre-emptive and proactive approach, and I think
by making it more prominent as a strategy, as you said, you
create an opportunity in the marketplace that I think is very
important.
The other issue I think for review by both NOAA and
yourselves is the whole idea of mapping upstream that is
becoming, according to some critics, part of a general
conspiracy in life as we know it, that you look, and it is
about blue carbon. It is about the ocean-based mapping and
priorities so that we can look at where those threats are and
where resilience has to be built in.
And upstream, as far as I can read it, there is no specific
mandate that says you must and you shall. So, before we get all
worked up over that, let's actually understand how it is
written.
The other issue, Ms. LeBoeuf, a big part of the reason we
wrote this bill was because the ocean was largely left out of
climate conversation. A lot of the climate legislation it seems
focuses on the Environmental Protection Agency. However, your
agency is one that runs climate.gov, if I am correct. Can you
share the role your agency plays in climate efforts within the
Federal Government? And do you believe that NOAA should even be
more prominent with a seat at the table in these climate
discussions?
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you, Chairman Grijalva. I welcome the
opportunity for oceans and coastal resources to be a part of
the conversations. Again, the Committee has highlighted for
many that the oceans are both signaling climate change and
rapid change along our coasts, and our oceans also can serve to
help mitigate and help us adapt, so they are really quite a
boon for us if we are paying attention.
NOAA has been studying the oceans and the atmosphere from
the highest part of our environment to the lowest part of the
ocean for many decades, and we have done so always with the
view of providing decision support. And that may seem like a
term of phrase, but that just means that we are conducting
science for the purposes of getting into people's hands to
create solutions and to make sure our economy is prosperous and
to make sure that farmers, ranchers, and industry have
predictability so that they can invest and capitalize in their
industries.
Like I said earlier, the insurance companies come to us.
The ports come to us. We would love to have a greater seat at
the table because we do believe we are the connective tissue
between the science agencies and the service agencies when it
comes to climate change.
The Chairman. Thank you. I agree. I think that the whole
point of this discussion, and you see it as a basic template of
the legislation we are talking about today and the other pieces
that were integrated in there is the reliance on empirical
information, fact, and science, and that reliance should not be
a threat to anybody. That reliance is not a conspiracy to undo.
It is almost a demand now that if we are going to deal with
climate change, it has to be integrated. It has to be
comprehensive. And if we can all agree that we are moving
forward on a basis of empirical information, fact, and peer-
reviewed science, then I think people will be more assured that
this is not a decision--the politics that were played was to
ignore science for the last 4 years. The politics we are trying
to play is to integrate science back into the discussions.
I want to thank the witnesses very much for their
testimony, it is much appreciated. I now invite the third panel
up, and I will introduce them. Thank you so much.
Ms. LeBoeuf. Thank you.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
We are beginning Panel 3. I will now recognize my
colleague, Mr. Case of Hawaii, to introduce our first witness,
Hawaii State Senator Chris Lee, and then we will proceed from
there.
Mr. Case, you are recognized.
Mr. Case. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. I am really honored
to introduce my friend and colleague, Hawaii State Senator
Chris Lee, who has been a passionate advocate for environmental
issues with a long history of working in a bipartisan manner in
Hawaii and nationally.
Senator Lee currently serves as Vice President of the Board
of Directors for the National Caucus of Environmental
Legislators and is a member of the Natural Resources
Infrastructure Committee at the National Conference of State
Legislators. Senator Lee authored the bipartisan legislation
that established Hawaii as the first state to require full
carbon neutrality by 2045. I really appreciate your leadership,
Senator Lee, and good to have you here today.

STATEMENT OF STATE SENATOR CHRIS LEE, HAWAII STATE LEGISLATURE,
HONOLULU, HAWAII

Mr. Lee. Thank you very much, Chairman Grijalva and Ranking
Member Westerman. I really appreciate the opportunity to
testify on the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
To keep it short because I know we are running long here,
climate change has been harming our entire Nation. Taxpayers
from coast to coast and out here on our islands are
hemorrhaging money and funds as a result of having to deal with
climate impacts. And states are taking action, but we do need
Federal assistance because we know that the faster we are able
to act, the less it will ultimately cost taxpayers, the less it
will cost states, and the less it will cost our economy.
This bill, in particular, deals with a number of things,
and it is going to help protect against the costs of sea level
rise that is impacting homes which in our state are falling
into the ocean. It is going to help to adapt to rising seas.
For our part, we have done some of the highest resolution sea
level rise analysis in the world on Hawaii, and we found that
we are on par to lose about $19 billion of homes and displace
20,000 residents in the coming few decades.
We are looking at $15 billion in highways we are going to
have to move inland, and we are already having to spend
hundreds of millions of dollars to do that just to keep them
above water.
This bill will also help protect taxpayers against the cost
of plastics and pollutants that are entering our oceans at
unfathomable rates. We are spending millions on the part of
states and local municipalities to clean this up. These costs
are hidden, but taxpayers are being forced to bear the costs to
clean up. Also, the cost of energy. This bill will help speed
up removals, offshore wind, and other opportunities that we
know are cheaper than other traditional fuel sources.
And in Hawaii and in California, who have, in part, led the
way, making this transition already, we know that getting off
of costly fossil fuels have already reduced our electric bills
by about $39 a month since 2011 which is huge amounts of money,
about $3 billion in savings we have already locked in by
switching over to renewables. And if we go a little bit
further, we have billions more to save.
And we know that government bureaucracy has been basically
holding back some of those opportunities, offshore wind and
others, just mired in endless red tape. This bill lets that
innovation move forward. It helps advance these kinds of
projects that will reduce costs across the electric grid and
help taxpayers and rate payers all around the country.
We know there is an opportunity for this bill to also help
protect businesses and the economy. We know that beach loss is
a huge deal. It affects my 4-year-old niece who can't play on
the same beach I did growing up in Hawaii. Waikiki, perhaps the
most prominent beach in the country, if it loses that beach
which is currently eroding rapidly, that is $2 billion out the
door. And it is a rare case where hotels and businesses stepped
up and said, you know what, tax us more so we can help restore
this beach.
When we lose our reefs, as other witnesses have mentioned,
there is a huge economic cost. Those contribute $477 million to
our local economy in Hawaii alone. Florida has its reefs and
other millions and hundreds of millions of dollars in
protections that they provide. Most of all, the ocean economy
around the country provides over $373 billion to GDP, and this
bill will take critical steps to help protect those natural
resources, businesses, and economies that rely on them.
Most of all, it will help protect our families. We know
hurricanes have been intensifying as a result of warming seas.
We know that along the Gulf Coast, colleagues that represent at
the state level, those states have been pleading for additional
help to help prevent the kinds of property loss, loss of lives
that we know that those things can lead to. And this will help
empower those local communities to help save the natural
barriers that protect them from these kinds of events.
But, also, climate action is creating jobs and boosting the
economy, and this bill can work hand in hand with a lot of
that. California and Hawaii, as I mentioned, were the first to
act. There is a clean jobs economy going on that has been
producing a whole lot of new opportunities and complete
industries that have helped save our economy through the last
recession, and in California, have led to hundreds of thousands
of jobs created, 350,000 still on track to be created by 2030
as a result of meeting those clean energy standards, and this
bill will help accelerate that kind of growth.
Finally, we will hit clean investment, sustainable
fisheries which can provide for more stable future jobs and
economy in those areas, alternatives to plastics that are
creating new businesses and jobs that didn't exist even a few
years ago. These kinds of things are huge economic drivers.
In conclusion, states are taking action, but it is just not
enough. We can look at I think the GAO report released this
year highlighting, and I quote, ``climate change poses risks to
many environmental and economic systems and creates a
significant fiscal risk to the Federal Government. The Federal
Government has not made measurable progress to reduce its
fiscal exposure to climate change, and therefore, this high
risk area warrants significant attention.''
And I will end by saying, when it comes back to my 4-year-
old niece, which is why I got into politics and policy in the
first place--if we don't change, by the time she graduates from
high school, the Federal Government will have lost hundreds of
billions, if not trillions of dollars, to these kinds of
impacts. By the time she is 33, there will be more plastic in
the oceans by weight than fish if we do nothing. And, finally,
by the time she is my age, there won't be reefs in Hawaii
anymore. Almost none are expected to survive that long.
So, we have a lot of work on our hands, and I appreciate
the Committee for working on this measure and working with the
states in partnership to move this issue forward.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Lee follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Chris Lee, Hawaii State Legislature
Chair Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and distinguished members
of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to submit this written
testimony regarding the Oceans-Based Climate Solutions Act. It is an
honor to be able to provide a unique perspective on this measure from
state and local governments working on these important issues.
I am a State Senator representing the 25th Senate District in the
State of Hawaii. For 13 years I have been fortunate to serve the people
of our state representing a district that stretches over 1,200 miles
across the Pacific Ocean, encompassing populous areas of the main
Hawaiian Islands, as well as countless other islands, coastal and
marine habitats, fisheries, and the Papahanaumokuakea Marine National
Monument.
I currently serve as the chair of the Senate Committee on
Transportation, and previously chaired both the House Committee on
Judiciary and House Committee on Energy and Environmental Protection.
Throughout my time in office our committees worked diligently with
government, business, non-profit, and community stakeholders to address
the harmful impacts of climate change on our taxpayers, economy, and
way of life. Together, we have taken bipartisan action to address ocean
degradation and climate change, while also reducing cost to taxpayers,
growing new markets, industries, and jobs, with positive real-world
results.
I am testifying today in strong support of the Oceans-Based Climate
Solutions Act. Despite Hawaii and other states beginning to take
individual action on climate change, significantly more must be done to
avoid costly and irreversible climate damage in the years to come.
Climate change is not a challenge that can be resolved by any one
state, it is a challenge faced in some way by every state. Nationwide
coordination, resources, and execution will be critical to future
success. Federal partnership and investment proposed by the Oceans-
Based Climate Solutions Act will be necessary to maximize the ocean's
potential to help mitigate this threat.
Healthy oceans can fight climate change and reduce climate impacts.
Oceans have already absorbed over a third of our carbon emissions and
90 percent of the excess heat we have generated, moderating the impacts
of climate change. However, the ocean's capacity to safely absorb
carbon and heat is limited. This has already resulted in warming
waters, stronger hurricanes, ocean acidification, sea level rise,
shifting fish stocks, and coral reef die-offs. The Oceans-Based Climate
Solutions Act is an important step forward that provides a coordinated
roadmap for ocean and coastal climate resilience. The investments it
makes will help preserve our oceans and minimize the worst impacts of
our changing climate.
Changing climate is already impacting people, businesses, and economies
in states around the country, draining state and local
resources.
Often lost in discussions about future impacts from climate change
are the taxpayers and businesses in states around the country already
being impacted by the effects of climate change today. Many are already
paying higher costs for adaptation and need help. Globally, weather
disasters have doubled since the 1980s, resulting in billions in annual
economic losses and increased costs to taxpayers.\1\ Recent years have
seen record fires in states like California and Oregon. Warming
temperatures are shifting seasons in Idaho, Utah, and Wyoming.
Hurricanes and flooding are increasingly devastating Louisiana,
Florida, and Gulf Coast states. Declining rainfall and drought are
threatening water supplies in Arizona, Nevada, and the Southwest.
Heatwaves are baking Colorado, Nebraska, and Kansas. And large
industries such as agriculture are being impacted across the country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://reliefweb.int/report/world/human-cost-weather-related-
disasters-1995-2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sea level rise, warming, and ocean acidification are jeopardizing local
economies and increasing costs to taxpayers and businesses.
Federal coordination and assistance is needed.
Around the country sea level rise is already threatening coastal
communities and infrastructure at a rapid pace. Over the past century,
Hawaii has experienced about 8 inches of sea level rise, with most of
the increase coming from accelerating rise in recent years. The rising
ocean has pushed over 70 percent of Hawaii's shoreline into a state of
chronic erosion.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Fletcher, C.H., et al. (2012) National assessment of shoreline
change: Historical shoreline change in the Hawaiian Islands: U.S.
Geological Survey Open-File Report 2011-1051, 55 p.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On Oahu and Maui, homes and roads are being undermined by rising
waves, and private homeowners in multiple counties are losing property
and investments. As sea levels continue to rise, an additional $19
billion in coastal assets will be exposed to damage and loss as sea
levels in Hawaii approach 3 feet, perhaps as soon as 2060.\3\ This
includes 38 miles of roads, 6,500 structures, 20,000 residents
displaced, 25,800 acres of land, and 550 cultural sites.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://science2017.globalchange.gov/chapter/12/.
\4\ Anderson, T., et al. (2018) Modeling multiple sea level rise
stresses reveals up to twice the land at risk compared to strictly
passive flooding methods. Nature Scientific Reports 8: 14484
DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-32658-x.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
State and local governments in the islands are already being forced
to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to move, retrofit, or replace
critical infrastructure, such as projects increasing the height of the
docks at Honolulu Harbor, and moving coastal highways on Maui and Oahu
inland. The State Department of Transportation has identified an
additional $15 billion in projects to move, raise, or harden threatened
coastal highways that serve as lifelines for population centers.
Sea level rise is also responsible for the loss of over 13 miles of
sandy beaches around the state through the latter half of the 20th
century. Beaches are critical to Hawaii's communities and economy. The
loss of Waikiki Beach alone is projected to cause annual losses of $2
billion to Honolulu's local economy. As a result, in 2014 local hotels
and businesses groups worked together to establish a new tax applied to
about 6,000 commercial properties in Waikiki to raise funds to
regularly replenish eroding sand on Waikiki Beach.
Ocean acidification and warming sea surface temperatures threaten
Hawaii's coral reefs. We have already seen an 8.7% increase in ocean
acidity in just 30 years.\5\ Warmer, acidic ocean water is dissolving
corals and killing reefs. As a result, by midcentury nearly all of
Hawaii's reefs will be experiencing annual bleaching and ecosystem
collapse from which most are unlikely to recover.\6\ Reefs host about
25% of the ocean's marine life, and losing reefs means massive losses
to fishing communities and disruption of the global food chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https:/ /coralreefwatch.noaa.gov/satellite/publications/
state_of_the_environment_2017_hawaii-usapi_noaa-nesdis-ncei_oct2017.pdf
\6\ Van Hooidonk, R., et al. (2014) Opposite latitudinal gradients
in projected ocean acidification and bleaching impacts on coral reefs.
Global Change Biology, 20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hawaii's top tourist attraction is Hanauma Bay, a world-famous
coral reef reserve that draws more visitors per year than Pearl Harbor.
Hanauma Bay and reefs around the state were valued at $33.57 billion in
2011.\7\ They currently contribute $477 million to the local economy
each year.\8\ Losing these reefs will have a crippling effect on jobs
and our tourism-dependent economy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Richard C. Bishop, et al. 2011. Total Economic Value for
Protecting and Restoring Hawaiian Coral Reef Ecosystems: Final Report.
Silver Spring, MD: NOAA Office of National Marine Sanctuaries, Office
of Response and Restoration, and Coral Reef Conservation Program. NOAA
Technical Memorandum CRCP 16. 406 pp.
\8\ Keener, V., et al. (2018) Hawai`i and U.S.-Affiliated Pacific
Islands. In Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth
National Climate Assessment, Volume II [Reidmiller, D.R., et al.
(eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp.
1242-1308. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH27.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By a different measure, Hawaii's reefs also provide natural
protection and buffer high waves and storm surges, providing $860
million in flood-risk benefits to property owners and people's
livelihoods every year.\9\ Reefs also provide other coastal states like
Florida with similar protections and benefits. Losing these reefs means
increasing damage from hurricanes, which themselves are growing in
number and intensity as a result of warming seas providing more fuel
and shifting tracks into Hawaiian waters.\10\ More hurricanes also
threaten the Atlantic seaboard and Gulf Coast causing billions in
damage and lives lost.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Reguero, B.G., et al. (2021) The value of US coral reefs for
flood risk reduction. Nat Sustain (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41893-021-00706-6.
\10\ Murakami, H., et al. (2013) Projected increase in tropical
cyclones near Hawai'i. Nature Climate Change, v. 3, August, pp. 749-
754.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Oceans-Based Climate Solutions Act will help address these
critical issues facing coastal states. It will provide coordination and
resources to enhance coastal barriers to better protect against natural
disasters, expand coastal barrier programs to include the Pacific Coast
and offshore islands, update the Coastal Zone Management Act, enable
indigenous and underserved communities to better manage coastal
resources, provide grants for coastal resiliency and adaptation work,
and provide for better research and understanding to act on ocean
acidification to protect coastal communities and economies.
Plastics and other pollutants in the ocean are harming coastal
communities, ecosystems, and increasing costs to taxpayers for
cleanup.
Shorelines in coastal states around the country from Alaska to
Florida have been inundated with trash, pollutants, and microplastic
debris. About 40 percent of today's global plastic waste continues to
end up in the environment with 11 million metric tons of plastic leaked
into the ocean in 2016 alone.\11\ Plastic debris is now so common in
the ocean that by 2050 the world may have more plastics in the ocean
than fish, by weight.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.pewtrusts.org/-/media/assets/2020/07/
breakingtheplasticwave_report.pdf.
\12\ https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-new-plastics-economy-
rethinking-the-future-of-plastics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plastic and other debris litters marine environments in coastal
states where it is being ingested by fish, turtles, birds, and is now
showing up in local catch at our supermarkets. Plastic debris often
ends up breaking into millions of small microplastic contaminants that
are incredibly difficult to clean up. In Hawaii every single beach,
including those regularly rated ``the best beach in the country'' are
now littered with microplastic. One beach on Oahu's Kahuku coastline is
notorious for high volumes of marine debris. In a single 90-minute
cleanup there with 100 volunteers it is possible to remove as much as
10,000 pounds of debris.
Taxpayers are being forced to pay the costs to clean up plastics
and other pollutants in Hawaii and in cities around the country. In
recent years California has spent over $400 million per year to help
prevent trash and plastic debris from getting into waterways, and
eventually the ocean.\13\ Residents in New York City have spent over
$40 million per year on waste management fees for single-use plastic
foodware.\14\ Taxpayers in other places around the country commonly pay
for similar cleanup efforts in their states and cities. Reducing the
amount of plastics and debris entering the waste stream will reduce the
burden for cleanup that is passed on to taxpayers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.nrdc.org/resources/waste-our-water-annual-cost-
california-communities-reducing-litter-pollutes-our-waterways.
\14\ https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/5d696bc69fa6c2515873360a/
5e618b692785ae55f96072f7_The
%20Dirty%20Truth%20About%20Disposable%20Foodware_vF.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Oceans-Based Climate Solutions Act will help reduce the unfair
burden of cleanup currently passed on to taxpayers. It will place a 5-
cent tax on virgin plastic manufacturers that would create a market-
based incentive encouraging more plastic to be recycled properly so
less ends up in the ocean. Funds raised will be directed to address
ocean-based climate solutions and could potentially be used for
plastics and pollutants cleanup. That will allow people who wish to
purchase virgin plastic products the freedom to do so without unfairly
passing the cost of cleanup along to their neighbors.
Expanding opportunities for offshore wind and transitioning to clean
energy can reduce cost and risk for ratepayers, as well as
reduce greenhouse gasses.
Switching to renewable electricity generation from fossil fuels not
only reduces greenhouse gas emissions but can also help reduce energy
costs for ratepayers. The cost of solar panels and batteries have
decreased by about 85 percent over the last decade. The cost of wind
power has declined about 50 percent. As a result, renewables are now
the cheapest form of energy to install on the electric grid in many
places, and their cost continues to fall. Additionally, renewables
operate at a fixed cost and aren't subject to price volatility due to
supply shortages or foreign events that can drive up the cost of fossil
fuel energy, which makes renewables a much safer long-term financial
investment for ratepayers.
Mitigating climate change means rapidly decarbonizing the economy.
To this end, 11 states have already established targets to achieve
economy-wide carbon neutrality by mid-century. They include Montana,
California, Louisiana, Michigan, Nevada, and Maine, among others. An
additional 12 states have established paths to significantly reduce
carbon emissions, typically a reduction of 80% below 2005 levels by
mid-century.
Hawaii was the first state to commit to achieving 100% clean
electricity and a carbon-negative economy by 2045. Over the last decade
Hawaii has more than tripled renewable energy on the electric grid
resulting in significant savings to ratepayers. Utility scale solar,
wind, and battery storage projects have helped stabilize volatile
fossil fuel electric rates. Most significantly, today one in three
single family homes in Hawaii has rooftop solar panels. Collectively,
rooftop solar is the single largest source of power on the electric
grid and together with energy efficiency upgrades is a key driver that
helped reduce electric bills by an average of $39 per month since
2011.\15\

\15\ https://energy.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/2019-
FF_Final.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rapid declines in the price of renewable technology have now made
renewable projects financially viable all around the country. If Hawaii
can transition to clean, renewable power resulting in cost savings for
residents and the economy, the same can be done faster, better, and
cheaper in other places with larger electric grids with greater
economies of scale, more flexible resources, and declining costs of
renewable technology.
The Oceans-Based Climate Solutions Act has immediate potential to
unlock those opportunities for appropriately sited offshore wind that
can provide some of the largest sources of clean energy for coastal and
inland states. Requiring approvals for reasonable amounts of wind
generation creates an instant market providing certainty to project
financiers, developers, and communities seeking to benefit from the
opportunity. This is one of the quickest ways to help deploy these
resources and spur change.
Ocean-based climate solutions can create new jobs and innovative
industries.
Perhaps one of the most notable benefits of taking action to
protect our oceans and address climate change through the Oceans-Based
Climate Solutions Act is the potential for new jobs and innovative
industries that it creates.
In 2018, America's ocean economy contributed roughly $373 billion
to the nation's gross domestic product, with coastal tourism and
recreation bringing in $143 billion.\16\ With support from the Oceans-
Based Climate Solutions Act, resources could begin flowing through
grants and other means into ocean-based economies with the potential to
expand local benefit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.noaa.gov/media-release/marine-economy-in-2018-
grew-faster-than-us-overall.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Hawaii, NOAA's Economics National Ocean Watch found that the
islands' ocean-dependent economy can support over 114,000 employees in
47 industries across six sectors, producing a conservative estimate of
over $8 billion in the annual gross domestic product.\17\ Today,
Hawaii's ocean sector is believed to be under-performing its potential
to provide jobs to local residents. The Oceans-Based Climate Solutions
Act can help seed work that properly assesses, manages, and restores
Hawaii's marine resources. Restoration of natural habitat, sustainable
fishing, recreation and other sectors can in turn expand markets and
create new potential for more community and economic benefit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ NOAA Office for Coastal Management. 2018. ENOW Hawaii:
Exploring the Hawaii Ocean Economy through a Deeper Dive into the ENOW
Dataset. https://coast.noaa.gov/data/digitalcoast/pdf/econ-hawaii.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Right now the energy and climate technology market is the strongest
it has ever been, with climate tech investment growing 3 times faster
than investments in artificial intelligence and 5 times faster than the
average growth of general venture capital. In 2019, over $13B was
invested into climate technology which is more than double what it was
in 2016. These funds have birthed startups and companies working on
climate issues such as CarbonCure, a sustainable carbon-sequestering
concrete company that now provides carbon-infused cement for Hawaii's
roadways. There is incredible potential for entrepreneurial innovation
in the climate and oceans space.
Around the country the transition to cheaper, cleaner, renewables
has spawned an entire new sector of high paying jobs. In Hawaii alone,
jobs in solar installation, energy efficiency, and renewable fuel
production totaled over 15,000 in 2016, paying an average of $3 to $7/
hour higher than the state's median wage. Clean energy jobs related to
renewables such as appropriately sited offshore wind have been proven
to similarly create decades of high-paying work for local residents.
In Conclusion
Thank you once more for the opportunity to provide these comments
on the Oceans-Based Climate Solutions Act. State and local governments
have taken steps which prove that investing in climate solutions helps
to address climate impacts, reduces costs to taxpayers, and promotes
economic growth. However, no state can solve climate change on its own.
Coordination, planning, and resources will be needed if we are to
succeed. I appreciate the role the federal government has to play to
help address this global issue, because our time to meaningfully
address it is running out. Our oceans, our economy, our way of life,
and our future depend on it.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Senator Chris Lee, Hawaii State
Legislature

Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan

Question 1. Sea-level rise, storm surge, and other climate impacts
are of utmost concern for Pacific island communities. How do programs
in the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act better protect communities in
places like Hawaii and the Northern Mariana Islands?

Answer. Coastlines and taxpayers in the United States and
throughout Pacific island communities face enormous risk, impact, and
cost increases as a result of climate change.

Sea level rise has already begun causing coastal losses and is
driving up cost to taxpayers around the country and across Pacific
islands. In Hawaii in 2017, as homes and roads began falling into the
ocean as coastal erosion accelerated, the State of Hawaii conducted the
highest resolution and most comprehensive sea level rise study to date,
finding that over $19 billion of property, including 38 miles of roads,
6,500 structures, 25,800 acres of land, and 550 cultural sites will be
lost to sea level rise in coming decades. This study also found that
20,000 people will be displaced. Further analysis by the State
Department of Transportation found that an additional $15 billion in
highways would also be imperiled, spurring over $175 million in
projects already underway to modify or move coastal highways.
Unfortunately, most coastal areas in the United States and
throughout Pacific island communities do not have this kind of
comprehensive analysis. The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act (OBCSA)
will help provide coordination and resources to assist coastal
communities who do not have the ability or expertise to analyze risk
and plan to adapt, especially in rural areas. OBCSA will also allow for
regional ocean partnership opportunities for states and territories to
coordinate and work together and learn from one another as we analyze
the full risk to taxpayers and local economies.
As human-induced greenhouse gasses continue to accumulate in the
atmosphere and oceans at rates exponentially faster than would
otherwise naturally occur, climate changes will continue to accelerate
infinitely faster than would otherwise be naturally possible. Warming
ocean waters are already helping to fuel stronger storms and hurricanes
of greater intensity and frequency. This directly impacts areas such as
the Gulf coast, Hawaii, and Pacific islands. A direct impact from a
hurricane on a city the size of Honolulu is estimated to incur as much
as $40 billion in damage and loss of life.
Coastal barriers such as reefs and dune systems are critical tools
to help prevent damage from increasing hurricanes and storm surges.
Hawaii and many coastal areas have robust coral reefs. In Hawaii,
coastal barriers contribute $477 million to our local economy enabling
fishing, tourism, and related industries. Most of all the presence of
coral reefs blunts the impact of storm surges and coastal erosion, and
this adds an estimated $860 million in annual benefit to coastal
resiliency. This is the result of reduced shoreline damage, insurance
claims, loss to industry, and local economies.
However, as oceans absorb greater quantities of carbon and
greenhouse gasses, water begins to acidify. In Hawaii we have already
measured an 8.7% increase in the acidity of ocean water over 30 years.
Together with warming ocean waters, the acidification of the ocean is
causing Hawaii coral reefs to experience unprecedented bleaching which
is killing entire reef ecosystems. Hawaii is expected to lose about 95%
of its coral reefs by mid-century to chronic bleaching. The same is
true in many coastal areas.
OBCSA will help provide for coastal community vulnerability
assessments to identify risks to key coastal barriers and expand
definitions to encompass bluffs and other vulnerable areas. It will
allow for regional ocean partnerships between states and agencies. It
will help quantify reef loss potential in vulnerable communities and
make recommendations for action. It will also help the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration coordinate and address harmful algal
blooms that threaten coral reefs and the coastal protection they
provide. OBSCA will also protect consumers and property owners by
requiring disclosure of risk, and limitations on the availability of
federal assistance. It will provide grants to assist working
waterfronts to ensure more resilient harbors and protect jobs. And it
will critically exempt cost sharing requirements in communities that
may not have adequate resources for disaster relief. Ultimately,
assistance from OBCSA will help save coastal economies, jobs, and
lives.
States and Municipalities Need Federal Help

States and municipalities do not have the resources to address the
threats to their economies, jobs, and communities from climate change.
Federal action is necessary for assistance to states and
municipalities, and to mitigate financial risk to the federal
government itself.
The 2021 GAO (Government Accountability Office) High Risk Report--
Limiting the Federal Government's Fiscal Exposure by Better Managing
Climate Change Risks, found that, ``Climate change poses risks to many
environmental and economic systems and creates a significant fiscal
risk to the federal government. Since our 2019 High-Risk Report, the
federal government has not made measurable progress to reduce its
fiscal exposure to climate change; therefore, this high-risk area
warrants significant attention.''
``Specifically, the federal government needs to, among other
things, (1) lead the development of a national climate strategic plan;
(2) establish an entity to prioritize national-scale climate resilience
projects; (3) develop a national climate information system; (4) make
structural changes to the flood and crop insurance programs; and (5)
establish a pilot program for community climate migration.''
OBCSA will take long overdue steps to responsibly limit harm and
risk to taxpayers, local economies, jobs, and communities around the
country and throughout the Pacific.
The United States is Falling Behind Other Countries

Other countries have already begun assessing the impacts of climate
change on their coastlines and economies. Many nations are also taking
action to mitigate the impact of climate change far in excess of the
United States, which has the added benefit for them of surpassing the
United States in technological innovation and economic development.
For example, of all new solar capacity added globally in 2018, 45%
was in China. China has also become the largest produce or solar
panels, wind turbines, batteries, and electric vehicles. It is
committed to the rollout of 800,000 electric vehicle chargers and on
track to produce over 8 million electric vehicles per year by 2028,
while the United States is likely to produce just 1.4 million. These
investments in clean technology and greenhouse gas mitigation are
significantly boosting their economy today and forging a path to
dominate the global economy in the future. India has already reduced
emissions intensity by 21% over 2005 levels and is on track to exceed
Paris Agreement Targets. It is expected to reach 175 GW of renewables
by 2022.
If the United States is going to remain globally competitive it
must innovate and build a clean economy that can mitigate climate
emissions and compete with other nations through the rest of the 21st
century. OBCSA is a complimentary and necessary step to our nation's
mitigation strategies that will adapt coastlines and protect
communities from climate impacts that mitigation efforts cannot
prevent.
Acting on Climate Change Does Not Have to be a Partisan Issue

Republicans, Democrats, liberals, conservatives, business, labor,
and communities can all come to agreement that climate change is a
critical threat to our economy, communities, and way of life, and take
action that not only addresses its impacts, but benefits taxpayers, the
economy, and local communities at the same time. In Hawaii our
collaboration across sectors and ideologies proves it.
It was a Republican governor who began the Hawaii Clean Energy
Initiative to transition Hawaii off fossil fuels and begin to address
climate change. Democratic governors have continued accelerating this
effort. As a Democrat, I joined together with our House Republican
leader to lead a campaign that successfully blocked a $4.2 billion
buyout that would entrench fossil fuels in our electric grid at great
risk to taxpayers. We were successful because it was not about party or
ideology, it was about what would most benefit everyone in Hawaii.
When we passed legislation in 2018 making Hawaii the first state to
commit to achieving a carbon negative economy by 2045, it was passed
unanimously with all Republicans and Democrats in support. It was also
supported by a coalition of environmental advocates, labor and business
interests alike. The President of the Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii
noted at its signing that, ``Moving forward on this bill will help
catalyze additional investment in local businesses while helping us
reach our 100% renewable energy by 2045 goal and achieve economic,
social and environmental sustainability.''
Setting politics aside and working together to address climate
change we have been able to successfully triple renewable energy in
Hawaii over the last decade. Investment in clean energy has reduced
electric bills by almost $40/month for local residents who are now on
track to save $3 billion over the life of these projects. Hawaii is now
leading nation with one in three single family homes having installed
rooftop solar, whose financial benefits and cost reductions are shared
by all ratepayers. Increasing the number of homes with solar panels by
just 10% will save an additional billion dollars for everyone. Hawaii
has built an entirely new clean energy industry with thousands of jobs,
grown innovative companies, and we are collectively on track to achieve
a carbon negative economy that will help reduce climate impacts for
everyone.
Taking action to address climate change benefits everyone. It is
fiscally responsible to protect taxpayers and businesses. It is
economically empowering for jobs and the economy. Most of all it is
morally responsible to ensure a better future for our next generation.
Hawaii proves that when Democrats and Republicans set partisan politics
aside to act on climate, everyone can benefit.

I strongly encourage our elected representatives in the U.S.
Congress to do the same.

______

Mr. Huffman [presiding]. Thank you very much, Senator.
I am going to take the virtual gavel from the Chair and
pinch hit here for a bit, and the Chair will now recognize Dr.
Ayana Elizabeth Johnson for 5 minutes.
Welcome, Dr. Johnson.

STATEMENT OF DR. AYANA ELIZABETH JOHNSON, CO-FOUNDER URBAN
OCEAN LAB

Dr. Johnson. Thank you, Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member
Westerman, and members of the Committee for this invitation to
testify.
The ocean is a source of nourishment, protection,
livelihoods, and joy. It is the foundation of climate
stability. In the United States, the blue economy supports
around 2.3 million jobs and contributes $373 billion annually
to GDP from tourism, to shipping, to fishing. This value can
continue to increase but only if we have robust laws in place
and only if we protect and restore ocean ecosystems.
Because of climate change, ocean temperatures are climbing,
pH is plummeting, fish are fleeing for the poles, corals are
frying in place, marine mammals are threatened with extinction,
and plastic is everywhere. The situation is extremely bad. The
United States is the largest historical emitter of greenhouse
gasses and the largest current contributor to ocean plastic
pollution of any nation in the world. We must understand these
stakes and our responsibility. We are here to talk about
solutions.
The ocean is not merely a victim; it is also a hero.
Collectively, ocean-based solutions could be 21 percent of our
climate solution, and there are three that I would like to
highlight: (1) protecting and restoring coastal ecosystems that
absorb tons of carbon and protect us from storms too; (2)
producing clean, renewable energy from offshore wind; and (3)
farming the ocean regeneratively to support a sustainable food
system.
First, coastal ecosystems. When we think of climate
solutions, it is tempting to think about technological fixes,
but nature and the process of photosynthesis are key. For
example, during Superstorm Sandy, although 85 percent of the
wetlands in New York and New Jersey had already been destroyed
by development, what little remained prevented $625 million in
damages.
Coastal ecosystems often provide cheaper and more effective
shoreline protection than hard structures such as sea walls
while absorbing up to four times more carbon in their soils
than a forest on land. This is why I support the blue carbon
proposal as well as the proposal introduced by Congresswoman
Plaskett that would allocate $10 billion to coastal
restoration. Also key is the provision that would support the
President's goal of protecting 30 percent of the ocean by 2030.
Second solution, renewable ocean energy. Historically,
ocean energy meant drilling for oil and gas, but today, we have
the opportunity for renewable energy offshore, and 66 percent
of Republican and 72 percent of Democrat voters support new
offshore wind farms. In the next decade, such farms could
support 80,000 jobs per year which is 60 percent more jobs than
the coal mining industry provided in 2019.
And with 40 percent of Americans living in coastal
counties, harnessing this offshore renewable energy would allow
the United States to generate electricity near where demand is
highest. I support the provision to set a national goal of 30
gigawatts of offshore wind production by 2030.
And the third solution, regenerative ocean farming. As we
consider the future of seafood, we must focus on farming the
ocean regeneratively. Instead of farming tuna and salmon, think
of seaweed and shellfish which live simply off sunlight and
nutrients already in the water. A single acre of ocean can
produce 25 tons of seaweed and 250,000 shellfish in just 5
months.
Scaling regenerative ocean farming could create millions of
direct and indirect jobs, improve habitat, and provide
nutritious food. No land, fresh water, or fertilizer required.
Notably, there is little in the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions
Act on supporting this type of aquaculture, a gap worth
filling.
One last key point, ocean justice. How we go about ocean
conservation and the implementation of ocean climate solutions
really matters. Ocean conservation is not only about fish or
wells or even about octopuses and the phytoplankton; it is also
about people. It is about who has access to healthy seafood to
eat, clean waters for recreation, and jobs in the blue economy,
and who does not.
Our solutions must be grounded in environmental justice,
and I appreciate that many of the provisions in the Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act recognize that need. That need has also
led the non-profit think tank I have co-founded, Urban Ocean
Lab, to convene the Ocean Justice Forum to ensure justice is at
the heart of U.S. ocean climate policy.
In closing, with robust policies like the bills we are
discussing here today, the ocean can be a core element of our
climate solutions, sequestering carbon, protecting coastal
communities, producing clean energy, providing nutritious
seafood, and providing millions of jobs.
Frankly, we have not been giving the ocean the respect it
deserves, and that must change. Trying to address the climate
crisis without including the ocean is simply a recipe for
failure.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I
look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ayana Elizabeth Johnson, Ph.D., Co-founder of
Urban Ocean Lab
Thank you Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, and members
of the committee for the invitation to testify today on these important
bills. Thank you for your leadership Mr. Chairman, both with the
introduction of the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act (OBSCA) and with
the Environmental Justice For All Act. I also want to thank the
sponsors of the other bills we are talking about today, many of which
contribute to ocean policy topics which have been the focus of my work
for the last decade.
The ocean is singular--one interconnected system of currents and
wildlife covering 71% of our planet. It is a source of nourishment,
protection, livelihoods, and joy. A healthy ocean is critical to our
food security, economies, cultures, and human health.
In the U.S., the ``blue economy'' supports around 2.3 million jobs
and contributes $373 billion annually to GDP--from tourism to shipping,
fishing, and construction. The largest share of that is tourism and
recreation, which alone contributes around $143 billion to the U.S.
economy each year. These industries depend on a healthy ocean, clean
beaches, and abundant fish and wildlife. That number of jobs can
continue to grow and the economic value can continue to increase, but
only if we have robust policies in place, and only if we protect and
restore ocean ecosystems.
The ocean has massively buffered the impacts of climate change, and
it can't take much more. For example, it has absorbed over 90% of the
excess heat trapped by greenhouse gases. Without the ocean absorbing
all that heat, our atmosphere would be around 95 degrees fahrenheit
hotter. The ocean has also absorbed around 30% of the carbon dioxide
we've emitted by burning fossil fuels.
But absorbing all this heat has changed the ocean--dramatically and
for the worse. As the ocean heats up, many species are migrating toward
the poles in search of cooler waters, while coral reefs are frying in
place. And warmer seawater fuels stronger and wetter storms, wreaking
havoc on coastal communities. Absorbing all this carbon dioxide has
also made the entire ocean 30% more acidic--among other things, this
increased acidity makes it harder for shellfish and corals to grow
their shells and skeletons, and harder for fish to smell home or their
predators or prey.
More broadly, to date, 66% of marine environments have been
``severely altered'' by human actions--overfishing, pollution, coastal
development and climate change. The ocean's biodiversity is also at
risk with a third of reef forming corals and marine mammals threatened
with extinction. And every year approximately 8 million tons of
plastic, and rising, end up in our ocean, harming marine life and
getting incorporated into the food chain. The U.S. is the largest
contributor to ocean plastic pollution of any nation in the world.
Therefore, I was pleased to see that this re-introduced version of
OBCSA includes creation of a tax on single-use, virgin plastics.
But at the same time, we need to reframe the narrative of the ocean
being merely a victim, and sometimes a threat, to valuing the ocean as
a hero--as a source for climate solutions. So I appreciate the name of
the OBCSA because indeed we must leverage the power of the ocean to
address our climate crisis.
Ocean-based mitigation options could provide 21% of the greenhouse
gas emission reductions needed by 2050 to reach the goal of remaining
below 1.5 Celsius of global warming--and reaching that goal is the most
important thing we can do for the ocean. This reduction is larger than
annual emissions from all current coal fired power plants worldwide.
There are three main ocean-climate solutions I would like to
highlight in my testimony: (1) protecting and restoring coastal
ecosystems that absorb tons of carbon and protect us from storms; (2)
producing clean, renewable energy from offshore wind; and (3) farming
the ocean regeneratively to support a sustainable food system. Many of
the bills we are considering today would further these solutions, so I
will elaborate briefly on each of the three.
1. Coastal Ecosystems
The carbon sequestered by ocean ecosystems is often called ``blue
carbon.'' While trees get a lot of attention for their carbon dioxide
absorbing potential, wetlands, mangroves, kelp forests, and seagrasses
can absorb several times more carbon in their soils than a forest on
land.
Yet, these ecosystems are increasingly threatened--degraded and
destroyed by development, climate change, and pollution. Disturbing
these ecosystems not only inhibits ongoing carbon sequestration, but
also releases previously stored carbon. Up to 1 billion tons of carbon
dioxide are released annually from degraded and destroyed coastal
ecosystems. And worse, this destruction also releases massive amounts
of methane, a potent greenhouse gas.
When we think about climate solutions, it is tempting to think
about technological fixes. But in reality, nature and the process of
photosynthesis are a big part of the solutions we have at our
fingertips. For example, during Superstorm Sandy, although 95% of the
wetlands in New York and New Jersey had already been destroyed by
development, what little remained prevented $625 million in damages to
property and infrastructure. Coastal ecosystems can often provide
cheaper and more effective shoreline protection than hard structures
such as sea walls. They also enhance food security and support coastal
economies. Clearly, protecting and restoring these ecosystems is
critical.
That is why I and many others support Title 1 of the OBCSA and Mr
Huffman's bill H.R. 3906, establishing a Blue Carbon program to
conserve and restore marine and coastal blue carbon ecosystems, as well
as the provision in the OBCSA and in H.R. 660, introduced by
Congresswoman Plaskett, that would allocate $10 billion to a broad
scale coastal restoration program. We can expect that investment to be
paid back many times over through healthier fish stocks, reduced storm
damages, and climate mitigation that we desperately need.
At present, less than 3% of the global ocean area is fully
protected, while leading scientists recommend protecting at least 30%
in order to safeguard biodiversity and restore ocean health. While 23%
of U.S. waters are well-protected, the vast majority of that is around
remote Pacific Islands. A well-connected, effectively and equitably
managed system of marine protected areas, that includes all ecosystem
types and the high seas, will build the ocean's resilience against
climate change. Therefore, the OBCSA provision that would support the
President's goal of protecting 30% of the ocean by 2030 is key.
2. Renewable Ocean Energy
Historically, ocean energy meant drilling for oil and gas--whose
extraction will only intensify climate change. Today, both President
Biden and the OBCSA are advocating for increases in ocean-based
renewable energy. Clean offshore energy (now primarily wind energy, but
perhaps in the future wave, tidal, and other forms as well) will be a
critical component of rapidly transitioning away from polluting fossil
fuels and eliminating the economic and ecological devastation caused by
oil spills.
Well-planned and well-sited offshore wind has the potential to
support an average of 80,000 jobs per year through development,
construction, and operation from 2025 to 2035, including many union
jobs and jobs that require skills easily transferable from the oil and
gas sector. That's 60% more jobs than the coal mining industry provided
in 2019.
And there is strong public support for this burgeoning industry.
Polling by Data for Progress shows that U.S. voters support the
construction of new offshore wind farms by a 48-percentage-point
margin, with support from 66% of Republicans and 72% of Democrats.
With 40% of Americans living in coastal counties, harnessing
offshore renewable energy would allow the U.S. to generate energy close
to where demand is highest. That is why I strongly support the
provision in the OBCSA that would set a national goal of 30 GW of
offshore wind production by 2030--matching the goal set by the
President.
3. Regenerative Ocean Farming
Globally, approximately 34% of the world's fish stocks and 18% of
U.S. fish stocks are overfished. We cannot rely heavily on wild fish to
feed our growing world population. At the same time, industrial
aquaculture, the farming of seafood, has been largely unsustainable,
often focused on raising carnivorous fish that require a lot of feed,
feed which to-date is often smaller wild fish. Hence, I support the
provisions in the OBCSA that would promote sustainable, climate ready
fisheries.
However, for our food security and for sustainability, as we
consider the future of seafood we must focus on regeneratively farming
the ocean. Regenerative agriculture on land has gained a lot of
traction in recent years--it is essentially farming in a way that
regenerates the health of the soil, restores ecosystems and
biodiversity, and absorbs carbon in the soil instead of emitting it. In
the ocean, this would look like seaweed and shellfish farms along our
coastlines--with oysters and clams growing in cages on the seafloor,
mussels growing on hanging ropes, and kelp growing like hanging
curtains between it all. These organisms live simply off sunlight and
nutrients already in seawater--no fertilizer, freshwater, or feed
required.
A single acre of ocean can produce 25 tons of seaweed and 250,000
shellfish in just five months. Moreover, these seaweeds have high
nutritional value, and one species, when fed to cows, can reduce their
methane emissions by over 60%. Through photosynthesis and the formation
of shells, ocean farms can absorb tons of carbon, help reduce local
ocean acidification, and improve local water quality, while also
creating a habitat for a cornucopia of wild marine life. Scaling
regenerative ocean farming could create millions of direct and indirect
jobs. Notably, there is little in this bill on supporting this type of
aquaculture--a gap well worth filling.
Ocean Justice
One last key point I must include: How we go about ocean
conservation and the implementation of ocean-climate solutions really
matters.
Ocean conservation is not only about fish or whales, or even
octopuses or phytoplankton. It's also about people, about protecting
our livelihoods and communities, about preserving coastal cultures.
It's about parents and grandparents getting to take their kids
fishing--and actually catching something. It's about who has access to
healthy seafood to eat, clean waters for recreation, and jobs in the
blue economy--and who does not.
The well-being of communities of color and of poor and working-
class communities are deeply affected as the ocean's health degrades.
In the United States, people of color make up about 40% of the
population, but 48% of the population of coastal counties and, per my
team's estimates, 53% of the population of coastal cities. Within these
areas, people of color often live in low-lying, flood-prone areas.
It has been well-documented that poor communities and communities
of color endure disproportionate exposure to toxic air, land, and
water. New Orleans, Flint, Standing Rock, and countless places in
between exemplify the need to prevent such communities from bearing the
brunt of environmental devastation. In New York, where I live, high-
polluting peaker plants are located adjacent to lower-income
communities of color. Hence, in the last few decades as the
environmental movement arose, right alongside it arose the
environmental justice movement.
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
environmental justice will exist ``when everyone enjoys the same degree
of protection from environmental and health hazards, and equal access
to the decision-making process to have a healthy environment in which
to live, learn, and work.''
This need for environmental justice clearly extends to the
coastline and into the sea. Ocean conservation is a social justice
issue. This is why, in collaboration with the Gulf Coast Center for Law
and Policy, Azul, and Center for American Progress, the non-profit
think tank I co-founded, Urban Ocean Lab, is convening the Ocean
Justice Forum, to ensure justice is at the heart of U.S. ocean-climate
policy.
The longer we wait to enact strong ocean and climate policies, the
more vulnerable people of color and low-income people in coastal
communities will become. Therefore, our solutions must be grounded in
environmental justice, and I appreciate that many of the provisions in
the OBSCA recognize that need.
In sum, the ocean is severely threatened, but it is also resilient.
With robust policies like the OBCSA and other bills we are discussing
here today, the ocean can be a core element of our climate solutions--
sequestering carbon, protecting shorelines, producing renewable energy,
providing nutritious and sustainable seafood, and supporting millions
of good jobs.
Frankly, we have not been giving it the respect it deserves, and
that must change. Trying to address the climate crisis without
including the ocean is a recipe for failure. If we protect the ocean,
it will protect us.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.

*****

The following documents were submitted as supplemental materials to Ms.
Ayana Elizabeth Johnson's testimony.

Select relevant publications:

--  Podcast: An Origin Story of the Blue New Deal--How to Save a
Planet, 2021 https://gimletmedia.com/shows/
howtosaveaplanet/2ohwd7k/an-origin-story-of-the-blue-new-
deal

***

Policy Memo: A Plan for Offshore Wind Energy in the U.S.--Urban Ocean
Lab, 2021
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.002

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.003

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.004

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.005

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.006

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.007

.epsTo Save the Climate, Look to the Oceans--Scientific American, 2020
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.008

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.009

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.010

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.011

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.012

.epsWhat I Know About the Ocean: We Need Ocean Justice--Sierra
Magazine, 2020
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.013

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.014

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.015

.epsThe Concrete Jungle Has 578 Miles of Coastline at Risk--The New
York Times, 2019
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4957.016

.eps__

Mr. Huffman. Thank you very much, Dr. Johnson.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Marce Gutierrez-Graudins for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARCE GUTIERREZ-GRAUDINS, FOUNDER AND EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, AZUL, SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA

Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. Good afternoon. Thank you, Chairman
Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, members of the House
Committee of Natural Resources, and Committee staff for the
opportunity to testify on the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act
of 2021. My name is Marce Gutierrez-Graudins. I am the founder
and Executive Director of Azul which was started in 2011 to
work with Latinx communities to protect coasts and oceans.
As someone who started their career in commercial fishing,
I understand firsthand the importance of a thriving ocean for
communities across the country. Now more than ever, climate
change requires policy makers to take bold leadership in
preserving marine resources while centering equity at the heart
of these solutions.
Climate change not only threatens marine resources, it
disproportionately impacts communities of color. For example,
these communities overwhelmingly live in areas prone to
flooding and extreme weather. Environmental justice has never
been prioritized like it has been by the Biden administration
and its proposal to address the climate crisis.
Chairman Grijalva, Congressman McEachin, and others are
leading the way on environmental justice in Congress with the
introduction of the Environmental Justice For All Act and now
the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act.
Azul is pleased to highlight provisions of the bill that
address inequality, reducing greenhouse emissions, supporting
the Biden administration's goal of equitably conserving 30
percent of land and ocean by 2030, assessing barriers faced by
communities of color when accessing nature, and enhancing the
ocean's natural ability to store carbon and protect coastal
communities and increasing their resilience of oceans through
coastal ecosystems.
The most important thing we can do for the ocean is to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This bill would advance the
goal in several ways. First, by prohibiting the expansion of
offshore oil exploration and drilling in most areas of the
Outer Continental Shelf except the western and central Gulf of
Mexico.
While we applaud the Committee's efforts to prohibit
exploration and drilling in certain areas, Azul strongly
advocates for complete prohibition of oil and gas exploration
in the Outer Continental Shelf. Communities of color living
along the coast have been disproportionately devastated by
accidents involving offshore oil and gas. To continue emission
reductions, the bill encourages the transition to renewable
energy sources, including well planned and sited offshore
renewables like wind and tidal energy as well as decreases in
shipping emissions.
Azul is strongly supportive of these provisions, especially
the bill's $0.05 excise tax on single use plastic products. We
appreciate the provisions in the bill that support the Biden
administration's goal to protect 30 percent of the ocean by
2030, including the authorization of a marine protected areas
inventory and a marine biodiversity census and gap analysis
that will help ensure accountability in the progress toward
achieving 30 by 30.
Over the last year, Americans from across the country
turned to neighborhood parks, trails, and beaches for relief in
healing more than ever before. The COVID-19 pandemic proved
that access to nature is not a privilege. It is a necessity for
our health and well-being.
Azul is supportive of the bill's provisions enabling more
equitable access to nature like authorizing a state-by-state
analysis of public access to the Nation's coasts and great
lakes, including opportunities and barriers to access for low
income communities and communities of color and strategies to
prevent the loss of public access as well as studying the
impacts of sea level rise in extreme weather.
The bill includes provisions to restore and protect coastal
blue carbon ecosystems, including mangroves and salt marshes.
Not only do these areas absorb and store carbon dioxide at a
rate of four times that of forests on land, they provide
habitat for marine wildlife, limit the impacts of ocean storms,
while also creating enhanced land protection for coastal
communities. We strongly support these provisions.
Azul also thanks Congressman Huffman for his Blue Carbon
Protection Act which establishes a blue carbon program to
conserve and restore marine and coastal blue carbon ecosystems.
Climate change can greatly impact commercial fisheries and
the communities that depend on them. I believe maintaining and
strengthening the fisheries management systems to support
rebuilding and ensuring the sustainable supply of wild caught
fish achieves the goal of supporting healthy fisheries in the
ocean. We support the provisions of the bill directed to this
goal.
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 would
capitalize on the opportunities the ocean offers to combat
climate change. And this bill is the kind of leadership from
Congress we need to confront environmental justice that Azul
and others have been working toward for many years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership on this bill
and to Congressman McEachin for your efforts to advance
environmental justice so broadly.
We look forward to working you to advance these important
proposals.

Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins follows:]

Prepared Statement of Marce Gutierrez-Graudins, Founder & Executive
Director, Azul
Thank you to Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman, members
of the House Committee on Natural Resources, and Committee staff for
the opportunity to testify on the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of
2021. My name is Marce Gutierrez-Graudins, and I am the Founder and
Executive Director of Azul, an initiative legally organized under
Multiplier founded in 2011 that works with the Latinx community to
bring its voice to conversations about marine resources. As someone who
began their career in the commercial fishing and aquaculture
industries, I understand first-hand the importance of a thriving ocean
for communities across the country. Now more than ever, the existential
threat of climate change requires policymakers to take innovative, bold
leadership in conserving marine resources while centering equity at the
heart of these solutions.

Since 2011, Azul's work has centered around celebrating Latinx's
rich conservation traditions and connecting them to current solutions.
The ocean is important to Latinx communities both culturally and as a
means of economic sustainability. Unfortunately--climate change not
only threatens marine resources--it disproportionately impacts
communities of color. As climate change accelerates, environmental
injustice will continue to worsen unless action is taken. Communities
of color are especially vulnerable because they live in places that
will confront severe repercussions due to climate change: a majority of
the Latinx community in the United States live in California, Texas,
Florida, and New York, all states considered to be most at risk of
excessive flooding, air pollution, and heat waves.\1\ Despite 40
percent of the U.S. population living in densely populated coastal
areas, Latinxs living in coastal communities will bear the brunt of
these impacts because, in many places, they overwhelmingly reside in
flood-prone neighborhoods.\2\ This example of environmental injustice
must be addressed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.nrdc.org/media/2016/161013.
\2\ https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/
population.html#::text=As%20of%202014%2C%20nearly%
2040,people%20live%20in%20coastal%20counties; https://
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jul/28/climate-change-
enviromental-racism-america.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Starting today, members of the Committee and the House can take
action: the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 proposes to
advance ocean climate action while centering equity and justice each
step of the way. To this day, environmental justice has never been
prioritized by an administration like it has by the Biden
Administration in its proposals to address the climate crisis. Chairman
Grijalva, Congressman McEachin, and others are leading the way on
environmental justice in Congress, Mr. Chairman, with the introduction
of H.R. 2021, the Environmental Justice for All Act and now the Ocean-
Based Climate Solutions Act. Azul is pleased to highlight elements of
the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act that address inequality at its
core. Provisions of the bill that address inequality include (1)
reducing greenhouse gas emissions; (2) supporting the Biden
Administration's goal of equitably conserving 30 percent each of land
and water by 2030 (30x30); (3) assessing barriers faced by communities
of color when accessing nature; (4) enhancing the ocean's natural
ability to store carbon and protect coastal communities; and (5)
increasing the resilience of ocean and coastal ecosystems.
Reducing GHG Emissions
In order to keep global temperatures from increasing past the 1.5 C
target of the Paris Agreement, the most important thing we can all do
for the ocean is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This bill would
advance that goal in several ways. First, by prohibiting the expansion
of offshore oil exploration and drilling in most areas of the Outer
Continental Shelf except the Western and Central Gulf of Mexico. While
we applaud the Committee's efforts to prohibit exploration and drilling
in certain areas, Azul strongly advocates for a complete prohibition of
oil and gas exploration on the Outer Continental Shelf. Communities of
color living along the coast are devastated by accidents involving
offshore oil and gas. Moreover, expanding offshore oil drilling by any
amount will intensify climate change and threaten ocean and coastal
habitats that are important to healthy fish, marine wildlife, and
coastal economies.
As a first step toward recognizing the negative impact plastic
production has on our environment and frontline communities, Azul is
also supportive of the bill's goal to fund broader ocean climate action
through a 5-cent excise tax on single use plastic production.
We are also supportive of the provisions in the bill to encourage
the transition to renewable energy sources, including well-planned and
sited offshore renewables like wind and tidal energy, and Azul supports
the bill's aim to promote decreases in shipping emissions.
Supporting the Biden Administration's Goal of 30x30
We appreciate the provisions in the bill that support the Biden
Administration's goal to protect 30% of the ocean by 2030 including the
authorization of a Marine Protected Areas inventory and a marine
biodiversity census and gap analysis that will help ensure
accountability in the progress toward achieving 30x30.
Assessing Barriers Faced by Communities of Color When Accessing Nature
Azul is especially supportive of a provision authorizing a study by
the National Academies to assess public access to the nation's coasts,
including the Great Lakes. This study must include a state-by-state
analysis of the quality and quantity of existing public access points,
opportunities and barriers to access for low-income communities,
communities of color, Tribal and Indigenous communities, and rural
communities, the impacts of sea-level rise and extreme weather, and
strategies to prevent the loss of public access. Over the last year,
Americans from across the country turned to neighborhood parks, trails,
and beaches for respite and healing more than ever before. The COVID-19
pandemic proved access to nature is not a privilege: it's a necessity
for our health and wellbeing. Azul is supportive of these provisions
enabling more equitable access to nature.
Enhancing the Ocean's Natural Ability to Store Carbon and Protect
Coastal Communities
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act includes provisions to
restore and protect coastal blue carbon ecosystems, including
mangroves, salt marshes, sea grasses, coral reefs, and kelp forests.
These coastal ecosystems absorb carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere
and safely store it at a rate of up to four times that of forests on
land. Additionally, the bill will limit the impacts of coastal erosion,
flooding, and storms, while providing habitat for marine wildlife and
fisheries by protecting and restoring blue carbon ecosystems. In
addition to these natural benefits, coastal communities of color will
benefit substantially from enhanced flooding protections. We strongly
support these measures in the legislation. Azul would like to also
thank Congressman Huffman for his Blue Carbon Protection Act, which
establishes a blue carbon program to conserve and restore marine and
coastal blue carbon ecosystems.
Increasing the Resilience of Ocean and Coastal Ecosystems
By decreasing the amount of stress placed on the ocean, healthy
ocean systems are better able to adapt to the effects of climate
change. I believe sustainably managing the ocean must be the standard
moving forward if we want to continue enjoying the bounty marine
resources provide.
Climate change can greatly impact commercial fisheries and the
communities that depend on them.\3\ This is something I witnessed
during my time in the seafood industry: in the winter of 2006, a
Pseudo-nitzschia bloom resulted in a large mortality event that
affected bluefin tuna as a result of domoic acid poisoning, an event
explained by ocean warming leading to harmful algal blooms.\4\ A
healthy ocean leads to healthy fisheries and maintaining and
strengthening fisheries management systems, to support rebuilding and
ensuring a sustainable supply of wild caught fish, achieves the goal of
supporting healthy fisheries. We support the provisions in the bill
directed at this goal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2018/12/04/671996313/
fishermen-sue-big-oil-for-its-role-in-climate-change.
\41\ https://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/378/docs/Caron_pdfs/
2018_Smith_etal_HA.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The time to act on climate change is long overdue; the Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act of 2021 will capitalize on the opportunities the
ocean offers to combat climate change, and this bill is the kind of
leadership from Congress we need to confront the environmental
injustices that Azul and others have been working to correct for many,
many years. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership on this bill
and to you and Congressman McEachin for your efforts to advance
environmental justice more broadly. We look forward to working with you
to advance these important proposals and goals.

*****

The following documents were submitted as supplemental materials to Ms.
Marce Gutierrez-Graudins' testimony.

Select relevant publications:

--  Neglected: Environmental Justice Impacts of Marine Litter and
Plastic Pollution. United Nations Environmental Programme.
April 2001

--  Conservation Policy Must Include More Diverse Voices--
CalMatters, 2021

--  Proteger el oceano es una meta urgente para 2030. America
Latina ya esta marcando la pauta--Washington Post, 2021

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Marcela Gutierrez-Graudins,
Founder and Executive Director, Azul

Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan

Question 1. Thank you for your work on the Azul and United Nations
Environment Program report titled ``Neglected: Environmental Justice
Impacts of Marine Litter and Plastic Pollution.'' Can you outline some
of the environmental justice concerns surrounding single-use plastics?

Answer. Plastic goes beyond impacting the health of our ocean--it
impacts the health and rights of vulnerable communities worldwide every
day. Azul's report in collaboration with the United Nations Environment
Programme, Neglected: Environmental Justice Impacts of Marine Litter
and Plastic Pollution, assesses how each stage of the death cycle of
plastic impacts vulnerable communities and the natural resources they
depend on to live. The report's main finding relates to how plastics
hinder the achievement of all United Nations' 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG).
Vulnerable communities around the world deal with the impacts of
single-use plastics but have historically been unable to inform
environmental conversations on the matter. Efforts to control and
decrease plastic pollution are inadequate to address the specific needs
of groups and peoples already in vulnerable situations, who are
socially, economically, politically, institutionally, or otherwise
marginalized.
Ninety-nine percent of plastics are produced from petrochemicals,
which are sourced from fossil fuels.\1\ Fossil fuel exploration and
contamination has severely impacted indigenous peoples whose well-being
is deeply tied to the health of the natural environment.\2\ Plastic
production frequently occurs in close proximity to fossil fuel
refineries given the volatility of the raw materials--and at the
expense of achieving SDG No. 3 `Good Health and Well-being' for
fenceline communities, which tend to have less political recognition
and less economic means to relocate.\3\
,
\4\ Moreover,
students in fenceline communities are more susceptible to adverse
health impacts, compounding education disparities and challenging SDG
No. 4 `Quality Education.' Plastics also challenge the achievement of
SDG No. 5 `Gender Equality', as women face especially high toxicity
risks to the harmful plastic additives due to their higher exposure to
plastics in the household and personal care products, along with
differences in biology, social roles, and political power.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ `Fossils, Plastics, & Petrochemical Feedstocks' (CIEL 2017).
\2\ O'Rourke D and Connolly S, `Just Oil? The Distribution of
Environmental and Social Impacts of Oil Production and Consumption'
(2003) 28 Annual Review of Environment and Resources 587.
\3\ `Plastic & Health: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet' (CIEL
2019).
\4\ Lerner S, Sacrifice Zones: The Front Lines of Toxic Chemical
Exposure in the United States (MIT Press 2010).
\5\ Lynn H, Rech S and Samwel-Mantingh M, `Plastic, Gender and the
Environment. Findings of a Literature Study on the Lifecycle of
Plastics and Its Impacts on Women and Men, from Production to Litter.'
http://rgdoi.net/10.13140/RG.2.2.33644.26242, accessed 18 November
2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plastics are diverse and persistent. While these qualities make
plastics desirable materials, they are also the reason why the majority
of single-use plastics cannot be easily recycled by a one-size-fits-all
solution.\6\ Instead, after one-time use, single-use plastics are
discarded and vulnerable communities disproportionately bear the
consequences of the health and environmental degradation that results
from the accumulation of plastic toxins and increasingly smaller
microplastics.\7\ Common plastic waste management processes, such as
incineration, generate toxic air pollutants and significant
CO
2
emissions.\8\ Unfortunately, incinerators and landfills
are disproportionately built in low-income and heavily minority
communities, further challenging SDG No. 10 `Reduced Inequalities' by
deepening social disparities with environmental degradation, health
costs, and wasted public investments.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Hopewell J, Dvorak R and Kosior E, `Plastics Recycling:
Challenges and Opportunities' (2009) 364 Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 2115.
\7\ Choy CA and others, `The Vertical Distribution and Biological
Transport of Marine Microplastics across the Epipelagic and Mesopelagic
Water Column' (2019) 9 Scientific Reports 7843.
\8\ Geyer R, Jambeck JR and Law KL, `Production, Use, and Fate of
All Plastics Ever Made' (2017) 3 Science Advances e1700782.
\9\ 124 Lerner S, Sacrifice Zones: The Front Lines of Toxic
Chemical Exposure in the United States (MIT Press 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Single-use plastics and the associated environmental injustices
they aggravate are grave and complicated issues that transcend
political and geographic boundaries. For the reasons mentioned above
and included in our report, I believe single-use plastics deserve our
immediate attention. Although Azul supports the legislation's 5-cent
excise tax on single-use plastic, more aggressive action aimed at
reducing single-use plastic production should be considered. Thank you
for the opportunity to comment on this topic and for the chance to
testify on the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act, a bold solution to
addressing threats impacting our ocean and quality of life. Azul looks
forward to working with your committee again in the future.

______

Mr. Huffman. Thank you very much.
Our last witness will be Mr. Mauricio Guardado, General
Manager of the United Water Conservation. Welcome to the
Committee. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MAURICIO GUARDADO, GENERAL MANAGER, UNITED WATER
CONSERVATION DISTRICT, OXNARD, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Guardado. Thank you, Chairman Grijalva, Interim Chair
Huffman, Ranking Member Westerman, and members of the
Committee.
On behalf of the Family Farm Alliance and United Water
Conservation District, I thank you for the opportunity to
provide my testimony today. I would also like to thank
Congresswoman Brownley for her support and leadership with our
water sustainability projects.
My name is Mauricio Guardado. I am the General Manager of
United Water Conservation District (United), which serves a
population of approximately 400,000 and covers some 214,000
acres in Ventura County, California, including U.S. Naval Base
Port Hueneme, Oxnard, as well as several disadvantaged
communities. Considered among the prime agricultural areas of
the world, year-round growing seasons support high value crops
such as citrus, avocados, berries, and row crops.
United stores and releases water at its Santa Felicia Dam
and utilizes its surface flows of the Santa Clara River which
is dry about 9 months of the year to administer a water
management program for all ground water basins within its
boundaries. Surface water deliveries offset groundwater
extractions near the coastline, mitigating sea water intrusion,
among other beneficial activities.
I also serve on the Advisory Committee of the Family Farm
Alliance, a grassroots organization of family farmers,
ranchers, irrigation districts, and allied industries in 16
western states. Its mission of ensuring reliable, affordable,
irrigation water and its commitment to preserving and
protecting western agriculture's positive impact on the
economy, environment, and national security is often overlooked
in national policy decisions.
My professional expertise substantiates my expertise in
water management and validates the interactions I have had with
National Marine Fishery Services, NMFS, a division of National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA.
While the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 is well
intended legislation, my primary concern is the expansion of
the authority of NOAA, vaguely referenced as among other
purposes.
Several areas of the new legislation have the potential for
far-ranging and uncertain impacts to water management and
agriculture, impeding the development of critically needed
infrastructure, especially in the drought stricken western
states.
I have direct experience with the arbitrary and capricious
regulatory edicts of NMFS. This agency, at least in southern
California, has taken Federal environmental laws intended to
protect species and ecosystems, and without any basis in
science, historical data, and even best practices, has issued
issue requirements that are, quite frankly, senseless.
For example, based on a number of scientific studies, it
was determined that steelhead are unlikely to swim upstream in
water with sediment levels greater than 2,000 milligrams per
liter. However, NMFS' direction to United was to provide
passage for steelhead on the Santa Clara River at flows of
three times that sediment level. It looks like chocolate milk
at that point. Most concerning is that sediment level is lethal
to the steelhead that NMFS says it is trying to protect.
NMFS has also asserted that Ventura County's Piru Creek is
a possible steelhead resource despite the fact that since the
late 1800s, fish and game biologists and regulatory agencies
have documented that it is not conducive to steelhead. In fact,
steelhead have never been observed in the watershed. Even the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission supports United's
position.
NMFS' response to this overwhelming evidence, the West
Coast Regional Office of Southern California branch replied,
the absence of evidence isn't evidence of absence. That
attitude is the foundation upon which NMFS continues to demand
expensive, unnecessary fish passage and habitat mitigation
regardless of historical data, consistently dry conditions,
natural migration barriers, and assessments of the region. NMFS
has required continuous water releases from United's
infrastructure into lower Piru Creek, deeming it as critical
habitat for steelhead, a fish that has never been seen in the
watershed. We have to ask, why are we taking water away from
farms and communities to accommodate fish that do not exist in
the watershed?
The Family Farm Alliance and United are dedicated to
finding a balance of environmental protection and sustainable
water supply. Following the science, good sound engineering,
and historical data will, in fact, yield successful results
rather than foster potential conflicts. We appreciate Chairman
Grijalva's efforts in making changes reflected in the current
bill, but there is still room for additional improvement.
While we support some provisions, other portions would
benefit from additional scrutiny. Let's be partners in
developing thoughtful climate policies based on sound science.
We hope these comments are considered in refining this
legislation.
And, again, thank you for the opportunity to present this
testimony to you. I am looking forward to questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Guardado follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mauricio Guardado, General Manager, United Water
Conservation District & Family Farm Alliance
Chairman Grijalva, Ranking Member Westerman and Members of the
Committee, on behalf of the Family Farm Alliance (Alliance) and the
United Water Conservation District (United), I thank you for this
opportunity to present this testimony today.
My name is Mauricio Guardado. I serve as general manager of United,
which covers approximately 214,000 acres in Ventura County, California,
and serves a population of approximately 400,000 residents including
U.S. Naval Base Ventura County, the beach cities of Port Hueneme and
Oxnard, and Channel Islands Beach district. Considered one of the prime
agricultural areas of the world, the year-round growing seasons support
high value crops such as lemons, oranges, avocados, strawberries,
berries, row crops and flowers.
United administers a ``basin management'' program for all of the
hydrologically connected groundwater basins within its boundaries
utilizing the surface flow of the Santa Clara River, impoundment of
water through its tributaries, wholesale water deliveries and other
activities in water supply for the beneficial use by various cities,
municipalities and agriculture throughout Ventura County.
United is one of California's few legislatively established Water
Conservation Districts. In performing its District-wide watershed
management efforts, United not only stores water at its Santa Felicia
Dam and Lake Piru reservoir, it also directly recharges the groundwater
aquifers via its Freeman Diversion. United also provides surface water
deliveries via vast conveyance systems to minimize groundwater
extractions near the coastline in its fight to mitigate seawater
intrusion from contaminating the aquifers.
I also serve on the Advisory Committee of the Family Farm Alliance
(Alliance), a grassroots organization of family farmers, ranchers,
irrigation districts, and allied industries in 16 Western states. The
Alliance is focused on one mission: To ensure the availability of
reliable, affordable irrigation water supplies to Western farmers and
ranchers. The Alliance is committed to the fundamental proposition that
Western irrigated agriculture must be preserved and protected for a
host of economic, sociological, environmental, and national security
reasons--many of which are often overlooked in the context of other
national policy decisions. The Western family farmers and ranchers who
we represent are confronted with many critical issues today. At the top
of the list is the daunting number of administrative policy and
regulatory initiatives that our Western agricultural producers face
daily.
I would like to focus my comments on the Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act of 2021 (H.R. 3764). This well-intended legislation
directs the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) to provide for ocean-based climate solutions to
reduce carbon emissions and global warming; to make coastal communities
more resilient; and to provide for the conservation and restoration of
the ocean and coastal habitats, biodiversity, and marine mammal and
fish populations, among other purposes. In November 2020, the Family
Farm Alliance developed written testimony for this committee on an
earlier version of this legislation. Several concerns were raised in
that testimony, and we were pleased to see that some of these issues
were addressed in H.R. 3764. However, there are several areas of the
new legislation that continue to cause concerns for our membership due
to potential far-ranging and uncertain impacts to water management and
agriculture in the West.
So, why are organizations that serve family farmers and ranchers in
southern California and the mostly inland West concerned with
legislation that would appear to apply more to the ocean and coastal
communities? It is because this wide-ranging bill could have a
significant impact on the development of critically needed new inland
water infrastructure. We have questions about whether the potential
impact on the economy, budget, and existing statutes and regulatory
processes have been assessed. Many of the Family Farm Alliance's
farmers and ranchers--and water managers, like me--have been impacted
by implementation of federal environmental laws intended to protect
ecosystems far-removed from their operations. I will provide some hard-
learned, real-life observations in this testimony that should clearly
demonstrate why many of us share these concerns.
For these reasons, concerns remain that this bill could
dramatically increase the role of federal agencies on inland rivers and
adjacent lands, as further outlined in this testimony.
Alliance Involvement with Climate Change Issues
In 2007, the Family Farm Alliance Board of Directors established a
subcommittee to develop a white paper that addresses the important
issue of climate change, its possible impact on Western water supplies
and irrigated agriculture, and recommendations on how to plan and
provide stewardship for this change. The report was prepared by a
Family Farm Alliance climate change subcommittee, our Advisory
Committee, and water resources experts from around the West. That
document--titled ``Water Supply in a Changing Climate: The Perspective
of Family Farmers and Ranchers in the Irrigated West''--was released in
September 2007. Since that time, we have been asked to testify before
Congress multiple times on how climate change could further strain
fresh water supplies in the West. We continue to advocate that we must
begin to practically plan for, and act on that immediately, and not
wait until we are forced to make decisions during a crisis.
Importance of Western Irrigated Agriculture and Key Challenges
Irrigated agriculture in the West not only provides a $172 billion
annual boost to our economy, it also provides important habitat for
western waterfowl and other wildlife, including southwestern pond
turtle, least bells vireo and southwestern willow flycatcher. Its open
spaces are treasured by citizens throughout the West. Family farmers
and ranchers are willing to partner with constructive conservation
groups and government agencies, especially if there are opportunities
to both help strengthen their businesses and improve the environment.
Still, many Western producers face significant regulatory and
policy related challenges, brought on--in part--by federal agency
implementation of environmental laws and policies. The challenges are
daunting, and they will require innovative solutions. The Family Farm
Alliance and the farmers and water management organizations like United
Water are dedicated to the pragmatic implementation of actions that
seek to find a balance of environmental protection and sustainable
water supply. Following the science, good sound engineering and
historical data are the elements that guarantee constructive working
relations among farmers and ranchers, water managers, environmental
groups and regulatory agencies. Collectively, these elements yield
successful results based on real world working solutions.
All too often, unfortunately, environmental policy is not driven to
achieve meaningful results. That is why our organization seeks to
collaborate with those groups that also seek positive results as an
objective. The foundation for some true, collaborative solutions will
be driven from the constructive ``center,'' one that steers away from
the conflict that can ensue between new regulatory overreach and
grassroots activism intended to resist any changes to existing
environmental and natural resource laws, regulations, and policies.
The Alliance is on record as consistently supporting collaborative,
coordinated and incentive driven voluntary efforts to implement species
conservation programs. Included in this approach is the need to
properly manage and support anadromous fish species.
Support for Voluntary Incentive-Driven Provisions
The Family Farm Alliance has long advocated a voluntary, incentive-
driven philosophy to advance conservation, and thus we supported the
bill's provisions to provide financial assistance to interests seeking
to apply voluntary conservation practices. Unfortunately, we have
several over-arching concerns about the uncertainties associated with
the expansive and uncertain nature of the bill. We continue to strongly
believe that, rather than creating new processes and planning groups to
tackle pressing marine challenges, existing collaborative programs that
have proven successful should be given emphasis and perhaps be used as
templates to duplicate that success elsewhere.

There are good examples of successful partnerships involving
farmers and ranchers that benefit West Coast fisheries, to wit:

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Fisheries Recovery Plan for Oregon Coast Coho Salmon calls
for public-private partnerships to conserve habitat for the
threatened species, positioning coho for possible removal
from the federal list of threatened and endangered species
within the next 10 years. The plan is voluntary, not
regulatory, and hinges on local support and collaboration.
The plan promotes a network of partnerships that integrate
the needs of Oregon Coast coho with the needs of coastal
communities.

The Yakima River Basin Integrated Plan in Washington State
is the result of a collaborative effort on the part of
irrigators, environmentalists, local governments, the
Yakama Nation, the federal government, and the State of
Washington. The plan looks to improving water for farms,
fish and the environment in a manner that does not pit one
use against another. Anadromous fish runs are already
benefiting from this forward-thinking partnership.

After nearly 12 years of discussions and negotiations, the
Deschutes Basin Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) was
recently announced, which will do a great deal to balance
streamflows and better protect four threatened species for
the next 30 years. The Deschutes HCP is a large-scale
planning effort that will help the City of Prineville,
Oregon and the Irrigation District members of the Deschutes
Basin Board of Control (DBBC) meet their current and future
water needs while enhancing fish and wildlife habitat.
Species covered under the HCP include three federally
listed species (Oregon spotted frog, bull trout, and
steelhead), and one currently unlisted species that have
the potential to become listed during the life of the HCP
(sockeye salmon).

Unfortunately, Alliance members like me fear that some sections of
the ocean's climate bill might discourage further voluntary efforts,
and would dramatically increase the role of federal agencies on inland
rivers and adjacent lands, including all uses (agriculture, irrigation,
ports, etc.).
The Need to Consolidate--and not Complicate--Existing Ocean Management
Efforts
Western watersheds that drain to the Pacific Ocean are home to many
species of fish, some of which are listed as ``endangered'' or
``threatened'' under the Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) and fall
under the responsibility of National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). Because fish have different
migration patterns or life histories, there are often duplicative and
sometimes overlapping actions by each of the agencies under the ESA.
Several of these species--like the Lost River and Short Nose
suckers in the Upper Klamath Basin, the Delta Smelt in the Sacramento-
San Joaquin River & San Francisco Bay-Delta, and the bull trout in the
Upper Snake River--spend their entire lives in freshwater. Other
anadromous species--such as the southern California steelhead, coho
salmon in the Lower Klamath River, chinook salmon in California's
Central Valley, and salmon and steelhead in the Columbia River--spawn
in freshwater, migrate to the ocean to mature, and return to spawn in
freshwater. Still other species are polymorphic: an individual O.mykiss
may live its entire life in freshwater, in which case the fish is a
rainbow trout, or that fish may ultimately spend part of its life in
the ocean, in which case it is a steelhead.
In fact, up and down the West coast--from California's Santa Clara
Valley Watershed and Central Valley Project, to the Upper Snake River
Basin in Idaho and the Klamath Irrigation Project in Oregon and
California--duplicative bureaucracies have generated ESA plans that
sometimes compete with or even contradict one another.
For example, based on a number of scientific studies reviewed by
Stillwater Sciences, it was determined that steelhead are unlikely to
swim upstream in water with sediment levels greater than 2,000 mg per
liter. However, in NMFS' direction to United Water, the agency is
requiring United to provide passage for steelhead on the Santa Clara
River at flows that would see more than three times that rate, 7,000 mg
per liter. This is lethal to the steelhead they say they are trying to
protect.
NMFS' arbitrary requirement leads us to ask, ``Why are we taking
the water away from farms and communities when it would provide no
benefit to the endangered species?''
The Ocean Based Climate Solutions Act--in our view--provides
potential to further these types of unfortunate examples, especially in
the drought stricken Western United States. We should be looking for
ways to streamline, improve and consolidate federal resource management
efforts. We need to be sure that new planning groups and programs are
necessary and do not waste public resources.
Key Concerns
The Family Farm Alliance certainly sees the need to address the
ocean impacts of climate change. For far too long, the ocean has been
left out of conversations about West coast climate and environmental
solutions. We fully support a robust, but thoughtful response to these
challenges. The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act of 2021 is a very
comprehensive bill with a long list of proposals to address climate
change. While many of the provisions of this bill go beyond our area of
interest and expertise, there are sections that raise grave concerns as
they relate to farmers and ranchers operating many miles inland from
the ocean.
1. Putting the Cart Before the Horse
We are not sure that the time is ripe for such a massive and
ambitious bill addressing an issue that may be largely unknown to most
Americans. For example, Title I proposes the establishment of a Blue
Carbon Program within NOAA. The intent of this program is to draw on
the latest science to address potential ocean solutions to accelerate
progress on climate change. We are not sure what ``blue carbon''
actually is, and the bill does not provide a definition of this term,
although Section 110 defines the term ``blue carbon ecosystem.'' That
definition--``vegetated coastal habitats including mangroves, tidal
marshes, seagrasses, kelp forests, and other tidal or salt-water
wetlands that have the capacity to sequester carbon from the atmosphere
for a period of not less than 100 years''--raises concerns, since the
phrase ``have the capacity'' appears to be subjective. We are concerned
how this term will be interpreted, as described later in this
testimony.
It would be helpful to provide additional information about the
latest science and technology behind the blue carbon initiative. It is
our understanding that resource managers attempting to promote the
sequestration of blue carbon rely on best-management practices that
have historically included protecting and restoring vegetated coastal
habitats. Only recently are managers beginning to incorporate
watershed-level approaches, a methodology that appears to be promoted
in several sections of the ocean-based climate solutions bill.
In our November 2020 written testimony, we raised concerns about
ambitious provisions that directed the Secretary of Interior to
undertake restoration of coastal wetlands on Department lands to halt
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and/or sequester carbon. We were pleased
to see that the current bill does not include those provisions, which
we believed ``put the cart before the horse'' and seemed to be
premature.
However, we hold fast to our belief that Congress should instead
work to further ``raise awareness of blue carbon ecosystems as a tool
to further conservation objectives through education and extension
activities'', something that would be addressed as part of the
strategic plan proposed in Section 101. Similarly, Section 1001 directs
study examining the social and economic vulnerability to ocean
acidification of coastal resource-dependent communities, including
identifying critical knowledge gaps potential adaptation strategies.
These are the sort of actions that should be conducted first, before
the government moves forward with a new federal program that will cost
approximately $4.8 billion in the first year alone.
Given the relative unknown nature of blue carbon ecosystems to the
general public and to policymakers, we would respectfully observe that
a careful, thoughtful, and incremental approach be taken first.
Also, the bill should be further examined to see if other
legislative vehicles might be used to carry certain provisions. For
example, Title VII, Section 821 establishes a grants program within the
Department of the Interior to improve the resilience of Indian Tribes
to the effects of climate change. We have strong relationships with
many Western tribal groups, and we were happy to work with your
committee in the last Congress to support important Indian water rights
settlement legislation. However, it is difficult for us to see the
nexus between a $1 billion tribal resilience package and ocean climate
legislation. This section, as well as Title IX, Section 904--which
authorizes $10 billion for fiscal year 2022 to support shovel-ready
coastal restoration projects to help stimulate the economy and provide
jobs for workers affected by COVID-19--would appear to be better
advanced in a COVID-19 stimulus package.
2. Representation Concerns
Traditionally, land use is a local and regional responsibility. The
Family Farm Alliance strongly advocates that the best decisions in
resources management are made at the local level. Section 101 calls for
the above-referenced strategic plan to be developed in collaboration
with Federal agencies, the interagency working group, State agencies,
Tribes, and non-governmental organizations on research, restoration,
and protection efforts relating to blue carbon ecosystems. The
experience of Family Farm Alliance members has helped mold our
philosophy that the best knowledge and solutions related to natural
resources issues comes from those who work at the local level. The
proposed collaborative effort should also include local government
representatives like counties and cities, who can appoint other local
experts like biologists, commercial fishermen, and other producers to
provide a better level of ``ground-truthing'' to those unfamiliar with
particular locales.
Section 106 establishes an interagency working group consisting of
federal department and agency representatives. Even though this working
group includes numerous representatives already, we recommend also
including the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation),
since major federal water projects are located in all of the major
watershed draining to the Pacific Ocean, and ``dams'', ``dikes'' and
``levees''--common features to Reclamation projects--are clearly
targeted for investigation in other sections of this bill.
3. Clarity and Practicality
The proposed strategic plan contains elements that appear to be
vague, subjective, and/or unrealistic. For example, the plan proposes
to study measures that ``protect and restore habitats, waters, and
organisms that are long-term carbon sinks or will be subject to habitat
change as a result of climate change and development.'' Presumably,
climate change will impact the entire globe, which theoretically will
impart some degree of change on habitat everywhere. A study of this
scope would appear to be a near-impossible task to achieve. Similarly,
it will be a technically challenging and expensive task to quantify
``co-benefits,'' including ``flood risk reduction, habitat restoration
for endangered and threatened species, maintenance of biodiversity,\1\
water quality improvements, habitat maintenance and creation, cycling
of nutrients other than carbon, commercial and recreational fishing and
boating benefits.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Speaking of biodiversity, while this term appears 14 times in
the bill, it is defined nowhere. The Convention on Biological Diversity
defines biological diversity or biodiversity as ``the variability among
living organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial,
marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of
which they are part: this includes diversity within species, between
species and of ecosystems (United Nations).'' This widely accepted
definition has been criticized by many for being too vague and in need
of clarification. While most ecologists downplay this vagueness, there
are at least three concerns regarding its actual application: 1) it can
impair the coordination of conservation actions; 2) hide the need to
improve management knowledge; and 3) cover up incompatibilities between
disciplinary assumptions. We recommend that this term be removed, or
defined in a manner that resolves these three concerns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 701 addresses conservation of marine mammals adversely
affected by climate change by amending the Marine Mammal Protection Act
to develop climate impact management plans for marine mammals that are
highly threatened by climate change. These management plans must
include strategies for mitigating the direct and indirect effects of
climate change on the marine mammal population and encouraged to be
integrated into Marine Mammal Protection Act conservation plans or ESA
recovery plans.
Again, this section is vague, and we believe could create
opportunities for litigious challenges to inland irrigated agriculture.
For example, the bill proposes that a list of marine mammal species and
population stocks in U.S. waters will be developed, for which climate
change, ``alone or in combination or interaction with other factors,''
has ``more than a remote possibility'' of resulting in a decline in
population abundance, of impeding abundance or population recovery, or
of reducing carrying capacity. That list shall include any species or
population stock listed under the ESA, and any other species or
population stocks, for which impacts have ``more than a remote
possibility of occurring within 100 years'' (emphasis added).
This criteria does not appear to carry any sense of priority. In
simpler prose, it might as well say, ``Add all marine species to the
list.'' A task of this magnitude will surely affect already budget
strapped agencies that interact closely with Western agricultural
irrigators, including the Departments of Commerce and the Interior,
NOAA, and USFWS.
We truly question the need to create new processes and planning
groups to tackle pressing fisheries and marine mammal issues. Instead,
existing collaborative programs that have proven successful should be
given emphasis and perhaps be used as templates to duplicate that
success elsewhere.
4. Environmental Litigation in the West
Before discussing other concerns with this bill, it would be useful
to set the stage and provide some background that drives our
perspective. The federal government's significant presence in the West
already presents unique challenges for Alliance members. This is
particularly true with respect to the reach of federal environmental
laws. Consider implementation of the ESA, which impacts the management
of land and water throughout the West. For example, federal water
supplies that were originally developed by Reclamation primarily to
support new irrigation projects have, in recent years, been targeted
and reallocated to other uses. The result is that these once-certain
water supplies have now been added to the long list of existing
``uncertainties.''
Given the nature of water storage and delivery, Alliance members
are often directly impacted by the implementation of federal
environmental laws like the ESA. The ESA has at times been interpreted
to empower federal agencies to take action intended to protect listed
species without consideration of the societal costs of such action,
even when it is not clear that the action taken will actually yield
conservation benefits for the particular species. And the ESA and other
environmental laws have many times been used to reallocate and diminish
water supplies traditionally developed for irrigated agriculture in
litigation by groups known for their litigious focus and not on helping
species in trouble through collaboration.
We emphasize here that not all conservation non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) should be lumped into the same category as these
activist groups that rely on litigation to drive their agenda.
The Alliance has worked hard to create the Western Agriculture and
Conservation Coalition, a collaborative effort with the goal of finding
ways to improve the environment, protect Western irrigated agriculture,
and keep farmers and ranchers in business. Other members of our
Coalition include The Nature Conservancy, Farmers Conservation
Alliance, California Farm Bureau Federation, Environmental Defense,
Wyoming Stockgrowers, Trout Unlimited, Public Lands Council, and the
California Agricultural Irrigation Association, to name a few.
5. Potential Risks to Inland Producers
We developed the above background section to explain why we have
concerns that certain programs proposed by this bill will generate
further risk and uncertainty to farmers and ranchers who rely upon
federal water projects in areas like the Columbia River, Klamath River,
and Sacramento-San Joaquin watershed on the West coast. Parts of the
bill include vague and undefined objectives, goals, and policies. We
know from experience that these types of provisions can be used by
critics of irrigated agriculture as the basis for negative media or
lawsuits to stop or delay federally permitted activities.
I have a specific example that illustrates this concern. Since the
late 1800s, documentation from Fish and Game biologists and regulatory
agencies have stated that the Piru Creek watershed in Ventura and Los
Angeles Counties is not conducive to steelhead. In fact, there has
never been documentation of steelhead in that watershed. The Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) submitted a Biological Assessment
that supports this assertion. However, despite historical data,
consistently dry conditions, natural migration barriers and assessments
of the region, NMFS' Biological Opinion reaches different conclusions.
It attests not only to the possibility of a steelhead resource, it also
requires the construction of a very expensive fish passage structure
and, since 2010, continuous water releases from United's infrastructure
into lower Piru Creek, deemed critical habitat by NMFS, for fish that
have never been seen there.
Elsewhere, during the last drought NMFS determined that Central
Valley salmon populations would go extinct unless government agencies
change their water operations in California. In a draft biological
opinion, NMFS concluded that the southern resident population of killer
whales might go extinct because its primary food source--salmon--is
imperiled by California's network of dams and canals. Similar linkages
between these orcas and potato farmers (located hundreds of miles from
the Pacific Ocean) were contemplated as a biological opinion was being
drafted by NMFS for the Klamath Irrigation Project, located in the high
desert of southern Oregon. Farmers in the Columbia Basin, east of the
Cascades, fear that linkages made by some between Puget Sound orcas and
dams located hundreds of miles away on the Snake River will be used to
someday remove those dams.
The bill opens the possibility of further emphasizing such
questionable relationships. Further, it sets up new processes where
requested federal permits would be subject to additional consultation
processes prior to any formal consideration.
For example, Section 102 calls for the development of a national
map of coastal blue carbon ecosystems and a description of these
ecosystem conditions. Among many things, one of the required
descriptions is ``any upstream restrictions detrimental to the
watershed process and conditions, including dams, dikes, and levees.''
Lumping in these features as ``detrimental'' is overly broad,
inaccurate, and establishes a bias before the descriptions are even
developed. Identifying ``any'' upstream pollution sources that threaten
the health of each ecosystem also appears to be subjective and
unrealistic. For example, in the Columbia River estuary, how far
upstream would such an analysis extend? Canada?
Sec. 103 requires a report that includes an assessment of ``Federal
agency actions that have historically caused and presently cause great
adverse effects on such ecosystems.'' As described previously, ``blue
carbon ecosystems'' are defined as areas that ``have the capacity to
sequester carbon from the atmosphere for a period of not less than 100
years.'' This type of open-ended definition could lead to the
designation of large areas of blue carbon ecosystems up and down the
Pacific coast. This would provide critics of Reclamation and federal
water projects with a new means of linking alleged environmental damage
to federal actions undertaken hundreds of miles inland.
Section 107 directs the Administrator of NOAA to develop criteria
for and designate ``coastal carbon areas of significance'' (CCAS) and
ensure conservation of CCAS using Department of Commerce programs and
resources. This section of the bill raises many concerns. First, the
criteria are vague. For example, one criterion says that CCAS should
provide for ``long-term storage and sequestration of significant
amounts of ecosystem carbon.'' ``Long-term'' and ``significant
amounts'' are not defined and appear to be subjective. A larger concern
is the new requirement that federal agencies proposing actions that may
harm CCAS are required to notify NOAA, which would consult with the
action agency to assess ``adverse impacts.'' The action agency is
prohibited from taking the proposed action if an alternative exists
that fulfills the purpose of the proposed action without harming CCAS.
If no feasible alternative exists, the action agency is to take
measures to mitigate the impact and to create carbon storage offsets
for unavoidable impact.
Section 308 addresses essential fish habitat (EFH) and requires new
consultation and mitigation process for any activity that would have an
adverse effect on EFH. In our November 2020 testimony, we noted that a
spokesperson with the Maine Coast Fishermen's Association had expressed
concerns that this bill would ``fundamentally undermine'' the Magnuson-
Stevens Act, and particularly the existing regional council system. Our
concerns with this section are similar to those previously expressed
for the CCAS. Significant changes are made to the current EFH
consultation process. It would replace the current consultation
requirement between the Secretary of Commerce and another federal
agency and replace it with a requirement that if any action by a
federal agency may have an adverse effect on EFH, that agency would be
required, through consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, to avoid
the adverse effects. To the extent that adverse effects could not be
avoided, the agency would be required to ``minimize and mitigate'' the
adverse effect based on the recommendations of the Secretary of
Commerce.
On the West Coast, many of our members' federal water supplies are
impacted by federal management decisions associated with salmon. The
2014 Pacific Council's Salmon Fishery Plan includes specific types or
areas of habitat within EFH based on several considerations. Because
other areas of the bill underscore the ``detrimental'' aspects of dams
and other federal water resources infrastructure to these ecosystems,
this section provides a whole new set of tools for litigious critics of
Western irrigated agriculture and federal infrastructure to use in the
courtroom.
We were pleased to see that troubling language \2\ in the earlier
legislation has been removed. However, we reassert our concern that the
entire bill be reevaluated to ensure that standards for scientific and
commercial data that are used to make decisions are established.
Relatively greater weight should be given to data that have been field-
tested or peer-reviewed. The former requirement would help clarify when
such things as ``personal observations'' or mere folklore are
considered by the agencies to be reliable enough to make decisions with
potentially profound effects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Section 121(D): ``. . . the lack of quantitative information
shall not be a basis for a determination that a species or population
stock is not adversely impacted by climate change, along or in
combination or interaction with other factors.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In summary, the federal consultation requirements associated with
the proposed CCAS, the vague terminology, and deemphasis on
quantification provisions--however well intended they may be--represent
yet another layer of red tape and uncertainty to Western irrigators
working in watersheds that drain to the Pacific Ocean.
Conclusion
American family farmers and ranchers for generations have grown
food and fiber for the world, but we will have to muster even more
innovation to continue to meet this critical challenge. That innovation
must be encouraged by our government rather than stifled with new
federal regulations and uncertainty over water supplies for irrigated
farms and ranches in the rural West.
We appreciate that Chairman Grijalva has made some encouraging
changes that are reflected in the current bill. This is clearly major
legislation with lofty goals, but in our view, there is plenty of room
for additional improvement. There are some provisions we can support;
but there are many which would benefit from additional scrutiny. We
urge Congress to consider farmers, ranchers and water managers like me
not as obstacles, but as partners in developing thoughtful climate
policies, including ocean policies based on sound science. We hope you
will consider these comments and those from other producer
organizations as you further refine this legislation.
We remain committed to working with your Committee and the Congress
to share our concerns and perspectives. Thank you for this opportunity
to present this testimony to you today.

______

Mr. Huffman. Thank you very much.
We will now bring this back to the Members for their
questions. I will start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes,
and I would like to begin with Ms. Graudins.
My colleague, Garret Graves, made the very valid point that
the climate crisis is a global problem and that we should be
looking for solutions and emission reductions all over the
world. And he brought up the large emissions in China as
something that call out for our attention. I don't disagree
with that, but I think we should do all of it.
And the interesting thing about the blue carbon solutions
we have been discussing today is that in some ways for the
local communities that are affected by blue carbon protection
and restoration, there are layers of benefits potentially that
might make this an even more attractive climate solution. Could
you speak a little bit about the co-benefits that might inure
to local communities from pursuing these projects?
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. Thank you for the question. Yes, I
think it is important that given that this is a global problem,
we look at all the solutions as somebody had spoken about all
the tools in the tool kit. We can talk about, as Dr. Johnson
spoke about, what some of these areas that are the best for
conservation for blue carbon offer in terms of protection to
climate change and sea level rise. I think that we can talk
about how that relates to local economy, whether people are
interested in coming to experience these areas. Other than
that, I would probably have to refer to someone with a little
bit more direct experience to that.
Mr. Huffman. I appreciate that.
I will turn to Dr. Johnson next and certainly invite her
thoughts on this, but I also want to ask about fishery
disasters. This is something that in California and in my
district, I have come to know all too well. We have seen the
frequency of fishery disasters increasing because of algae
blooms.
Other large-scale ecosystem changes that we are seeing
include the collapse of kelp forests all along the north coast,
the loss of bull kelp due in part to ocean heat waves, and we
have lost our red abalone and the red urchin fishery as well.
How does this legislation we are talking about today ensure
that our fisheries, fishing and coastal communities and
managers, are prepared to adapt and respond to these events?
And also, ultimately rather than just providing relief for the
disasters, how do you think this legislation helps tackle the
biggest climate drivers that are causing these disasters in the
first place?
Dr. Johnson. So, the No. 1 driver of our climate disaster
is greenhouse gas emissions. The elements of the Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act that rein in those emissions, including
dramatically restricting drilling offshore and including
protecting and restoring coastal ecosystems, which Ms.
Gutierrez-Graudins and I both mentioned, can absorb up to four
times what a forest on land can in its soils.
Those kinds of ocean-based climate solutions can be a
significant part of our national and global solutions and our
contribution to meet our responsibility to the global
community, because the United States is the largest historical
emitter of greenhouse gases.
So, even though China is the No. 1 emitter at this moment,
we do have this overall responsibility for our contribution to
the problem.
And the specifics that you mentioned I think are really
important because when we think about the effects of a warming
and acidifying ocean, the ocean has absorbed over 90 percent of
the heat that we have trapped by burning fossil fuels and
emitting greenhouse gases.
And, obviously, that has led the ocean to warm
dramatically. And if the ocean hadn't absorbed all that heat,
the atmosphere would be something like many dozens of degrees
hotter than it currently is.
The ocean has also absorbed around 30 percent of the carbon
dioxide we have emitted which has led to ocean acidification.
And all of these marine species, just like species on land,
have a fairly narrow range of comfort zone when it comes to
temperature. So, when waters warm by a few degrees, fish start
fleeing for the poles. Things which can't move like coral
reefs, like kelp forests, are really damaged where they are.
And that heat can exacerbate other things like the spread of
disease in the ocean, et cetera.
So, it is important to think of all of these things
holistically at an ecosystem level and think about what we do
have the control and opportunity to manage.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you very much, Doctor.
I see that Chair Grijalva has returned. I will pass the
virtual gavel back to him and yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Let me now recognize Representative Bentz for his
questions. Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Guardado, do you think the Bureau of Reclamation should
be included in the blue carbon interagency working group?
Mr. Guardado. I have a lot of respect for the Bureau. This
is in their wheelhouse when you are talking about
infrastructure and supply. So, I think, any level of their
involvement would only assist in the right direction. Yes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. And I think that is what we kind of
heard from the Assistant Director. You also shared your concern
regarding some of the definitions used in H.R. 3764,
particularly, the definition of blue carbon ecosystem, and you
highlighted the phrase ``have the capacity'' to be such an
ecosystem, and you noted that that is open to interpretation.
Can you share more why this definition is of particular concern
to you?
Mr. Guardado. Yes. Thank you, Congressman. It is the open-
ended language. Rather than being assistive in the process, it
becomes weaponized. We have been experiencing, trying to figure
out what to the maximum extent practicable even means. The
language of ``more than remote possibility and other purposes''
I don't think is going to help us get to balanced solutions.
Giving the NOAA more flexibility, more jurisdiction, and
more authority to keep those things open-ended just creates
litigation. We don't get anywhere. It creates delays. And when
there are delays, we spend a lot of money in litigative
circumstances. So, our main concern is to dial back in to more
specifics and not keep these languages open-ended.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. Before I ask you my last question, I
just wanted to thank you for your excellent testimony. A lot of
work went into it, and I really appreciate the effort.
Now to the question. You testified that NOAA is imposing
fish restoration measures on your water district that are not
workable. Those requirements are related to the Endangered
Species Act. This bill doesn't directly impact the Agency's ESA
responsibilities and instead is focused on other activities
related to fish restoration. Based on your experience, what
causes you concern about giving NOAA more responsibilities
under this legislation?
Mr. Guardado. Yes. More concern over greater authorities
because, frankly, in our neck of the woods in the West, NOAA
has not been transparent or forthcoming. For example, when
steelhead went on the endangered species list in 1997, to date,
we have a facility that over this span of time, we have only
observed 12 steelhead, and 1 of those 12 steelhead have died in
our facility. Fish and Wildlife was present, and they deemed
that fish a hatchery fish, not a natural fish, because it had a
disease on its face that was common to hatcheries. Our staff
clipped the fins. Soon thereafter, NOAA confiscated those fins,
confiscated the fish. To date, we still have not received the
genetic results because that is what we were going to try to
figure out despite several Freedom of Information Acts. So, as
a result, we have a jeopardy biological opinion.
If NMFS has it their way, and NOAA, we will be putting in a
$200 million hard ramp in the middle of the river, a new fish
passage when we already have an existing one with evidence
through our videos that fish do pass. But 12 fish since 1997,
only 1 dying in our facility that is speculative, their open-
ended authority, their vast jurisdiction and over-reaching
regulation is causing a tremendous strain on our rate payers
that are going to have to bear the cost of a $200 million fish
passage structure when one already exists.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you so much.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
Let me recognize our colleague, Representative Lowenthal
for his questions. Sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. It is good to see you
back again, and I also want to thank Representative Huffman for
his outstanding leadership in your absence.
My questions go to Senator Lee and Dr. Elizabeth Johnson.
In both of your testimonies, you highlighted the impacts of
plastics on the marine environment. This is a critical issue
for me which is why I introduced the Break Free From Plastic
Pollution Act, a bill that would implement and extend the
producer responsibility program, a national bottle deposit
program, minimum recycled content standards, bans the export of
unrecycleable plastic waste, and so much more. The bill seeks
to shift the burden of plastic pollution and waste away from
the taxpayers and on to the producers. This bill will reduce
plastic waste, create a circular economy, and protect the
environmental justice communities from the production of these
products.
My first question is to Dr. Johnson. Can you explain how
policies addressing extended producer responsibility can help
address the issue of plastics entering the environment and our
oceans?
Dr. Johnson. Thank you for this question. I will admit this
is not a core area of my expertise, but I think it is important
to recognize just at the broadest picture that the vast
majority of plastics are made from fossil fuels and that as the
demand for gasoline, et cetera, declines because we start to
transition to renewable energies, we have a situation where
there is this increase in the construction of facilities to
produce plastics as an alternative use for that which results
in the siting of those often in lower income communities or
communities of color as you mentioned and the resulting
detrimental effects on air quality and, therefore, public
health.
And, right now, what we have is companies that are creating
all this single use plastic, and citizens and taxpayers are
bearing the brunt of the costs of the disposal and recycling
and cleanup of all that waste. And the United States is the
largest contributor to ocean plastic pollution of any nation,
so we definitely have a responsibility to get that right.
And if companies were responsible for the products they
created for the full life cycle of those products, that would
certainly make a difference, incentivize greater recycling,
reduce the creation of virgin plastics, increase the value of
plastics, frankly, so that people saw it as a resource and not
something to use a single time and throw away.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you. For someone who started off by
saying you don't know very much about it, you gave a
comprehensive and complete answer. Thank you very much.
Senator Lee, can you elaborate on what Dr. Johnson said,
why it is important to shift the cost burden to cleaning up
plastic pollution away from taxpayers and on to the producers?
Mr. Lee. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I think
it is just, first, an issue of fairness. We ought to have a
system in which people aren't going to be saddled with cost
even though they do their part to avoid throwing something in a
river that ends up in the ocean or on a beach.
Where I come from, every beach in Hawaii is littered with
plastic. The No. 1 and No. 2 beaches regularly ranked around
the country, Kailua and Lani Kai, you put your hand in the sand
and you come out with sand and tons of microplastic.
On a beach just up the highway, there is a beach we have
thousands of pounds of plastic and other marine debris we are
regularly collecting. This is what has to be dealt with. We
can't not pay to clean this up because it affects our economy,
it affects our way of life, and it ends up in our storm drains
clogging things up, and our state and county governments end up
footing the bill, which goes on to taxpayers.
Mr. Lowenthal. Yes.
Mr. Lee. But there is opportunity. It can create new jobs.
Mr. Lowenthal. I want to follow up on that--why then, if
the taxpayers are paying for it, state and local governments
are paying for it, they don't have the resources to do it, they
finally end up with these large beach cleanups, with lots of
volunteers, which just deals with literally the surface, why
have we let the producers get away with this for so long? They
don't pay anything.
Mr. Lee. I think that is where it comes down to our
obligation to our taxpayers to make sure that we act in their
interest. We set up policies and regimes that make sure that
their voices are accounted for so they are not the ones that
are going to be unfairly saddled with this, raising their cost
of living. We have the opportunity to do that as elected
leaders, and I think that is an obligation that I feel, and it
sounds like, I think, that is part of the discussion here
today.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you so much.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes Representative Gohmert for his 5
minutes. Sir, you are recognized.
Let me recognize Mr. Stauber. Sir, you are recognized for 5
minutes. When Mr. Gohmert gets online, he will be recognized as
well.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins, thank you for joining us today. In
your testimony, you applaud this Blue New Deal legislation
toward the goal of reducing greenhouse gas use. As you may be
aware, 80 percent of America's steel originates as taconite in
my district. Miners harvest the iron ore, and it then gets
shipped from ports in my district across Saint Lawrence Seaway
through the Soo Locks and to steelmaking facilities across the
rest of the Midwest.
The steelmaking process in the United States is the
cleanest in the world. The so-called Ocean-Based Climate
Solutions Act levees incredible burdensome reporting
requirements on those that use our waters for transportation.
In fact, every vessel, over 5,000-gross tons in the bill, would
be forced to comply with standards set by the European Union.
The Mesabi Miner, a Great Lakes iron ore carrier, has a
carrying capacity of 63,300-gross tons alone. This will
undoubtedly hamper our clean domestic steelmaking and instead
empower our rivals to produce more steel, hurting the miners in
my district and steelworkers nationwide while ironically
creating more greenhouse gas emissions globally.
Do you agree or disagree that moving America to further
rely on foreign steel, as this is what the Blue New Deal would
inevitably accomplish, leads to an increase in greenhouse gas
emissions?
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. Thank you for the question. I will
have to say, this is news to me. I am not very familiar with
the steel production or the fact that, as you mentioned, the
U.S. steel is the cleanest steel in the world. I would welcome
some more information on that.
I really don't think there is--I don't see that connection
personally. I think this is obviously something that can be
discussed. Do I support broad climate action, yes, I would
welcome more information on the steel specifically and how you
make that connection.
Mr. Stauber. With your regulation and pushing of this piece
of legislation, you weren't aware that the Great Lakes ships
iron ore that makes 80 percent of the steel in our Nation,
knowing full well that the European Union would set the
standards? Did you not know that?
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. I did not know that it was
specifically your district, and I should qualify, the cleanest
steel in the world, that is something I will admit I did not
know, so I welcome more information on that.
I understand that we talked about advancing the reporting
requirements of vessels. I don't know if that is what you are
referring to. Yes, we do need to know what the emissions are,
and I think that is the first step in terms of taking action,
but, frankly, I welcome more information specifically as it
relates to your district.
Mr. Stauber. Ma'am, I would give you as much information as
you want with respect to the union workers of my district that
mine the iron ore and have been for 135 years, and we do it
best, and we make 80 percent of the steel. And we are on the
verge of getting into critical minerals, which is going to help
us in our alternative sources of energy.
So, continuing on, this Blue New Deal would regulate any
``upstream structure.'' The Mississippi River begins in
Minnesota's 8th Congressional District and ends in the Gulf of
Mexico; therefore, my district is part of this broad ecosystem
map. Will this bill require NOAA to list a Federal dam system
of the Mississippi River in Leech Lake, Lake Winnibigoshish, or
Pokegama Lake as part of this map?
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. I think we are going to have to
submit more information to you in writing, if that is OK. As I
understand it, what is it exactly that you are referring--maybe
I am not understanding your question. What is it exactly you
are referring to in the Blue New Deal?
It would not actually regulate upstream structures, just
map them. I think this is a point that Chair Grijalva made
before specifically to that. So, maybe if you explain it
specifically as it relates to Blue New Deal; otherwise, we
would probably have to give you more information in writing.
Mr. Stauber. OK. Last question, so you are saying that this
legislation will not regulate any upstream?
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. Correct. This is exactly what the
Chair just said, said that it doesn't compel them.
Mr. Stauber. No, I know.
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. It just maps them.
Mr. Stauber. OK. Thank you very much for your time, and we
will have to get back with you for additional answers.
Back to you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes Representative McEachin.
Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, as always,
thank you for your continued leadership on this issue as well
as so many others.
Today's conversation is both critical and timely. As we all
know, our oceans play a significant role, arguably the most
significant role in combating and addressing our climate
crisis.
According to the United Nations, our oceans are the single
largest contributor of our planet's oxygen and are the main
source for food for over 1 billion people worldwide. Most of
the world's biodiversity lives within our oceans, as well as 40
million individuals globally rely on ocean-based industries for
employment.
To put it simply, we cannot leave a healthy and sustainable
planet for our children and grandchildren without ensuring the
protection and preservation of our oceans. As such, we must
enact bold, transformative policy, such as the Ocean-Based
Climate Solutions Act, that will protect our ocean's coastal
communities and rich wildlife.
Dr. Johnson, in your testimony, you speak about how ocean
conservation is intimately linked with the well-being of
communities of color and low-income communities. As you know,
the communities of color make up nearly half the U.S. coastal
population. Consequently, many of these individuals are at risk
of sea-level rise, environmental degradation caused by offshore
drilling, and more.
The Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act aims to promote
justice and equitable climate change mitigation by prioritizing
benefits for frontline and fence-line communities. These
policies include prioritizing resilience projects in at-risk
communities and improving and expanding coastal access points
for environmental justice communities.
Doctor, can you speak to the important role that ocean
conservation plays in protecting environmental justice
communities, and how would these policies set out in the Ocean-
Based Climate Solutions Act protect frontline and fence-line
communities?
Dr. Johnson. Thank you, Congressman, for this question and
also for all of your work co-sponsoring the Environmental
Justice for All Act, which I see as very much related to this
ocean-based climate solutions work.
And I guess, I would say, I hope there are no fence-line
communities in the ocean. Once we start building fences in the
ocean, we have really lost to the plot. But I think, obviously,
when it comes to coastal communities that are at risk because
of climate change, we are talking about sea-level rise. We are
talking about stronger and wetter storms. We are talking about
heat waves combined with that. We are talking about flooding.
We know that, for example, in New York, where I am from and
where I live, low-income housing, public housing is often built
in flood zones, so that when things like Superstorm Sandy hit,
it is low-income communities and communities of color, who are
hit the hardest, and that is certainly not something that is
specific to New York City.
This also makes me think of the need to address managed
retreat, which is something that is included in this bill.
Because of sea-level rise, some people, some communities are
going to have to move out of harm's way because certain places
will no longer be safe, inhabitable, and making sure that we
set up that transition in a way that takes care of everybody,
people who did not have very much of a hand in causing the
climate crisis, who are now displaced because of it.
We are at a stage where we will have climate refugees more
and more within the United States, and that is certainly a
justice issue, among other things. We notice the same thing
also, as you mentioned, with access to coast lines, which is
something that I know Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins works on, as well
as just access to healthy seafood and clean water for
recreation.
So, certainly, when it comes to the ocean, environmental
justice doesn't stop at the shore, and it is really important
to consider the implications of how we implement various ocean
climate solutions.
Mr. McEachin. It is interesting that you say that. I just
literally, while I was waiting for my turn to speak to this
panel, received a report about a portion of my district where
the refugees, as you pointed out, are just baked in. It is just
a matter of how many refugees I am going to have, not if. If we
do certain things, we can hold the number down; if we don't do
anything, the numbers become staggering.
Quickly though, in your testimony, you also spoke about the
Ocean Justice Forum that you and others are convening to ensure
the justice is infused into our Nation's ocean climate
policies. Can you elaborate further, and how can Congress be
helpful in uplifting and championing this work? Oh, and by the
way, don't forget to thank the Chair for the Environmental
Justice Act. I am just Robin, he is Batman.
Dr. Johnson. I love a dynamic duo situation. Very quickly,
the Ocean Justice Forum is a collaboration with Azul, Ms.
Gutierrez-Graudins' organization, with the Gulf Coast Center
for Law and Policy, as well as the Center for American Progress
to bring together a few dozen ocean conservation groups to come
up with a Federal policy agenda that will make sure justice is
at the heart of our ocean climate policy.
Thank you for asking what you might be able to do, and I
think having the Committee welcome our suggestions and perhaps
a hearing specifically on the intersection of ocean justice and
climate and ocean policy could be a very important way to
continue this discussion and make sure that we are developing
and implementing policies that meet the mark.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you. And thank you for all your hard
work in this area.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McEachin. The gentleman
yields.
I recognize Representative Moore. Sir, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman and everyone, for being here
today.
Mr. Guardado, I have a few questions. I appreciate your
comments, and I would like to ask you a couple questions, just
following up on your testimony. You and I both know that
farmers rely on the health of our lands for their livelihoods.
Can you highlight a few ways that farmers work to contain
seepage or pollution in particular?
Mr. Guardado. Well, you know, in our neck of the woods too,
farmers and ranchers, they are some of the most innovative
folks around. Many of them have had and owned family-owned land
for over 100 years, so they have had to adjust and adapt to
changing circumstances.
They have been able nowadays to leverage technology to
become some of the highest water efficiency irrigators
anywhere. When you become self-contained like that, that is
going to help any tributary runoffs. That is going to be self-
contained. It is going to be more efficient. And that all comes
down to, I think, more of just a local control, local
application.
We have several examples where working with the governor's
water resilience portfolio, that if you get the right people in
the right room from a diverse set of groups, over 200 in this
case, and we had large objectives that we had to meet, but we
got together. We were able to develop action items, and we are
moving through those right now as we speak. So, having that
local control, that local application, nobody knows the
landscape better than those who have been around for a while.
Mr. Moore. Yes, I am going to pull it up to the 30,000-foot
view quickly. And just to build on what you are saying, like I
have not been involved in many land issues before running for
office. I had to dig in deep during the campaign to understand
a lot of the public land issues.
And Utah is a state that two-thirds of it is owned by the
Federal Government. And that was the key thing that I learned,
that the people that own the land, the people that are there
sincerely are the best stewards, and this cuts through all
political lines. I have met with people from all over the
political spectrum on this and their willingness and their
desire to be a good steward of the land. I think you have a lot
of good examples of that in Utah.
I have a bunch listed here. We may not get to them as I
continue on some of this questioning, but just to hit that that
has been my biggest takeaway, getting on to Natural Resources
Committee, which I was thrilled to do. It is such an important
Committee for Utah. But just in general, the ability for them
to be able to make these decisions, and our country is vastly
different. I have had three rainstorms just this week in DC,
and we haven't had any in Utah, right. The range of challenges
that exist are so important for that.
Let me bring up voluntary conservation programs. They are
critically important mechanisms through which we can manage and
protect our lands. Do you agree, and if so, would you please
expound on why these programs are such effective tools for land
managers?
Mr. Guardado. Well, sure, voluntary conservation measures
are a direct result because these landowners are invested. They
have been around a long time. They are invested in balanced
solutions. Everybody wants to succeed. The difference is, when
you provide the science, you provide the data, you provide the
engineering, the monitoring that moves toward that balanced
solution, the key element is it being considered.
And when you just can dismiss it, with some of my
testimonies I mentioned before with this kind of just arbitrary
conditions, it makes it that much more difficult to get through
those conservation measures. And that is why I think, again,
this bill certainly has merit, but when you have this open-
ended, arbitrary-type language and statements, it prevents
those landowners from actually executing some really solid
balance-based solutions that carry forward for decades to come.
Mr. Moore. In addition to addressing that language, is
there anything else we can do off the top of your head to
improve some of these conservation efforts, these volunteer
conservation efforts?
Mr. Guardado. To just get the right people in the room. I
think if we had like almost a third-party arbitrator that can
review the science to hold people accountable, I think it
becomes very apparent, very focused on what should be done to
take care of a lot of these issues. There is low-hanging fruit
there. There are solutions out there. We just have to move past
the personal agendas that I think some of the regulatory
agencies have.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. I recently had a meeting with a group
in Summit and Weber County in Ogden Valley that is doing just
this, and it is all volunteer, and they are active and they are
engaged, and I appreciate it. So, thank you so much.
My time is up, and I will yield back. Thanks, Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
Representative Soto, sir, you are recognized.
Mr. Soto. Thank you so much, Chairman.
There is a place called the Indian River Lagoon as well as
the Saint Johns River, estuaries and rivers on the East Coast
of Florida, right near our district, and we have seen huge
development over the years, as well as an increase in nutrient
output combined with warming seas. And what happened? The
seagrass that the Florida manatee rely on has been
disappearing, exacerbated by climate change.
It would be great to hear from you, Dr. Johnson. We have
seen this unusual mortality event among Florida manatees. Can
you explain to us how you think climate change and some of
these other issues are affecting these large sea mammals?
Dr. Johnson. Thank you for the question. I will admit, this
is certainly not my area of expertise, but I think the way that
you described it is really important, pointing out that there
are multiple factors contributing to the negative impacts that
we see on marine life.
There is pollution and runoff from the fertilizer and
pesticides associated with agriculture. There are the shifts in
freshwater patterns based on how we are managing water on land
and the history of land transfiguration through the work of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. There is obviously changing
climate, which is both the warming of sea water as well as it
becoming more acidic.
And with manatees having seagrass as their primary food
source, of course, things that affect the seagrass in turn
affect the manatees. So, it is a great example of the ways in
which things are complex and interconnected, and we have to
think about conservation solutions on a level that accounts for
that.
And I just want to thank you for your clear concern for
marine mammals and for wanting to come up with solutions that
will really be effective because if we don't have the heart to
save the manatees, then we have sort of lost the love that
drives a lot of ocean conservation work. So, thank you for
that, and I am happy to provide more information if that is
useful in the future.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Dr. Johnson. I appreciate it.
And, Chairman, thank you for including Representative
Brownley's bill to direct the Secretary of Commerce to
establish climate impact management plans to conserve marine
mammal species.
Senator Lee, how has climate change impacted Hawaii's coral
reefs? Representative Case and I have the Restoring Resilient
Reefs Act. How do you see the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act
and other of these efforts to save coral reefs critical to the
future of both the quality of life, protecting species, and the
economies of states like Hawaii and Florida?
Mr. Lee. I appreciate the question. I am not going to try
to repeat the name of the geographic places you mentioned in
the last question. I won my state's geography bee, but I am not
that good. But I will add, for seagrasses, they absorb five
times more carbon than regular forests, and yet they are being
destroyed at a rate significantly in excess. So, we are
shooting ourselves in the foot in more ways than one.
But when it comes to reefs, they are a huge part of the
ecosystem too. We are seeing not only in Florida, in your area,
but also in Hawaii, we are seeing 8.7 percent higher rates of
acidification than we did 30 years ago. And this is huge
because, coupled with warmer waters, it is destroying the
ability for reefs to regrow themselves and survive.
We are seeing record reef bleaching, and that is something
that is destroying any economic opportunity we have for the
future because those contribute $477 million to our economy,
the tourism, fishing, our way of life. It also provides $860
million in coastal resiliency, if there are storm surges from
hurricanes and that sort of thing.
We know that these things are critical. We have to have
them preserved as much as possible, and this bill would really
go a long way to try to coordinate agencies, put in some
resources to try to take those first steps to see what kind of
steps can actually save those reefs and save the economies,
jobs, and ultimately lives that are at stake that they are
protecting.
Mr. Soto. Thanks so much, Senator Lee. On this Committee,
we see this tension between states like ours that are really
vulnerable to climate change, that have huge tourism and
agriculture economies, versus those hailing from energy states.
Our jobs are affected by these issues. Our way of life is
affected by these issues. And I applaud you, Chairman, for
bringing these bills forward.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Soto.
Many contributors to the legislation, and I want to thank
them as well.
Representative Herrell, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
The floor is yours.
Ms. Herrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This has been a great Committee hearing, and I thank all
the witnesses for coming forward and sharing with us. I feel
like the Blue New Deal before us today, though, it threatens
Americans' energy independence and creates billions in new
spending and threatens existing onshore activity even though it
is framed as an ocean-based climate bill.
And included in the bill is the carbon program that
requires NOAA to create a map of any upstream restrictions
detrimental to the watershed process and conditions, including
dams, dikes, and levees. In addition, NOAA must submit a report
to Congress that assesses the threat to blue carbon ecosystems
from water storage and flood control structures.
In my district, Mr. Chairman, we are nowhere near the
ocean, but it is home to a large portion of the Rio Grande
watershed, which contains many dams, reservoirs, and dikes. The
Rio Grande watershed is also experiencing the extreme drought
that threatens several important sectors in our economy like
Ag, recreation, and others.
So, these existing dams and reservoirs are more important
now than ever. In fact, we need more of them. In my view, the
provisions I mentioned are the first step toward the breaching
of critical existing dam infrastructures across the West. I am
concerned with this bill that it would have extremely
detrimental impacts to the existing assets that aid farmers
across my district to receive water for irrigation and allow
for my constituents to recreate along the river.
My question is for Mr. Guardado. Do you share these same
concerns, and if so, can you give the Committee some examples
of where NOAA or another Federal agency whose primary
jurisdiction is offshore has made decisions that have had
negative impacts on upstream resources?
Mr. Guardado. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman. As a matter of
fact, we have a major conflict of interest as it relates to the
marine and coast inland. The tributary that I spoke of earlier
today is some 40 miles away from the ocean. Dry gaps, as I
mentioned, that river is dry 9 months out of the year and, in a
drought, more than that, obviously.
But we talked about steelhead trout, and there is the
resident rainbow trout, and that trout is deemed as a
subspecies because the rainbow trout may have the genetics to
turn into a steelhead trout. We are required to provide
critical habitat for a trout that may have the capability and
genetics to turning into steelhead.
We have never witnessed steelhead nor trout in this
particular tributary, yet, again, having to provide water
releases for habitat and considering a fish passage to
accommodate the species.
Ms. Herrell. That is right.
Mr. Guardado. So, here is a species that we are not allowed
to touch, that we have to provide expensive monetary
compensation to try to mitigate, yet the California Fish and
Wildlife still allow permits and fishing license for the public
to fish out that exact same species up to two a day.
Ms. Herrell. That is right.
Mr. Guardado. So, how are we supposed to recover in those
kind of conflicts?
Ms. Herrell. Right. And I appreciate what you are saying,
and, again, I feel like this bill, while the intentions are
good, I feel like it is just over-reach. And I would like to
ask you one more question, because in your testimony I like
that you said we really need to be working collectively,
working together.
So, what would you like to see or what ideas come to mind
where we can see elements of this bill for our climate and
ocean policies that would actually work where we can kind of
bridge that gap? Because I think in this particular bill, what
we are reading right now, it is an over-reach because it is
compromising industries in my district and across the country,
even those that are not right on the ocean.
Mr. Guardado. Thank you. Yes, it is that balanced approach,
getting the right people in the room. We have a model for it.
We had climate change as one of the topics in the resiliency
portfolio that I spoke of earlier, sea water intrusion, over
drafting, all these things you need the right people in the
room.
If we follow the science, good, sound engineering, that
will prevail all day every day. It is when those are ignored
and then misinterpreted with open-ended language that gets us
into trouble and creates the cost that you were speaking of to
the constituents unnecessarily. The model is out there. This
can be done, and I believe that.
Ms. Herrell. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, or is that Chairman Batman? No, I am kidding,
but I think that my time is almost up, and so I will yield
back. And thank you, again, to all the witnesses and, Mr.
Chairman, for putting this together. Thank you.
The Chairman. Chairman Batman, huh. I am more Green Lantern
kind of stuff. But, anyway, recognizing myself, if there are no
other Members, and thanking all the witnesses.
And let me ask a kind of general question. This blueprint
with the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act, there have been
some comments and some recommendations that have been pointed
out that certainly merit consideration, Bureau of Reclamation's
involvement, the mapping issue that is brought up again and
again. But, overall, let me, if I could, Dr. Johnson, Ms.
Gutierrez-Graudins, and Senator Lee, a general question. This
whole discussion is premised on that the last 4 years didn't
exist and that we are all of a sudden beginning some process
that is going to be viewed as a threat or detrimental to
economic interest and local issues.
I think that we are operating under the premise that there
is an urgency here, an urgency to begin to move, an urgency to
do the best parts of this piece of legislation and move it
forward. And I want to ask you about that urgency and the topic
as being the role of oceans in climate, in addressing the
climate crisis, but also in the ever-increasing climate crisis
that we are facing here globally and certainly in our country.
So, talk about the need to move forward as opposed to be
stuck in a place where nothing is done, which many times some
of the recommendations I heard today is about leaving things as
is, presuming there is no problem. Well, there is a problem,
and it is a huge issue, and I want whatever reaction you might
have in terms of the Committee moving forward on this piece of
legislation and others dealing with the climate crisis. I can
begin with Ms. Johnson, then Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins, and
Senator Lee for whatever time we have left. Thank you.
Dr. Johnson. Thank you for this question. I think, as a
marine biologist, it has been very frustrating to see the ocean
left out of pretty much all major climate legislation, so this
is very needed and overdue, and thank you for making sure that
this gets the attention that it deserves.
And while there is always bits of room for improvement, I
think I mentioned I would love to see more support for
regenerative ocean farming in the bill, but overall, it really
does hit the mark on a broad range of topics. And this work
could not be more urgent, from reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by reducing offshore drilling to protecting blue
carbon.
And we have talked at length about the value of coastal
ecosystems in absorbing so much more carbon per acre than
happens on land. We give so much attention to trees and not
enough attention to wetlands, marshes, seagrasses, and
mangroves.
And I think it is important to also remember that this
really is an economic issue. If we ignore it, if we do nothing,
there are lives at stake. There are certainly millions of jobs
at stake and billions of dollars at stake. So, doing nothing is
a recipe for disaster. Ignoring the ocean when we think about
climate solutions is a recipe for disaster.
So, I think the name of this bill alone represents a really
important step forward in recognizing ocean-based climate
solutions as about a fifth of the solutions to the climate
crisis that we face. Also, I really appreciate the recognition
of nature-based solutions, not just technology but thinking
about the value of protecting and restoring ocean ecosystems,
which are very much protecting us.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins, if you want to add something to
that, and obviously Senator Lee, we have a minute or so left.
Ms. Gutierrez-Graudins. Thank you. Yes, I think it is
important that we recognize the urgency of acting, that we know
that ignoring the ocean is a potential huge mistake. We can't
afford to make it because what is at stake is not just the
environment and the health of the ocean but really the
livelihood and the well-being of the communities that depend on
them.
And I will say that it is important to do this mapping
because, as we have heard before from Mr. Guardado, it is
important that we follow the science. But how we get to the
science is by getting this information, by doing this analysis,
by getting this mapping, and really starting from there. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Senator?
Mr. Lee. Thanks very much. I would just throw in that, the
faster we move, the less we are going to have to spend as
governments dealing with this situation, because each passing
year, it gets more and more expensive. And at the same time, I
think there is a false dichotomy that this is going to cost
money to do this when actually the investments we make are
going to have an enormous return positively, both for state and
federal revenues as well as job creation, economic benefit
across the board that is going to benefit taxpayers from coast
to coast and beyond. I think that is something that makes this
sort of a no-brainer in a way where we can move forward
benefiting all around. So, thank you for the opportunity to
comment this afternoon.
The Chairman. And thank you to all the witnesses for your
testimony. It is very much appreciated. And the conversation
reminds me of the conversation back home in Arizona relative to
the Colorado River, the subsidence of that water level, Lake
Mead, Lake Powell, the subsidence and the seven basin states
that depend on the river for water, and you find discussions
within my state of basically everything will be all right, we
just have to somehow muscle through this crisis.
All the science, all the facts are saying it is a mega
drought. It is going to have economic and human consequences
and life consequences on the region, and something has to be
done beyond doing nothing. I think this is a kind of issue
where sticking one's head in the sand is not a solution; it is
making the situation even worse.
I appreciate all the comments and appreciate the
suggestions that were made to the legislation by my colleagues,
and we will be looking at those as well.
With that, the meeting is adjourned, and thank you very
much for the hearing.

[Whereupon, at 6:32 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

NATIONAL PARKS CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION

June 22, 2021

Re: NPCA Position on Legislation before the U.S. House Natural
Resources Committee

Dear Representative:

Since 1919, National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) has been
the leading voice of the American people in protecting and enhancing
our National Park System. On behalf of our more than 1.6 million
members and supporters nationwide, I write to share our thoughts on
H.R. 3764, the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act, ahead of a
legislative hearing held by the U.S. House Natural Resources Committee
scheduled for June 22nd, 2021. H.R. 3764 is comprehensive legislation
that builds on knowledge and recommendations from recent national and
international scientific reports and includes components and themes of
the ocean-focused bills also included in the hearing.

H.R. 3764--Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act: NPCA strongly
supports this legislation, which harnesses the power of oceans to
provide solutions to the climate crisis. Rising temperatures, melting
glaciers, flooding, shoreline erosion, sea-level rise, extreme storms,
coral bleaching and more are impacting America's national parks today,
altering iconic landscapes, ecological processes, cultural resources,
infrastructure assets and recreational opportunities. With 88 coastal
parks in the National Park System covering more than ten percent of
America's coastline, national parks need to be part of the climate
solution.

NPCA supports H.R. 3764 and the accompanying ocean-related bills
that provide important steps to protect and restore the ecological
integrity and resiliency of coastal national parks, where natural
landscapes and historical and cultural structures are on the front
lines of climate change impacts.
This legislation will:

Substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions. NPCA
recognizes that H.R. 3764 calls for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by advocating for stricter emissions standards of
vessels, increasing appropriately sited renewable energy
sources and energy efficiency such as offshore wind energy,
and preventing the expansion of offshore oil exploration
and drilling.

Protect the ocean's natural ability to store carbon and
mitigate climate change, by conserving and restoring
coastal ``blue carbon'' ecosystems, including mangroves,
seagrass beds and salt marshes. NPCA prioritizes restoring
``blue carbon'' ecosystems such as Everglades and Biscayne
National Parks, Cape Cod and Point Reyes National
Seashores, and Gateway National Recreation Area, and
recognizes this legislation advances policies that enhance
the ecological health of parks by restoring wetlands,
mangroves and living shorelines to better withstand the
worsening impacts of sea level rise and more intense
storms.

Implement adaptation strategies to increase ocean
protection resiliency to the unavoidable impacts of climate
change. This includes strongly protecting at least 30
percent of the ocean in areas where marine wildlife can
thrive, as well as promoting sustainable fisheries
management, pollution reduction, ocean habitat restoration
and ocean planning. NPCA supports the goal of 30x30 and the
creation of a 30x30 task force to focus on potential
oceanic areas that deserve protection, building on the
legacy of Presidents Bush and Obama to establish marine
national monuments through the Antiquities Act to improve
the health of national parks and the wildlife they support,
particularly in sensitive habitats such as coral reefs
which harbor the highest diversity of any ecosystem. For
example, at Dry Tortugas and Channel Islands National
Parks, scientists have found that fully protected marine
reserves are contributing to bigger and more abundant sea
life within protected areas.

Thank you for your consideration of our views. Please contact Sarah
Gaines Barmeyer at rrrrr  if you have any questions or concerns.

Sincerely,

Christina Hazard,
Legislative Director

______

Submission for the Record by Rep. Westerman

STRONGER AMERICA THROUGH SEAFOOD

June 21, 2021

Chairman Raul M. Grijalva     Ranking Member Bruce Westerman
House Committee on Natural
Resources                     House Committee on Natural
Resources
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Grijalva and Ranking Member Westerman:

I am writing to express concern with aquaculture provisions of H.R.
3764, the Ocean-Based Climate Solutions Act. The section titled ``Ocean
Aquaculture Research and Policy Program'' establishes a program for
offshore aquaculture which would be limited to seaweed and shellfish
only. Unfortunately, this falls short of what is needed for the U.S. to
leverage the many environmental, societal, and economic benefits of
offshore aquaculture. Instead, what America needs now is a
comprehensive plan for managing and permitting U.S. offshore
aquaculture, including finfish, that preserves existing environmental
safeguards and minimizes impacts to existing ocean-based industries,
much like what is envisioned in the 116th Congress' Advancing the
Quality and Understanding of American Aquaculture (AQUAA) Act, H.R.
6191 and its bipartisan Senate companion, S. 4723.

Wild fish harvests are and always will be an important part of the
seafood supply. There is, however, a significant environmental and
social opportunity for aquaculture to supplement wild harvests in both
domestic and international markets. Aquaculture is one of the fastest
growing sustainable forms of food production and has the unique
potential to improve food security and nutrition, enhance coastal
resiliency, create quality jobs, help restore species and habitats, and
ensure that seafood (both wild-caught and farmed) continues to be an
important part of the global food supply.

The environmental benefits of offshore aquaculture include water
conservation, lessened emissions and greater animal protein production
using little space. Offshore aquaculture requires no land, minimal
fresh water and a relatively small amount of space to provide abundant,
healthful seafood. Since fish are cold blooded and grown in water where
the effects of gravity are lessened, they can convert feed to edible
protein much more efficiently than warm blooded animals produced on
land. Plus, farming in the ocean is three-dimensional, allowing much
more animal protein to be produced in the same areal footprint.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ World Economic forum 18 Oct 2017 Robert Jones, Global
Aquaculture Strategy Lead, The Nature Conservancy https://
www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/10/how-aquaculture-can-feed-the-world-and-
save-the-planet-at-the-same-time.

During the past 30 years, management practices and scientific
innovation have reduced, eliminated, or minimized many of the
environmental risks at responsibly managed farms.\2\ And, new coastal
planning and siting tools are already available to assist managers,
coastal planners and businesses in identifying suitable sites for
marine aquaculture that avoid environmentally sensitive habitats and
reduce spatial conflicts with existing ocean uses like fishing,
shipping and energy development.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Hall, S.J., et al. Blue Frontiers: Managing the Environmental
Costs of Aquaculture. Penang, Malaysia: The World Fish Center (2011).

Unfortunately, domestic aquaculture is currently constrained by
disjointed federal leadership and numerous regulatory hurdles,
including overlapping jurisdiction of federal, state and local
governments, and the absence of an efficient and affordable permitting
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
process, particularly in U.S. federal waters.

To overcome these regulatory hurdles and lay the groundwork for
strengthening the U.S. aquaculture industry, AQUAA authorizes NOAA to
clarify a pathway for permitting offshore aquaculture operations which
meet robust National Standards for Sustainable Offshore Aquaculture
which, like the National Standards for commercial fishing outlined in
the Magnuson Stevens Act, are guiding principles for growing coastal
economies, protecting ecosystems, and avoiding conflict among
stakeholders. AQUAA leverages modern siting and monitoring technologies
to mitigate potential environmental impacts. It also provides for
strict federal enforcement and includes a process for public input
which ensures that coastal communities and states are considered prior
to permitting new operations. In short, AQUAA provides much-needed
regulatory certainty for U.S. marine farmers while also preserving the
environment, local economies, and public health.

In addition to increasing our supply of healthful and sustainable
American-raised seafood, growth of domestic aquaculture is an
opportunity to revitalize the seafood industry which has been hard hit
by the effects of COVID-19. As America rebuilds from the COIVID-19
pandemic, creating a new American seafood source will have rippling
effects throughout many areas of the country. Increased aquaculture
production will lead to increased demand for American-grown crops such
as soybeans, corn and peas which can be used in plant-based fish feed,
will open up new markets to heartland farmers and lessen dependence on
the uncertainty of foreign trade relationships.

For these reasons, I encourage the Committee to support
comprehensive offshore aquaculture legislation, like the AQUAA Act,
instead of the limited research and policy program included in H.R.
3764. For the U.S. to responsibly expand the aquaculture industry and
tap into the full potential that aquaculture can provide, the AQUAA Act
is the better choice.

Sincerely,

Margaret Henderson,
Campaign Manager

[all]
