- BACKGROUND CHECKS: ARE VA'S HR FAILURES RISKING DRUG ABUSE AND VETERAN HARM?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BACKGROUND CHECKS:
ARE VA'S HR FAILURES RISKING DRUG
ABUSE AND VETERAN HARM?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-43

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-503                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia, Chairwoman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana, Ranking
American Samoa                       Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
Florida

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Jennifer A. Kiggans, Chairwoman....................     1
The Honorable Frank J. Mrvan, Ranking Member.....................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Daniel Galik, Executive Director for Identity Credential and
Access Management, Office of Human Resources and
Administration/Operations, Security and Preparedness, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................     4

Accompanied by:

Ms. Jessica Bonjorni, Chief, Human Capital Management,
Veterans Health Administration, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs

Mr. Shawn Steele, Director of the Healthcare Infrastructure
Division, Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     5

Mr. Seto Bagdoyan, Director for Audit Services, Forensic Audits &
Investigative Service, U.S. Government Accountability Office...     7

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Daniel Galik Prepared Statement..............................    27
Mr. Shawn Steele Prepared Statement..............................    30
Mr. Seto Bagdoyan Prepared Statement.............................    43

BACKGROUND CHECKS:
ARE VA'S HR FAILURES RISKING DRUG ABUSE AND VETERAN HARM?

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jen Kiggans
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kiggans, Radewagen, Bergman,
Rosendale, Mrvan, Pappas, and Cherfilus-McCormick.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Kiggans. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. Thank you all for being here today as the subcommittee
conducts important oversight on VA's background check process.
To obtain VA employment, applicants must go through a three-
part background check. First, applicants must self report
information, including violations of law. Second, applicant
fingerprints are submitted to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) for a criminal history check. Finally, the
Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency investigates
the applicant. During each step of this process, VA staff
reviews relevant information to determine if the applicant is
qualified, competent, and suitable for the position they are
applying to. If the background check reveals an applicant has a
felony-controlled substance related conviction, and the
applicant will have access to controlled substances in their VA
position, the VA must submit a waiver for Drug Enforcement
Agency or DEA approval.
Though these background checks take time, they are a
crucial part of the hiring process. Even though there has been
a lot of pressure to hire as many VA employees as possible, it
is also crucial that the right people care for our veterans so
veterans and their family members know they are in safe hands.
Individuals with a controlled substance criminal history should
not, absent a DEA employment waiver, be hired for positions
where they have access to controlled substances.
When the wrong people are hired for the job, veteran safety
is put at risk. Just a few years ago, one of VA's nursing
assistants in Clarksburg, West Virginia, murdered seven
patients after deliberately administering lethal insulin
dosages. Since then, there have been numerous instances where
medical professionals have been caught stealing medication that
is procured for veterans. These instances contributed to the
more than 1,400 incidents of controlled substance theft or loss
at VA, about 7 percent of the 20,000 total incidents reported
to the DEA in 2021.
Given the VA's consistent failure to get rid of its few bad
employees, including in situations I have heard about, like
employee drug theft, it is crucial that the VA does not hire
dangerous employees in the first place. Despite the importance
of effectively carrying out the employee background check
process, evidence suggests the VA is failing to follow the law
and commonsense policy, resulting in background check
deficiencies.
Inspector General (IG) reports in both 2019 and 2023
highlight major issues with the VA's management of the
background check process. The 2023 report outlines how the VA
background investigations are often initiated late, not timely,
or not properly documented, in violation of the VA's own
policies. Disturbingly, the report also highlights in some
cases for unknown reasons, applicants have never had background
investigations done in the first place. This includes hundreds
of employees with indications of a controlled substance related
criminal history that Government Accountability Office (GAO)
estimates have not completed background investigations.
The absence of these background investigations is alarming,
as DEA regulations require employers, including the VA, to
apply for and receive employment waivers for those with access
to controlled substances who were convicted of a controlled
substance related felony. Simply put, this is not optional.
These DEA regulations are in place to prevent drug theft and
loss, which is common at the VA, unfortunately.
Evidence suggests the VA is not properly executing DEA
employment waivers as well. GAO in both 2019 and 2023, found
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) has a zero DEA employment
waiver policy in place, including guidance for determining
whether employees have access to controlled substances. I am
very concerned that over 4 years have passed since the VA was
first made aware of these deficiencies, and there has still
been little to no progress made to improve the background check
process. I look forward to all of you testifying before us
today explaining why the VA has failed to fix the deficiencies
in its background check and DEA employment waiver process. With
that, I now recognize Ranking Member Mrvan for his opening
comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF FRANK J. MRVAN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chair Kiggans. I appreciate you
holding this hearing. Ensuring VA has an effective and robust
workforce is a priority for me. As the Department implements
the Honoring Our PACT Act and its monumental expansion of
veterans benefits, it is critical VA has the staff it needs to
support existing and new veterans entering the VA healthcare
system. It is equally critical that those new VA workers have
the required skills and background as we entrust them to care
for our veterans. I share Chair Kiggans's concerns about the
deficiencies in VA personnel suitability program that have been
identified by the VA Office of Inspector General (OIG) and the
Government Accountability Office.
I hope this hearing can help us identify ways to improve
VA's process for screening employees so that we can strike the
right balance of swiftly onboarding the staff we need while
promptly and accurately vetting them to ensure patient safety.
The length of VA's onboarding process has long been cited as a
recruitment and retention issue. Historically, VA has struggled
to attract and keep talent due in part to the lengthy timeline
to get prospective staff to work after an offer of employment
is made. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) authorized VA to use hiring
flexibilities in an expedited process to get staff into
positions more quickly. However, there are risks associated
with instituting a quicker process, and there need to be
safeguards in place to ensure that the hired staff have the
background and skills needed to care for and deliver benefits
to our veterans.
After reviewing the testimony prepared by our witnesses
today, it seems to me that a common thread and core cause of
weaknesses in vetting is staffing. This is a bit circular, but
it appears that VA does not have the requisite staffing levels
needed to onboard additional staff. The areas of improvement
identified by both the IG and the GAO all seem to center around
the fact that VA does not have enough qualified personnel to
run its personnel suitability program. This has created an
unattainable cycle of staff shortages, causing new staff to
enter the VA workforce without the completion of appropriate
and required vetting.
I am particularly concerned by the IG's findings related to
the VA Information Technology (IT) system that are used to
track and manage background check processes. In my role last
Congress as the Technology Modernization Subcommittee Chairman,
I frequently did deep dives into VA software capabilities. VA
currently has two information systems to manage the
sustainability determination process, HR Smart and the VA
Centralized Adjudication Background Investigation System, or
VA-CABS. In its review of the VA's personnel suitability
program, the VA IG identified issues with these data management
systems and determined the use of the multiple data systems can
lead to missing or inaccurate information.
I hope to hear an update today from the VA on its
implementation of the VA-CABS 2.0 and its plan to ensure that
future systems offer the functionality needed to effectively
oversee and manage the background investigation process. I am
disappointed that VA did not make sustained improvements of the
execution or oversight of its personnel suitability program
between the 2018 and 2023 IG audits. This hearing serves as an
opportunity for VA to commit to plans to improve staffing
levels and data management throughout the functions of its
personnel suitability and credentialing programs. I look
forward to the VA following up on the coming months as to its
progress.
Finally, I was disturbed by the GAO's findings related to
the VA's lack of control procedures for determining whether
employees who have access to controlled substances have been
adequately vetted. Again, this process seems to be stifled by
VA not having enough staff to operate and oversee an effective
background check and credentialing process in compliance with
the policy and regulation related to the Controlled Substance
Act. Ensuring all practitioners who care for veterans are in
compliance with the Controlled Substance Act and the DEA
policies is important, and I hope to hear today from our
witnesses how this vetting process translates for care veterans
receive from community providers.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to a productive conversation. With that, I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Ranking Member Mrvan. We will now
turn to witness testimony. Testifying before us today on our
panel we have Mr. Daniel Galik, the Executive Director for
Identity Credential and Access Management in the Office of
Human Resources and Administration, Operations, Security and
Preparedness (HRA/OSP) at the Department of Veteran Affairs. We
have Ms. Jessica Bonjorni, the Chief of Human Capital
Management at the Veteran Health Administration. We have Mr.
Shawn Steele, Director of the Healthcare Infrastructure
Division at the Office of Inspector General. We have Mr. Seto
Bagdoyan, Director for Audit Services in the U.S. Government
Accountability Office for Forensic Audits and Investigative
Service. Will the witnesses please stand and raise your right
hand and be sworn in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much. Let the record reflect
that the witnesses answered in the affirmative. Mr. Galik, you
are now recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL GALIK

Mr. Galik. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Higgins,
Ranking Member Mrvan, and members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the Department of Veterans
Affairs Human Resources background investigation and
suitability programs and processes. I am accompanied today by
Jessica Bonjorni, Chief Human Capital Management, Veterans
Health Administration.
VA recognizes that rigorous suitability protocols for its
workforce are vital to maintaining the trust of veterans,
caregivers, and veterans' families. VA's suitability program
aligns with the guidelines established by the Office of
Personnel Management. Preemployment screening and suitability
determinations are mandatory for Federal employees to determine
their suitability for employment.
Once a tentative offer of employment has been made to the
applicant, VA begins preemployment screening. At this stage,
self-declared information and available criminal history are
reviewed. In line with Federal regulations, any issues
identified during the preemployment screening process are
forwarded to a trained adjudicator for review and appropriate
action. If the adjudicator cannot mitigate the issues found
during the preemployment screening process, VA may withdraw the
offer.
An applicant's qualifications and credentialing
requirements are also reviewed by VA's credentialing and
privileging staff. If issues are identified with professional
licensing or credentialing, these are communicated to HR to
determine the appropriate follow-up action. If an applicant has
a favorable initial screening, a background investigations is
initiated at the appropriate level for the position with the
Defense, Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA).
After the background investigation is completed by DCSA, a
final suitability determination is made by a VA suitability
adjudicator. This determination involves a review of a person's
character or conduct that may have impact on the integrity or
efficiency of the service. When issues are discovered after a
person is hired, such as when a report or an alert is received
by the VA from DCSA or other sources, these reports and alerts
are reviewed by a VA adjudicator and HR staff. If necessary, VA
or HR may initiate the appropriate action on employees that are
past their probationary period.
In late 2020, VA established working groups to conduct
governance, oversight, and compliance and to review the
processes used within VA to initiate background investigations
and the subsequent adjudication by VA staff. Process
enhancements were identified and implemented for instances
where there were weaknesses in how background investigations
were adjudicated by VA's adjudicators. VA has made progress,
but more work is needed to strengthen governance, oversight,
compliance, and policies.
VA is also addressing weaknesses in the governance of the
suitability program, as identified in September 2023 VA OIG
audit. HRA/OSP is developing an updated plan with each
administration to establish this more robust governance and
oversight of VA's personnel suitability program, including
conducting program reviews at VA facilities, updating policies
and oversight processes, verifying that background
investigations are initiated and adjudicated within prescribed
timelines, and that documentation is filed as required.
The administration, and in particular VHA, has taken action
to create a more structured approach to oversight and
compliance. The VA, HR and suitability programs are working
with the VA CIO's information technology team to also address
and resolve the data quality and other issues identified with
our IT systems that support the HR and suitability programs.
We appreciate this opportunity to share more information on
VA's background investigation and HR processes and how VA helps
protect our veterans. Our objective is to give the Nation's
veterans the top-quality care they have earned and deserve by
carefully and thoroughly vetting all personnel who will
interact with veterans, their families, and others at VA. We
appreciate this subcommittee's continued support and
encouragement. This concludes my testimony.

[The Prepared Statement Of Daniel Galik Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you so much, Mr. Galik. Mr. Steele, you
are now recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SHAWN STEELE

Mr. Steele. Good morning. Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking
Member Mrvan, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify on the OIG's oversight of VA's
personnel suitability program. A high performing screening
program is critical for VHA to ensure the integrity of its
workforce, to support the delivery of safe, high-quality
patient care, and to protect sensitive information from misuse.
As the OIG has documented, VA faces significant staffing
shortages across many of its programs, including critical
positions within VHA. These staffing shortages extend to human
resources and personnel suitability staff essential to the
hiring and vetting process. We have published reports on
deficiencies in the personnel suitability program for several
years. Our 2018 report recommended that VA and VHA establish
robust oversight, ensure reliable investigation data are
collected and maintained, correct data integrity issues, and
implement a plan to review the suitability status of all VHA
personnel. While we closed those recommendations between 2019
and 2022, the OIG became concerned that the program was not
sustaining the improved controls.
Our September 2023 follow-up audit had two main findings.
First, neither VA nor VHA provided effective governance of the
program, and second, they lacked adequate IT systems to ensure
that required background investigations were completed timely.
In our first finding, we identified that VA did not
consistently initiate or adjudicate background investigations
timely or at all. In multiple instances, staff were in position
to provide direct patient care without being vetted.
These issues occurred because neither VA nor VHA dedicated
sufficient resources to carry out key internal controls or
accomplish program tasks. HRA/OSP suspended required
inspections of the suitability program due to insufficient
staffing. VHA's Workforce Management Consulting office also did
not conduct program reviews of its suitability functions,
largely delegating oversight to the Veterans Integrated
Services Networks (VISNs). The VISNs, however, lacked
sufficient staff to consistently perform their
responsibilities. VISN personnel security chiefs reported they
did not consistently review their suitability programs because
they were covering for VISN staffing shortages. Many VISN
suitability specialists also reported difficulty handling their
workload.
Our report highlighted examples of facilities that were
supported by only one adjudicator despite employee counts
ranging from 1,200 to 4,700 Full-Time Equivalency (FTE). We
issued four recommendations for this first finding calling on
VA to refocus its oversight of VHA's personnel suitability
program and implement updated staffing metrics to ensure
requirements were met.
Next, we found that VA's background investigation data and
information systems were insufficient to track the status of
investigations or conduct program oversight. For example, HR
Smart data were not consistently up to date. Similarly,
critical VA-CABS data fields were either empty or inaccurate.
While we recognize VA has now replaced VA-CABS, they did
not provide us with evidence during our audit that VA-CABS 2.0
will address known program and data weaknesses. As such, VA may
have allocated resources toward developing a system that has
functionality issues or duplicates other efforts given that a
governmentwide suitability IT system is in development.
Unless data reliability and system design and functionality
are improved, VA lacks assurance that investigations have been
fully processed and data integrity concerns have been
mitigated. For this finding, we issued three recommendations
for VA to collect and maintain sufficient and appropriate data
to track investigations, as well as ensure that future systems
can support the management and oversight of the background
investigation process.
The issues found in this report persisted from 2018, and a
single responsible party was needed to coordinate corrective
actions taken by HRA/OSP and VHA, all seven of the report's
recommendations were issued to the Deputy Secretary. VA
concurred with all the recommendations which remain open. In
conclusion, the OIG remains committed to continued oversight of
VA's personnel suitability program because of its importance to
onboarding a highly qualified workforce and because of the risk
to veterans, their family members, and staff if employees are
not fully vetted. Presently, OIG audit teams are evaluating the
personnel suitability programs in Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA) and National Cemetery Administration (NCA)
to gain an enterprise-wide perspective. Additionally, the OIG
is assessing VA's compliance with requirements for vetting
contractor employees.
Madam Chairwoman, this concludes my statement. I would be
happy to answer any questions you or members of the
subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Shawn Steele Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Steele. Mr. Bagdoyan, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SETO BAGDOYAN

Mr. Bagdoyan. Thank you. Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member
Mrvan, members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear
before you today to discuss GAO's February 2023 report on VHA's
employee screening process. As context, VHA operates one of the
largest healthcare systems in the Nation, with over 9 million
veterans enrolled in the VHA healthcare program. VHA is
responsible for ensuring that its 400,000-plus healthcare
providers and support staff are qualified, competent, and
suitable to provide safe care to veterans.
Of this number, we identified 12,569 employees with
indications of criminal history related to controlled
substances, of whom we estimate 1,800 had felony convictions. A
projectable sample of 305 from this universe constituted the
basis of our analyses. We referred over 12,500 out of the
original number to VHA for review and appropriate action.
My remarks today will address our report's two principal
findings, the extent to which VHA has responded to adverse
information regarding its employees' criminal history or DEA
registrations. Second, whether vulnerabilities exist in VHA's
processes for completing and documenting employee background
investigations or BIs. Our bottom line, our findings pose a
double risk. As you mentioned, first, harm to veterans' care
and also diversion of controlled substances for illegal
purposes.
Regarding our first finding, VHA received adverse
information about some employees, but lacked policies and
controls to ensure it responded as required. For example, VHA
received information about some employees' control substance
related felony convictions and actions taken against certain
employees by DEA. VHA was required to obtain waivers from DEA
for any of these employees whose job involved access to
controlled substances. Specifically, from our projectable
sample, we identified 50 employees who had one or more felony
convictions related to controlled substances. VHA did not
request DEA waivers for 48 of these individuals and could not
confirm it requested waivers for the other two.
At the time of our review, VHA did not have a waiver policy
to guide its actions, but nevertheless determined that no
waivers were required. Without such a policy, including
guidance for determining whether an employee has access to
controlled substances, VHA cannot assess whether its employees
require waivers. Further, VHA risks that its facilities are not
consistently complying with DEA regulations designed to control
against theft and diversion of controlled substances.
Regarding our second finding, we identified vulnerabilities
in VHA's processes for completing employee background
investigations. Specifically, we found that 13 employees in our
projectable sample did not have a background investigation
completed as required by both OPM guidance and VA policy. VHA
was not aware of this until we brought the matter to its
attention.
Without adequate controls to ensure that it completes
background investigations as required, VHA lacks reasonable
assurance that its employees are properly vetted and suitable
to provide care to veterans. In our February 2023 report, we
made 14 recommendations to VHA, including five involving
finalizing and implementing a DEA waiver policy and others for
establishing controls to ensure that BIs are completed and
documented. VHA agreed with the recommendations and outlined
some actions in response, including reviewing a draft policy on
waivers with a March 2024 target for implementation. As of
today, all recommendations remain open.
In closing, I would note first that our findings are
consistent with those that resulted in veterans healthcare
being added to GAO's high-risk list in 2015 involving ambiguous
policies, inconsistent processes, and inadequate oversight.
They are also generally consistent with the Veterans
Administration-Office of Inspector Genera's (VA-OIG's) findings
that Mr. Steele just enumerated. Second, the control
deficiencies we identified could have broader implications for
the vetting of all VHA employees beyond those with just
criminal histories. Accordingly, VHA should act decisively and
implement our recommendations in a timely fashion to enhance
its oversight of and controls over employee vetting and help
minimize the risks I identified.
Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, and members of
the subcommittee, this concludes my opening remarks. I would be
pleased to answer your questions. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Seto Bagdoyan Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much for all of your
testimonies. We will now move to questions, and I yield myself
5 minutes first. Mr. Galik how does the DEA define access to a
controlled substance?
Mr. Galik. Chairwoman, I am going to defer to my colleague
here as the VHA team is working the details of the DEA waiver
policy.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay.
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes, thank you. The DEA definition of access
to controlled substances includes anyone who dispenses or
administers a controlled substance and anyone who has access or
influence to how those controlled substances are administered
or stored.
Ms. Kiggans. Mr. Bagdoyan, do you agree with that
definition?
Mr. Bagdoyan. That is my general understanding that it is
correct to access, dispensation, influence, proximity. It does
not have to be direct access based on my understanding, but
that is generally accurate, yes.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Mr. Galik, are there VA employees
who do not prescribe or dispense controlled substances but
still have access to them according to the DEA's definition?
Mr. Galik. Again, I am sorry, but I will have to defer to
my colleague to respond to that.
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes, there are employees who do not dispense
or administer, and those would be reviewed on an individual
basis at each facility based on their procedures. This new
review, based on the feedback that we got from the GAO, is in
our draft policy that we are working to roll out in January of
this year to do the review that they recommended.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Mr. Bagdoyan, under what
circumstances would a VA employee who has access to controlled
substances need a DEA employment waiver?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Yes, if they have a criminal history with a
felony conviction for a controlled substance, and also, they do
not have DEA registration, which would provide upfront sort of
a dispensation that that was considered. Those would be the two
principal triggers. Of course, access is----
Ms. Kiggans. Right.
Mr. Bagdoyan [continuing]. another issue as well, yes----
Ms. Kiggans. Right.
Mr. Bagdoyan [continuing]. or consideration, rather.
Ms. Kiggans. Gotcha. Ms. Bonjorni, when was the last time
the VA requested a DEA employment waiver?
Ms. Bonjorni. We do not track that centrally under not
having the policy in place yet that has been recommended. Under
the new policy, any request for a waiver would have to come all
the way up to central office, and so we would be able to track
those centrally, and they would be reviewed at a national
level.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Just out of curiosity, what is the
biggest problem with doing these background checks? We hear
from other jobs that require background checks, and the length
of time it takes to get them is one problem. What do you think
the hindrance is? I think maybe, in my personal opinion,
everyone should have a background check who is directly related
to care for our veterans. What is the biggest problem with
asking for and implementing background checks?
Mr. Galik. I would say staffing is definitely a
consideration, but all of our adjudicators who perform the
adjudication of the background investigation results that come
from DCSA are trained in accordance with the standards and
criteria for how to conduct a background or how to assess the
results of a background investigation. I think the VA, we are
committed to performing those background investigations
consistently and properly so that we have good workforce.
These particular instances that have been noted in the
reports do not really have a good explanation for how some of
these occurred. We are trying to improve our oversight and
compliance to track those and catch those instances where
background investigations maybe were deficient or were not
performed for whatever reason. I do not really have a good
explanation as to why they occurred, but we are committed to
ensuring that those types of events do not continue to occur in
the future.
Ms. Kiggans. Several of you mentioned just staffing
challenges with tracking. What does the tracking process look
like during that hiring process? People that require background
checks, is there an electronic system? Is it a paper, or how
are we actually charting who needs a background check, who has
had one? Where they are in that process, is that adequate?
Mr. Galik. Right. As highlighted, we have two primary
systems right now, HR Smart, and also a new system, relatively
new system, VA-CABS. We are moving toward VA-CABS being the one
centralized system that captures all the data that is collected
in the hiring process, the fingerprint results, the
documentation that the application fills out related to the
background investigation, also the results of the DCSA
investigation. Right now, we do have some of that information
in HR Smart, which is our HR primary system for employee
tracking, but we are moving all of that here in early 2024 to
one system, VA-CABS.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Then, just out of curiosity, before I
yield to Ranking Member Mrvan, what is the security like in
your pharmacies? Are there cameras on all medications? Is there
especially security cameras on things like the opioid
distribution machines? I know different hospital systems are
set up differently. Sometimes the staff has to scan a card
before they can have access to the machines. For the medication
to get in the machine, there are a lot of places where the
medication has to get from where it is manufactured into the
building, into the pharmacy, into the distribution machine. Is
there adequate security? Are there cameras? Is there scanning
of badges to know who comes in and out of the room and who has
access to the machines? Or what does that security look like?
Mr. Galik. I will ask my colleague to address that.
Ms. Bonjorni. The detailed specifics are outside of my
realm of expertise. My understanding is that, yes, there are
requirements for scanning in and out whenever we are dispensing
or administering any controlled substances. We have adequate
control procedures in place with our pharmacy teams.
Ms. Kiggans. Are there cameras installed?
Ms. Bonjorni. I would have to get back to you on that.
Ms. Kiggans. Just curious if that is a requirement or not.
Great. Thank you so much. I yield to Ranking Member Mrvan.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairwoman. Mr. Bagdoyan, did the
GAO's review of the VA's compliance with DEA policies and
procedures include a review of the community care providers'
compliance with the DEA policies? How can the VA ensure
providers in the community who are reimbursed for caring for
veterans are in compliance with DEA policies?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Thank you for your question, Mr. Mrvan. That
was not something that we focused on in our audit work leading
to the report. The responsibility for seeking waivers, for
example, for those providers, if appropriate, rests with their
employers. With that in mind, VHA really does not have any
influence on that process, at least that is my understanding.
Our VHA colleagues may have a different take on it, but that is
not something that we looked at.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Mr. Galik, Chairman Kiggins asked a quick
question, and you had answered that staffing is a consideration
to one of the reasons why the process is not up to speed. Can
you take a little deeper dive of what you mean as staffing as a
consideration?
Mr. Galik. Yes. Thank you for the question. Both department
wide and also specifically VHA have put a good amount of time
into assessing the workload and determining what are the
appropriate grade levels and staffing levels that are necessary
to support as we ramped up to support The Sergeant First Class
Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive
Toxics (PACT) Act and the hiring surge there over the more
recent past. All this occurred around the COVID timeframe and
we lost some momentum there in the 2020 timeframe.
Basically, it is a staffing analysis. We did bring on some
contractor support to do some work on assessing the workload,
and what would be the appropriate grade levels and numbers of
individuals required to support the workload. We just have not
followed up yet and actually done the hiring to support the
requirements that were identified.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you. Ms. Bonjorni, what policies and
procedures are in place to ensure that community care providers
are in compliance with the requirements of the Controlled
Substance Act?
Ms. Bonjorni. I would echo the comments of my GAO colleague
that those would be the requirements of their employer. It is
not something that we would administer in the human capital
space in VHA.
Mr. Mrvan. Right. The next level would that, does the VA
verify from their employers that they are in compliance prior
to allowing the veterans to go to a third party? Can you
identify the loophole that we are trying to hone-in on?
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes, I understand what you are asking. It
is----
Mr. Mrvan. Okay.
Ms. Bonjorni [continuing]. that would be something that is
required in the contracts that we have with our community care
providers and the overall network, but outside of my portfolio.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Can someone get us that answer?
Ms. Bonjorni. Absolutely.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay, thank you. My next question is, Mr. Galik,
per VHA policy, the adjudicators have discretion in reviewing
an onboarding employee's record and making a final suitability
determination. In instances when a prospective employee has a
criminal record, what information regarding that record do
adjudicators take into account when making that sustainability
determination, for example?
Mr. Galik. Yes. All our adjudicators are formally trained
in the criteria and standards that are established by the
Office of Personnel Management. Includes factors such as
criminal record, the debt commitment.
Mr. Mrvan. Can I ask, does the length of time from the
violation that it occurred, is that taken into account?
Mr. Galik. Yes, that is taken into account. In terms of was
it something that occurred perhaps a long time ago? If it was
an employee, maybe something occurred with that individual
where they were in the college environment and committed some
type of activity or a crime like marijuana use or something
along those----
Mr. Mrvan. Is that policy on paper?
Mr. Galik. In terms of the timeline? It is discussed----
Mr. Mrvan. For the crime timeline consideration and the
types of crime?
Mr. Galik. Right. It is in the OPM guidelines----
Mr. Mrvan. Okay.
Mr. Galik [continuing]. and standards where that assists
the adjudicator in making that call.
Mr. Mrvan. How does this process take into account when
state laws reclassify felony drug offenses as misdemeanors?
Mr. Galik. I would have to get back to you on that one
particular question, sir. I do know that dealing--we have to
comply with the state laws in terms of those type of issues or
they are taken into consideration. It becomes an area where the
staff will need assistance from OGC, General Counsel and
others, in making their ruling.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. Mrs. Radewagen, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes for questioning.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Chairwoman Kiggans and Ranking
Member Mrvan for holding this hearing today. Thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony. Mr. Steele, your testimony
highlighted steps VA should take to improve its background
check program. Could you explain these steps?
Mr. Steele. Yes, thank you. Our work identified gaps
related to people, processes, and technology that support the
personnel suitability program. We made numerous recommendations
to establish robust oversight, commit staff to both oversight
and operations at the headquarters level and in the field, and
commit resources to ensuring that future systems support case
management for the program.
Ms. Radewagen. Mr. Steele, in your testimony, you also note
how VA's information systems do not adequately support the
background check program. Can you discuss this further? I mean,
what is inadequate about VA's information systems?
Mr. Steele. The IT systems were critical to the issues that
we identified. As Mr. Galik noted in his testimony, VA relies
on two systems, HR Smart and VA-CABS, to support the personnel
suitability program and track the five key milestones that are
associated with that process. While that is not prohibited, it
is not ideal for case management and complicates the issue.
We also identified some functionality issues with VA-CABS.
For example, a field that was meant to collect the date when an
investigation was scheduled with DCSA was meant to be auto
populated. However, we found that in about one third of the
cases that did not occur, and the process was able to move
forward without that particular field being populated. We made
recommendations for VA to consider closing those gaps, which we
will monitor through our process.
Ms. Radewagen. What can VA do to ensure its information
systems adequately support VA's background check program moving
forward?
Mr. Steele. I can speak to the gaps that we identified
during our audit, which were lack of functionality and the
duality of the systems that impaired case management. In terms
of the resources that VA needs to carry those out, I would have
to defer those questions to VA.
Ms. Radewagen. Mr. Galik, has VA made any improvements to
its background check related information systems?
Mr. Galik. Yes, that is very important to us. We are
putting quite a bit of attention and effort into the new
system, VA-CABS. We do have two systems at this time, HR Smart,
to track the employee background investigation, and that data
is moving, including making automated connections to move the
data from HR Smart to VA-CABS. Working with our Chief
Information Officer (CIO) information technology partners to
address the requirements, whether it is provide the appropriate
reports that can enable staff to perform their oversight role
and also to improve the data quality so the data is accurate
for each of the key milestones that enable us to track
performance of those systems so the employees would feel that
they are getting an effective tool to enable them to perform
their job.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mrs. Radewagen. Mr. Pappas, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair. I find
the reports that we heard about from OIG and GAO deeply
concerning. We are talking about a breakdown of basic
governance, oversight, compliance that is potentially putting
veterans at risk. Maybe I could start with you, Mr. Galik, and
just ask if VA was surprised by these recommendations at all
and if you can tell us any more about a timetable for when
these recommendations will be satisfied and closed?
Mr. Galik. Yes, thank you for the question. This is
obviously the report findings and recommendations highlight a
number of key issues. We kicked off a number of working groups
and are putting together an overall oversight compliance plan
that involved reinstituting the program reviews and onsite
inspections or virtual inspections of each of the programs at
each of the VA facilities. The timeline, it appears that most
of the recommendations have moved a little bit to the right
beyond the initial commitments, and we are working to complete
most all of them in 2024, early calendar 2024.
Mr. Pappas. Well, maybe if I can ask you about a comment I
heard from Mr. Steele, I believe just talking about
insufficient staff, which you have explored with some of the
other members here through their questioning. He said that some
of this work has been delegated down to the VISN level, but we
also lack oversight in terms of what is happening at the VISN
level. According to the OIG team, all five VISN personnel
security chiefs that they interviewed did not consistently
conduct reviews of the programs in their network.
Oversight is basic. It is so essential, and we need to see
more of it at VA at the VISN level. What are the plans to
provide VISN security chiefs with the adequate support,
staffing or otherwise, that they need to be able to conduct
these reviews of the programs in their networks?
Mr. Galik. I will ask my colleague to address that one for
VHA.
Ms. Bonjorni. Sure. Thank you for the question,
Congressman. We were not surprised by the reports, as you asked
about earlier, but it did put things into clear guidelines and
pathways that we need to follow. Based on the recommendations
that we received from OIG and GAO, we have developed a staffing
model for personnel security functions in the field in VHA that
we rolled out last month. That tool is now available for
facilities to evaluate how well their staffing is doing.
We did increase the total number of personnel security
staff we have on board by about 35 percent over last year. We
are making an improvement there. Then within our own office, we
are adding additional personnel to perform those compliance and
oversight duties and reinstitute the onsite personnel security
reviews starting in 2024 once we fill our positions. We are
taking all of their advice very, very seriously.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you for that. Another question. As
part of the Cleland-Dole Act that was signed into law last
year, we enacted provisions that require VA to improve its
credentialing processes to include ensuring covered healthcare
professionals hold active DEA registrations. It also required
VA to audit Veterans Administration Medical Centers (VAMCs)
annually to check compliance. The first reports are due to
Congress at the end of this year, and I am wondering if you can
tell us when we expect to receive those reports and if you have
any sort of a preview on that.
Mr. Galik. I will ask my colleague to address that.
Ms. Bonjorni. Credentialing is another area that is not in
my portfolio, but we will be happy to get back for you on the
timeline for that.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Well, thank you for that. With that, I
will yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. Mr. Bergman, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Let us get right
to it. Mr. Steele, when did OIG first find deficiencies in VA's
background check process?
Mr. Steele. The OIG became alert to potential issues in the
background process when a whistleblower identified a backlog of
cases at the Atlanta VA Medical Center. We substantiated those
issues in a January 2017 report, but it was clear that we
needed to conduct a nationwide review of the program. Our March
2018 audit identified gaps related to insufficient staffing,
inadequate processes, and inadequate IT systems. We made
numerous recommendations to VA at that time for corrective
action.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. 2017 identified through a whistleblower.
You did your due diligence, issued a report. Are these
deficiencies similar to those the OIG described in its
September 2023 report?
Mr. Steele. Yes. VA has, in between our two reports,
implemented new advisories and policies. They introduced VA-
CABS between our 2018 report and 2023, but the underlying
issues remain the same. There are still gaps related to people,
processes, and technology that need to be closed.
Mr. Bergman. If we are identifying the same things over and
again, why or what has not allowed--what has been inhibiting VA
from making significant progress in fixing the deficiencies?
Mr. Steele. The personnel suitability program is a people-
driven process, and I think the theme as we have----
Mr. Bergman. Define people driven process in this case.
Mr. Steele. There is workload that needs to be completed
and a need for people to be dedicated to carrying----
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Mr. Steele [continuing]. out those tasks.
Mr. Bergman. You have got a workload that is not matched
with the humans, the number of humans' ability to really get
into that workload. Are you saying you need more people?
Mr. Steele. That is correct.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Do you need them full-time or do we just
work off the backlog? Are there any folks that VA could
contract with to bring in qualified, for lack of a better term,
investigators, adjudicators, whatever you want to call it, to
bring down the backlog? I see you shaking your head. The answer
is no. Why not? Whether it be the governmental sector or the
private sector, there are expertises that exist that if your
goal is to knock down a backlog or decrease the time without
adding unnecessarily full-time equivalents, because if you add
full-time equivalents now, you have got someone on the payroll.
If you knock it down, do they have work to do? Okay. Tell me,
you were shaking your head. Why is it the way it is?
Ms. Bonjorni. Adjudicators are one of those inherently
governmental functions that cannot be contracted out to a
contractor.
Mr. Bergman. By law, by policy, or by capability?
Ms. Bonjorni. I believe by law and OPM requirements.
Mr. Bergman. It is not as though it cannot be done by
changing the requirements and the law, it is just that it is
being used as a reason to not do it because it is the law, it
is the policy. Am I hearing you correctly?
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes. I would add that it is because we are
asking them to make a decision about whether someone is
suitable for Federal employment. That is not typically
something we would want to outsource outside the government.
Mr. Bergman. Want to or need to? What do we sacrifice by
delaying? Do we sacrifice the ability of our good people who
are trying to do the job and do it right and get others in? Who
fails in the end? Where does the burden of lack of performance,
lack of the ability to get it down? Who does that lie with?
Does that lie with the bureaucracy? Does that lie with who? The
policymakers like us? Who should we pin the rose on?
Ms. Bonjorni. Right now, you can continue to pin it on the
VA because we need to be making more improvements swiftly to
staff, which is what we are doing right now. We are staffing up
those positions to make sure that we can address backlogs and
issues.
Mr. Bergman. Some of us who have been to the war fight,
when you are in the fight, you are really not worried about
policy. You are worried about what have you got for ammunition
and what have you got for support? I would suggest we could all
improve. We want to work with you, but how do we take, do the
right thing long term, but do something in the short term that
actually benefits the veterans through good adjudication, then
hiring, and all of that? With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much. Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick,
you are now recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanted
to kind of circle back to one of the initial conversations you
were having with Ranking Member Mrvan. I wanted to know what is
your oversight mechanisms to ensure that the community care
providers are living up to their contractual obligations? Now,
Mr. Steele mentioned real quick the audit process, I just want
to dive a little deeper into that.
Mr. Galik. I will ask my colleague if she could address
that.
Ms. Bonjorni. I will continue to need to get back to you.
Community care is outside of my area of expertise.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What is the audit process or
oversight process you have? One of my concerns is, before I
came to Congress, I worked 15 years as a Chief Executive
Officer (CEO) of a healthcare company. One of our preliminary
things that we did, we had an audit process to make sure we
were living up to our contractual obligations. Compliance was
always the first lever. Those who gave us the contract, they
actually had a mechanism in place even before you can get paid.
That has been the priority that I have seen, the standard. I
wanted to know what was yours, because I think that is really
going to be one of the linchpins in figuring out how to solve
this long term and short term. I would love to get that
information back, because I think that is where we are really
finding the problem.
I heard a lot about the policies, procedures. Policies and
procedures and reports are wonderful, but we are really looking
at the implementation plan so we can protect our veterans. Is
there any implementation plans that you could talk about today
that will assist us in protecting our veterans?
Ms. Bonjorni. As it relates to community care providers or
our employees?
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Employees, community care
providers. I am really looking into the background checks, the
lapse of those people who were able to work without those
background checks.
Ms. Bonjorni. Oh, as it relates to background
investigations for our employees, I could speak to what we are
doing internally to VHA. As mentioned, we are increasing our
staffing to try to tackle those issues to make sure we do not
end up with situations as Mr. Steele referenced before, where
we had just one person onsite to adjudicate background
investigations. We have to make sure that we have multiple
people there for checks and balances. We have instituted that
already across the system.
We are also instituting a compliance checklist that we are
piloting in two networks right now based on some of the
recommendations we got from our partners here on the dais that
we are going to roll out throughout the system in March 2024.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. The proficiency of the things that
you are implementing right now, are you confident that they are
actually going to solve this problem, that we will not be going
into 2024 finding the lapse of background checks?
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes. I think that we are finally identifying
the things that we really need to tackle with the help of the
technology improvements that we are seeing.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. My next question, it is really
about the hiring. We looked, and we see that throughout the
entire spectrum of healthcare, there is a shortage of getting
qualified nurses, nurse practitioners into the system. When I
visited VAs from in my State of Florida and also in Texas, they
all complained about the lag time. They are extremely long. We
heard from our stakeholders during the hearing also that we had
that employee hiring process times at the VA often can run as
long as 6 months. By contrast, effectively run private
hospitals typically turned around the same level of paperwork
no longer than 4 weeks.
In addition to that, when we spoke to healthcare providers,
they said they would love to work for the VA. However, the long
time of waiting made it unacceptable for them because they had
to take another job. What steps are you taking to actually cut
it down? I am aware of the problems that we are having with our
technology modernization as the ranking member, so I wanted to
know what we can do on that front also to cut down those times?
Ms. Bonjorni. Sure, I could speak to the hiring process
improvements. Our team is charged with tackling that. It
remains a priority for our leadership. Right now, we are doing
a lot of different things in 2024, looking at sharing best
practices across the system. We look at each of our locations
that have done one step in the process really, really well. We
are trying to take what they have learned at that site and
share it across the system to improve time to hire.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. In that process--I do not mean
interrupt you--it looks like you are looking at best practices.
When you are looking at best practices in hiring, what has been
the average rate, timeframe? You are going from not 6 months
now, the ones that who have the best practices, what is that
timeline like?
Ms. Bonjorni. It is still longer than the community. In the
places where we are doing the best, we have locations where
they have time to fill in the range of 90 days. That is still
much better than our average, which is 168 days for time to
fill in VHA.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What do you think is an acceptable
timeframe in this area that we are in where it is so hard to
get healthcare professionals, what is the goal timeframe that
you would like to see the VA in hiring?
Ms. Bonjorni. Our goal, in conjunction with OPM, is 80 days
for hires. I still think that is too long. We would love to get
closer to 60 days or less.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you so much. Mr. Rosendale, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank
you very much, Madam Chair, for holding this hearing. The U.S.
Department of Veteran Affairs is required to have individuals
to go through an extensive background check before being hired
to protect veterans, veterans' family members, and fellow VA
employees. Any employee of the VA must properly be vetted to
ensure that our veterans receive the best possible care.
VA's personnel suitability program governs the background
check process and is designed to ensure individuals hired to
care for veterans or handle veterans' sensitive information are
suited for those responsibilities. The Office of the Inspector
General and the Government Accountability Office have both
released reports that found the VA violates its own policies by
allowing individuals to obtain employment without completed
background checks. This is unacceptable, and I appreciate the
committee's effort to search for those answers.
More closer to home, we had these problems arising at the
Fort Harrison medical facility in Montana. It was so, so
terrible and egregious that after an investigation was
conducted, we most recently had been able to have the director
removed from that facility. That is what we call accountability
in Montana.
I am tired of representatives from the Veterans
Administration sitting here and telling us, I take fully
responsibility for these actions and the things that are going
on, but they continue in their same positions with their same
compensation, and that is not taking responsibility.
More recently, I want to ask about human resources failure
by the VA. This is to Ms. Bonjorni. I cosigned a letter by
Congressman Luttrell regarding Shekeba Morrad, an attorney at
the VA who shared a video where she was antisemitic and mocked
hostages. The VA was supposed to have provided a response by
last night and has not done so. What is the VA's response to
this disturbing video?
Ms. Bonjorni. Thank you for raising that issue. It has
absolutely been brought to the attention of leaders throughout
the organization. We have had extensive conversations about the
importance of educating employees on appropriate social media
use.
Mr. Rosendale. Brought to the attention, and we have had
conversations about educating them. Okay.
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes, but----
Mr. Rosendale. If anyone in this dais had conducted
themselves in the way that Ms. Morrad did, they would be
calling for an expulsion on the House floor right now. The
action took place on November 12. The letter was sent out on
November 30, so this was not like 72 hours. The letter for
request of information was sent out on November 30. We have had
3-1/2 weeks since the act. What action has been taken place
except to identify that, yes, we do have a problem?
Ms. Bonjorni. To my knowledge, it is an ongoing
investigation without final decision.
Mr. Rosendale. Is Ms. Morrad still receiving compensation
and sitting in her regular duties?
Ms. Bonjorni. I would have to get back to you on that.
Mr. Rosendale. I would like to know that, because that is
very problematic for someone who released an antisemitic video
that was posted on November 12. Ms. Morrad actively mocked the
Israeli hostages being held captive by Hamas.
As you were well aware, on October 7 of this year, Hamas
committed one of the vilest terrorist attacks in recent
history. I am taking this directly from the letter. During the
attack, men, women, and children, and children that Hamas did
not kill, were taken back to Gaza to be held as hostages. Ms.
Morrad's mocking of these people and their families is
unacceptable and quite frankly, dangerous to the other staff
and dangerous to the actions that are taking place in the
facility. I find it troubling that you would sit there and say
that we have identified that issue, but yet you have no
understanding of where Ms. Morrad is, if she is being
compensated, and what has taken place.
This letter went out on November 30, and so I would say by
close of business today, I would like to have some kind of
information about her status as it exists right now and what
actions are being taken as we move forward. I yield back. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale. I want to proceed to
just a second round of questions and getting back to some of
the issues with background checks and whatnot. Mr. Steele, is
it possible that some of the VA employees with felony drug
convictions have never received a background check?
Mr. Steele. Well, I cannot speak to that element of the
background check process. Our report did identify gaps related
to people, processes, and technology that suggests that VA does
not consistently complete suitability actions timely or at all.
In terms of the specific DEA waiver process, I would have to
defer that to VA.
Ms. Kiggans. It is possible that there are people with
felony drug convictions that have not received a background
check working at the VA?
Mr. Steele. There are gaps in the background check process
that do not ensure that they are completed.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Mr. Bagdoyan, does the VA have a
policy in place to determine whether an employee has access to
controlled substances?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Policy for access, I am not sure, I know they
do not have one for waivers. I would redirect to the VA if they
do. Apologies for not knowing that off the top of my head.
Ms. Kiggans. Would it be possible, do you think, for and
maybe, Ms. Bonjorni, you would be better suited to answer the
question, but for someone like a maintenance staff or cleaning
staff that might have access to controlled substances?
Ms. Bonjorni. Maintenance staff or cleaning staff would not
have access to controlled substances. However, in the draft
policy that we are planning to move forward with in January, we
are going to be issuing guidance to facilities as well to
evaluate each position so they are able to understand how to
make that designation of which positions have access or do not.
A maintenance worker would not have access.
Ms. Kiggans. In this report that will come out then in
January, this policy, will security be addressed in that as
well so there will be ways to track? I feel like that is
another just step of good deterrence for when people know that
they are being watched and on camera.
Ms. Bonjorni. That would be covered under other policies
about how we administer and manage controlled substances. The
one that we are putting forward is an HR policy.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Great. We will follow up on that. Mr.
Bagdoyan, in your testimony, you note the risk that the VA is
taking by not having this policy. Could you talk about the
risks of not having just a policy in place to determine whether
an employee has access or not?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Sure, yes. As I highlighted in my opening
remarks, it is the care or the attention that a veteran needs
when in facility and also, of course, the diversion risk. As
reported to DEA in 2021 there were 50 instances within VHA
where there was employee theft involved. I am not certain
whether that involved also diversion for illegal purposes.
You know, if you go by a standard of one is one too many,
it is close to an absolute standard. Given that veterans are
involved, that may be something to really take a close look at
in terms of how certain do you have to be through processes and
procedures to make sure that these potentially unsuitable
employees do not have access and then harm veterans or engage
in other illegal activities.
Ms. Kiggans. Can any of you answer just this question? When
you do find in a VA facility that there has been people that
there are controlled substances that are missing, there are
people there that are involved in maybe some nefarious
activities, what is the process done then? Is there a procedure
in place that they come in and they take a closer look at each
employee that has access to those controlled substances? What
are we doing to actually rectify that problem once it is
highlighted?
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes, so, our facilities do have standard
procedures to do investigations. When there is an issue
identified of potential loss or diversion of controlled
substances, those procedures are standard and in place.
Ms. Kiggans. They happen every time?
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Mr. Bagdoyan, when did the GAO first
recommend that the VA develop a policy?
Mr. Bagdoyan. For waivers, yes. That goes back to our 2019
report that we issued. The audit work for that actually went
back as far as 2015. That is something that we flagged quite a
while ago. Of course, our 2023 report found similar challenges
with the absence of a waiver policy, which is the anchor in
terms of, or the roadmap, if you will, of what needs to be
done. Further to Mr. Steele's point of people, processes, and
technology, you will not know what you need unless you have a
policy to anchor all those activities on.
Ms. Kiggans. It has been a while, several years----
Mr. Bagdoyan. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kiggans [continuing]. and multiple occasions----
Mr. Bagdoyan. Yes.
Ms. Kiggans [continuing]. that you have asked for that.
Mr. Bagdoyan. Eight years and counting, yes.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Ms. Bonjorni, why has it taken so long
for the VA to create this policy?
Ms. Bonjorni. My understanding is that our group who was
looking at developing the policy had extensive discussions with
the DEA to make sure that we understood what their requirements
were until we got to a point where we feel we understand
exactly what they are looking for and we can publish a policy.
It has been drafted now for a few months, and we are getting
ready to issue it.
Ms. Kiggans. January we will receive a policy or we can
find it----
Ms. Bonjorni. An interim policy will come out in January,
yes.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay, great.
Ms. Bonjorni. That facilities can start making sure they
are doing the appropriate reviews.
Ms. Kiggans. I am looking forward to reviewing that. Will
the policy include the DEA's definition of access to controlled
substances?
Ms. Bonjorni. Yes, it will.
Ms. Kiggans. Great. Last question, Mr. Bagdoyan, will you
be reviewing the VA's policy when they publish it?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Yes, that is part of our recommendation
monitoring process. We engage regularly with VA and other
agency personnel as they implement our recommendations, of
course, within the boundaries of independence on both sides.
Yes, we look forward to seeing that as evidence so that we
consider closing the recommendation and giving the department
credit for taking action. I would point out that it has to be
action in fact, in addition to action on paper. Those are two
different things.
Ms. Kiggans. Right.
Mr. Bagdoyan. I just want to make a note of that.
Ms. Kiggans. We too in this committee will be anxiously
looking forward to reviewing the policy and following up on its
implementation. Thank you very much for that, and I yield to
Ranking Member Mrvan.
Mr. Mrvan. Mr. Steele, in your audit of the VA's personnel
suitability program, you determine that staffing is a core
deficiency leading to the issues with how the personnel
suitability program operates or fails to operate effectively.
In your audit, you identified examples of human capital
concerns throughout the personnel suitability process. For
instance, there is a single VISN adjudicator to address
thousands of employee onboarding files at a number of
facilities. In your view, how many employees are needed to fill
the need to onboard on time to get to the goals that Mrs.
Bonjorni talked about?
Mr. Steele. Our audit identified clearly that personnel
suitability actions were not being completed timely or at all,
and that could be attributed to a lack of staffing. We did not
evaluate staffing metrics or other benchmarks that would guide
that. VA did provide us a draft staffing model that we
highlighted in our report. However, we made a recommendation
that we will follow up on to see where they eventually end up
with that metric. In terms of specific questions related to
staffing levels, I would have to defer to VA.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Ms. Bonjorni, as far as that staffing
model, can you elaborate on what that looked like?
Ms. Bonjorni. Sure. The staffing model that we recently
rolled out for facility use includes recommendations around
total staffing for both personnel security specialists and
personnel security assistants who participate in this entire
process in the HR realm. Right now, we have about 800 total on
board between those two occupational groups, and we estimate
that we still have a gap of about 145 total that still need to
be hired to get to full capacity.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Mr. Steele, we heard from the VA that they
have made progress in implementing the new case management IT
system for personnel suitability deemed the VA-CABS 2.0. Has
the IG had a chance to review this updated system? What
features would an updated case management IT system ideally
have to help the VA effectively manage its personnel
suitability program?
Mr. Steele. We made recommendations related to the new VA-
CABS 2.0 system. However, our first follow up to those
recommendations will not occur until later this month. We have
not reviewed anything related to how VA has defined their
requirements for that new system.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. With that, I yield back, chairwoman.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. The chair now recognizes
Mr. Rosendale for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. You did a
really good job of outlining the process that is deficient and
trying to establish a new one going forward. I appreciate that.
That wiped out a bunch of my questions. It sounds to me just
what I am hearing here is that the focus needs to be on the
actual onboarding of the employees, that joining the VA is not
the origins of these people having different drug problems,
Okay? They had these problems with substance abuse and/or the
felonies prior to joining the VA. We really need to be drilling
down on the onboarding process, the hiring process, to make
sure that we are not bringing these people that already have
problems into a system that might provide them with the means
to access the substances that are giving them problems in their
lives to begin with. Mr. Bagdoyan, am I pronouncing that
correctly?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Yes, sir, thank you.
Mr. Rosendale. Bagdoyan, yes, sir. VA testified that it has
been years since the last submitted a DEA employment waiver. Do
you think the department was properly following Federal laws
and regulations by doing so?
Mr. Bagdoyan. Well, Mr. Rosendale, if they do not have a
policy which I identified as the anchor of what VA should be
doing, I do not want to speculate on whether they violated
something or not, but it clearly is a gap that should be
closed. As Ms. Bonjorni indicated----
Mr. Rosendale. If they were not violating something, they
certainly were not following the intent of what DEA was trying
to do, then can we say that?
Mr. Bagdoyan. I would say that in the case of the 50 people
we identified in our projectable sample, the determinations
that these individuals, at least for 48 of them, that VA
confirmed that they did not need a waiver for one reason or
another. That was kind of an ad hoc decision, if you will, that
was not----
Mr. Rosendale. Yes. So, again----
Mr. Bagdoyan [continuing]. grounded in policy----
Mr. Rosendale [continuing]. the waiver was not necessary.
However, they had previous problems that had not been detected.
Again, this is where we go to the onboarding. If somebody has a
problem, I mean, are we going to take a kleptomaniac and leave
them in charge of security of the store? I do not think so,
okay. Do not expose them.
Ms. Bonjorni, I hope that you are now clear on DEA's
guidance. How many current VA employees require employment
waivers but do not have them?
Ms. Bonjorni. That is one of the things that we will be
reviewing when we roll this policy out.
Mr. Rosendale. Do we have any kind of estimate whatsoever?
Is this some numbers that you can provide to us within the next
week?
Ms. Bonjorni. When we do the review, so when we roll out
the draft policy as well as the guidance for facilities about
how to do the review, we will be able to provide you additional
information on that.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Ms. Bonjorni, in 2021, VA accounted
for 7 percent of DEA's total reports of theft or loss of
controlled substances. Have any of these incidents involved
employees with a criminal record?
Ms. Bonjorni. I would need to get back to you on that.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Again, I am drilling down, trying to
get to the point that what we need to be focusing on is the
preemployment. We have to be focused on the onboarding of these
employees so that we are not putting people in a position where
they can be a danger to themselves and others. Do you think
that having a controlled substance policy that complies with
DEA regulations could help reduce those numbers?
Ms. Bonjorni. I do think it could help, but I would offer
that right now, we are following the personnel suitability
requirements that are in place already from OPM. We also are
reviewing to make sure that people have appropriate
unrestricted licenses. Any type of felony conviction would tend
to have some kind of impact on licensure already. That is
reviewed in the credentialing process as well.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair. I would yield
back the balance of my time.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale. I just want to thank
our committee members and especially those of you who came to
testify before us today. Thank you very much. I know there is
work to be done. It was very educational for me and I am sure
the other members to hear of the good work that you all are
doing.
I feel like the opioid crisis is a crisis, right? We are
working to just make positive changes in all facets of it. I
feel like we have done a good job. The DEA works hard with
providers. As a nurse practitioner, I know that we have a drug
data base. We are careful about our prescribing habits. I think
that the VA does a good job of ensuring patient safety through
things like drug contracts and drug screenings and just really
watching how we are prescribing opioids.
This is kind of the back end of that loop. Just curtailing
that, again, nefarious activity. We have made it harder to get
opioids, which is a good thing.
We need to close the loop on the back end to make sure that
we are--the employees that we are hiring, not just for patient
safety, but cost too. I mean, there are costs associated with
that type of theft. Making sure we are doing all of the right
things to provide the best care for our veterans. Thank you for
all the good work you are doing. Thank you to our members. I
ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative days
in which to revise and extend their remarks and include any
extraneous material. Hearing no objection, so ordered. This
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Daniel Galik

Good afternoon, Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Human Resources (HR) and
Background Investigation processes. I am accompanied today by Jessica
Bonjorni, Chief, Human Capital Management, Veterans Health
Administration (VHA).
VA recognizes that rigorous personnel security and suitability
protocols for its health care workforce are vital to maintaining the
trust of Veterans, Veteran families, and VA employees in its health
care delivery system. VA's background investigation processes for all
employees aligns with 5 C.F.R. Part 731 and guidelines established by
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).

Suitability Processes

Pre-employment screening for Federal employees to determine
suitability for employment generally begins once a tentative job offer
is made. At this stage, self-declared information and available
criminal history are reviewed. Once an applicant has a favorable
screening, a background investigation is initiated at the appropriate
level for the position.
Suitability determinations involve a review of the person's
character or conduct that may have an impact on the integrity or
efficiency of the service. Once a completed background investigation is
sent from Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA) to VA
and a trained suitability adjudicator makes a final determination. This
determination considers whether the individual has the appropriate
character and conduct for Federal employment in the position sought.
The Office of Human Resources and Administration/Operations,
Security and Preparedness (HRA/OSP) sets VA enterprise policy and has
oversight over background investigations processed for VA employees. VA
Administrations (VHA, Veterans Benefits Administration and National
Cemetery Administration) are responsible for following VA policy when
processing background investigations to ensure the safety of Veterans,
employees and visitors. Achievement of the investigative requirements
is verified during VA information technology account provisioning and
Personal Identity Verification badge issuance.
Background investigations for Federal employees should be initiated
before appointment but no later than 14 calendar days after placement
in the position. VA uses the same standard for contractors. A final
suitability decision is made after the conclusion of the background
investigation by the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency
(DCSA) and in accordance with 5 C.F.R. part 731, must be reported to
the governmentwide reciprocity system no later than 90 days after the
investigation is completed.
Issues discovered during the pre-employment screening process are
forwarded to a trained adjudicator for review and appropriate action.
If the adjudicator cannot mitigate the issues found during the pre-
employment screening process, the VA HR Onboarding Point-of-Contact
(POC) may decide to withdraw the offer.
Qualification issues, to include U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) registration, are also identified by VA's
credentialing POC and communicated to the HR POC to determine the
appropriate follow-up action.
Similarly, issues discovered during the background investigation
process are forwarded to a trained adjudicator for review and
appropriate action \1\. If the adjudicator cannot mitigate the
identified issues, a decision of unsuitable may be rendered. The
adjudicator will determine if a suitability action or action under
another applicable authority may be appropriate. The decision on which
authority may be applied may take into account the length of time on
the job and the seriousness of the issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 5 C.F.R. Part 731, Office of Personnel Management, https://
www.ecfr.gov/current/title-5/part-731
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When issues are discovered after a person is hired, such as when an
alert is received by VA from DCSA Continuous Vetting products updated
criminal history information), these alerts are reviewed by a trained
adjudicator \2\. As appropriate, Employee Relations and Labor Relations
may initiate appropriate adverse action on employees. In response to
GAO Audit (#23-104296) VA, under HRA/OSP guidance, developed a RAP BACK
action plan that includes development of control procedures and any
other action that must be completed to ensure RAP BACK notifications
are routed and resolved appropriately.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  5 C.F.R. Part 731, Office of Personnel Management, https://
www.ecfr.gov/current/title-5/part-731

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efforts to improve VA's Personnel Security and Suitability Program

In late 2020, VA established working groups and Integrated Project
Teams (IPT) to review the processes used within VA to initiate
background investigations and the subsequent adjudication by VA staff
of those investigations. The IPTs identified process enhancements that
were implemented to mitigate weaknesses and inconsistencies in how
background investigations were adjudicated by VA's adjudicators. The
findings from the Fiscal Year 2022 Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA) audit determined that VA has made and continues
to make progress, and continued focus is needed to processing address
the improvements identified in the audit. VA is continuing to update
our corrective action plans to resolve issues identified in the FISMA
audit reports.
VA is also addressing how to improve governance of the personnel
suitability program as identified in VA Office of Inspector General
(OIG) Audit Report 21-03718-189, dated September 21, 2023. HRA/OSP is
leading the development of a VA-wide plan with actions and milestones
to increase oversight of VA's personnel security and suitability
program, identify roles and responsibilities, review and update
oversight processes as well as verify that background investigations
are initiated and adjudicated within prescribed timelines and that
documentation is filed as required. VHA completed a personnel security
oversight and compliance pilot on October 31, 2023, to test guidelines
and job aids to enhance VHA Personnel Security programs. Those
guidelines and job aids are being refined for deployment across VHA
through March 2024. This more structured approach to oversight and
compliance will be supported through a new Personnel Security staffing
model recently published for Veterans Integrated Service Networks and
other VHA offices to implement.
In partnership with HRA/OSP, the Administrations will also develop
plans to establish robust oversight of their personnel suitability
programs. HRA/OSP will integrate these plans into the VA-wide plan. The
plan will include the actions and resources required by HRA/OSP and the
Administrations to reimplement the monitoring program required by VA
Handbook 0710 on the personnel vetting program. It will also identify,
prevent, and mitigate any systemic areas of improvement in the
personnel suitability program. The plan will be submitted to OIG by
December 31, 2023.

VA's Rehabilitation Program

VA emphasizes the importance of finding a balance in our mission to
provide world-class health care to Veterans and our mission to support
the rehabilitation of Veterans who have had complex histories including
substance abuse. For example, VA's Compensated Work Therapy (CWT)
program is a clinical vocational rehabilitation program offered at
every VA medical center. CWT provides Veterans with evidence-based
vocational rehabilitation services. These services include partnerships
with business, industry and Government agencies to provide Veteran
candidates with employment.
To be considered for participation in the CWT program, a Veteran
must be eligible to receive VA health care services, have a goal of
returning to competitive employment and have experienced barriers to
obtaining and/or retaining employment, which requires the intensive
supports provided by one of the CWT service components. There are
numerous success stories of the CWT program, including Veterans who
graduated from VA's CWT program to become full-time employees at VA
medical centers or as cemetery caretakers, and employers have realized
the benefits of hiring Veterans from the program.
VA seeks to hire Veterans who have rehabilitated on their own or
through structured VA programs, including the 52,000 Veterans VA serves
annually through the CWT program. Enhancing Veteran readiness for re-
employment and successful reintegration back into the workforce
balances VHA care delivery with our mission to rehabilitate Veterans,
including those with histories of substance use, or prior criminal
history. In the event a CWT program participant is offered employment
at VA at the conclusion of their therapy, these Veterans are subject to
the same suitability requirements as other VA employees.

Conclusion

Madam Chair and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to share more information on VA's background investigation
and HR processes and how VA helps protect Veterans. Our objective is to
give the Nation's Veterans the top-quality care they have earned and
deserve by carefully and thoroughly vetting all personnel who will
interact with Veterans, their families, and others at VA. We appreciate
this Subcommittee's continued support and encouragement.
This concludes my testimony. Ms. Bonjorni and I are prepared to
respond to any questions you may have.

Prepared Statement of Shawn Steele
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Seto Bagdoyan
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
