- LESS IS MORE: THE IMPACT OF BUREAUCRATIC RED TAPE ON VETERANS EDUCATION BENEFITS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LESS IS MORE: THE IMPACT OF
BUREAUCRATIC RED TAPE ON
VETERANS EDUCATION BENEFITS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-31

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-152                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California Ranking
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Member
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Derrick Van Orden, Chairman........................     1
The Honorable Mike Levin, Ranking Member.........................     3

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Mr. Joseph Garcia, Executive Director, Education Service,
Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     4

Accompanied by:

Mr. James Ruhlman, Deputy Director, Program Management,
Education Service, Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Joseph W. Wescott II, Ed.D, Legislative Director, National
Association of State Approving Agencies, Inc...................     5

Panel 2

Mrs. Anne Meehan, Assistant Vice President, Government Relations,
American Council on Education..................................    18

Dr. Jan Del Signore, President, National Association of Veterans'
Program Administrators.........................................    20

Mr. Will Hubbard, Vice President for Veterans and Military
Policy, Veterans Education Success.............................    22

Mr. Joe Rasmussen, Director, University Veteran Services at
University Wisconsin-Madison...................................    23

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Joseph Garcia Prepared Statement.............................    37
Mr. Joseph W. Wescott II, Ed.D Prepared Statement................    41
Mrs. Anne Meehan Prepared Statement..............................    46
Dr. Jan Del Signore Prepared Statement...........................    50
Mr. Will Hubbard Prepared Statement..............................    57
Mr. Joe Rasmussen Prepared Statement.............................    84

Statements For The Record

Charles Bernstein................................................    89
The American Legion..............................................    99

LESS IS MORE: THE IMPACT OF
BUREAUCRATIC RED TAPE ON
VETERANS EDUCATION BENEFITS

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Derrick Van Orden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Van Orden, Franklin, Ciscomani,
Levin, Mrvan, McGarvey, and Ramirez.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DERRICK VAN ORDEN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Van Orden. You all right? Guess that was a little
aggressive. Hey, good morning, everybody. I really appreciate
you coming here. The subcommittee will come to order. It is
very good to see you here again, and I am glad that you are
here. I would like to preface this, as I do with everything,
this committee is not a bipartisan committee. It is a
nonpartisan committee. Anybody gets out of line either side of
this aisle, I will bring them back in, because we are just not
doing that. We are just not. That is for the record. We got our
gear working this time, right, Mr. Garcia?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I tell you what, we had some issues,
and I do not mean you. I mean me and these guys. It is good. It
is a pleasure to have you all here. Over the last 4 years, the
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity has passed legislation
that has greatly improved the veterans access to their GI
benefits, which are earned, not given, and has protected them
from fraud and other outside factors. Much of this legislation
was passed under the leadership of my friend and colleague, Mr.
Levin. I appreciate the ranking member and his staff for
continuing to work with us in a nonpartisan way as we continue
to work with improving the VA system that our subcommittee has
jurisdiction over.
Today, our subcommittee comes together to examine the state
of the GI Bill and the Education Service. Let me make it clear,
I believe this, Mr. Garcia, that your intentions are pure and
your staff and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and I have a
very good but somewhat complicated political relationship, as
you do. I do believe that the Secretary's intentions are pure.
I absolutely know that my ranking members' intentions are pure
along with the rest of these folks. The sole stated intent and
our purpose here today is to make sure that our veterans have
the best possible access seamless to these educational
benefits. Let us lock arms and march together.
Last year, though, however, the subcommittee has also seen
you guys getting in the way of yourself and making it harder
for our veterans to access their earned benefits. That is an
issue. That is what we are here to talk about today.
Last Congress, the House and Senate had to pass an
emergency legislative fix for the 85/15 Rule because you had
altered their interpretation, your interpretation of the
statute, without telling the schools or Congress. If a fix had
not been made, thousands of GI Bill students would not have
gotten their benefits.
Earlier this year, our committee sent a letter to the
Secretary asking for delay of the release of the Enrollment
Manager because the VA decided to implement it at the beginning
of the semester, when the majority of schools certify student
veterans. We have heard additional concerns from the veterans
and schools about how the VA interprets Section 1015 waiver
authority and the VA's lack of communication with school
certifying officials (SCO). This has become a pattern of
behavior with the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), and
it is increasingly frustrating to us and the schools and the
veterans.
VA's most recent example of getting in the way of itself is
the risk-based surveys. Congress intended for risk-based
surveys to be used when the VA and the state approving agencies
believe there is an issue with concern. I am going to say the
quiet part out loud. We screwed this up. I am using the word we
because I have been in Congress for 5 minutes. We had really
good intentions, and how we communicated them to you was just
wrong. We set parameters that are not good. They are not
reasonable. They are not realistic. We are taking that one on
the chin. Time to do some truth telling, right?
Unfortunately, you guys have mandated a certain number of
risk-based surveys to be performed regardless of whether there
is an issue with the number of schools, at that number of
schools. This is completely unnecessary red tape and not at all
the intent of the law when it was passed. Risk-based surveys
were intended to be used as a tool to review schools providing
questionable services to veterans and hold them accountable to
the veterans they serve. I believe that the VA generally has
done good work in the education space. There are many success
stories in this area, and we applaud everyone for the work they
have done to achieve the ability of our veterans to get
education.
However, we are going to hold you guys to the highest
standard. That is just it as you try to do yourself. Congress
should not have to continuously be called to intervene in your
administration of educational benefits, especially when the
number of Education Services staff has risen from 75 at the
implementation of the post-911 GI Bill to 231 today.
With more people working at the VA today, there should be a
better level of service. Once again, I am very thankful that
you are here today, and I am looking forward to getting this
done. With that, I yield to the ranking member for his opening
remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE LEVIN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you all
being here. Oftentimes, government regulations are written
after misconduct and negligence lead to disastrous
consequences. For our subcommittee, those consequences are
usually wasted taxpayer dollars and broken promises to our
veterans. I am proud that we have responded by establishing
strong policies to prevent similar abuses in the future.
To be clear, I think there are legitimate complaints
regarding the way VA has implemented some policies, and we are
here today to ask VA to refine some things. However, we are
talking about refining process, not rolling back underlying
protections for veterans. These protections were hard won after
decades of fly by-night predatory schools targeting veterans
for their earned benefits. It is critical that this
subcommittee and VA continue to police bad actors because the
GI Bill is a transition benefit. It is a key component of
reintegrating service members into civil society and closing
the opportunity gaps with their peers who did not serve.
That being said, I have real concerns about how VA is
implementing risk-based surveys, and I can empathize with the
frustration coming from schools. I hope to learn more from VA
today on how the Department plans to move forward with these
protections and utilize risk factors to prioritize reviewing
potential bad actors targeting veterans and their earned
benefits. Congressional intent was that risk-based surveys
should be used when schools have grossly failed at one of the
standards in law, not that they should duplicate compliance
surveys.
I also look forward to hearing from our partners from the
state approving agencies, the schools, the Veterans Service
Organization (VSO) community, and the program administrators. I
see some of them are already here. Glad you all could join us
today. Thank you for the work that you do and for the direct
impact you have on veterans and their families. The feedback
from the people you all represent will help us review and
refine GI Bill processes as we focus on serving veterans and
protecting their earned benefits.
Last, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say I am excited to come
to Wisconsin to join you for a field hearing in the coming
months. I hope the weather is as good in Wisconsin as it was in
San Diego when you came to visit us a few months ago.
Mr. Van Orden. The chances----of that are zero.
Mr. Levin. With that, I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. I will now
introduce our witness panel. Our first witness is Mr. Joseph
Garcia, the Executive Director of Education Services at the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Mr. Garcia is accompanied by
Mr. James Ruhlman, the Deputy Director of Program Management at
Education Services. Our second witness is Mr. Joseph Wescott,
the Legislative Director for the National Association of State
Approving Agencies.
I will ask the witnesses to please stand and raise your
right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Very well. Thank you. Let the record reflect the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Mr. Garcia, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your testimony on behalf of
the Department of Veterans Affairs.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH GARCIA

Mr. Garcia. Good morning, Chairman Van Orden, Ranking
Member Levin, and other members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to discuss VA's education benefit programs.
With me today is James Ruhlman, Deputy Director Program
Management, Education Service. Today, I will highlight VA's
partnership with the State approving agencies, SAAs, and the
National Association of State Approving Agencies, NASAA, to
provide program oversight, which is more important than ever
before. There are more schools, more training programs, and
more options for students.
As part of our oversight efforts, VA works in collaboration
with SAAs to perform risk-based surveys (RBS). Risk-based
surveys have three principal objectives. First, they provide a
mechanism for SAAs to review and mitigate potential fraud,
waste, and abuse by using data and risk factors that are
outside of the normal program approval and compliance survey
process. Second, RBSs allow the SAAs to verify the propriety of
benefits paid to education and training institutions under the
provisions of the laws administered by VA. Third, if risks are
confirmed, corrective action is promptly initiated.
These surveys are an important tool in assuring that
institutions are meeting and maintaining VA's approval
requirements. The Fiscal Year 2023 cooperative agreements
between VA and SAAs requires the completion of 1,308 RBSs. As
of September 13, 2023, 1,195 have been conducted. Due to the
RBS findings, 55 educational and training institutions have
been withdrawn from GI Bill participating in the program.
VA has worked with NASAA to adjust RBS thresholds and
revise the Standard Operating Procedures Guide and worksheets
for Fiscal Year 2024. Improvements in the RBS process are
ongoing. An RBS workgroup was formed by NASAA and Education
Service leadership to discuss best practices, gaps, and other
areas of concern. The workgroup remains committed to continued
improvement, refining the RBS model, guidance, and tools based
on SAA feedback and data driven findings.
I would like to take the opportunity to also highlight VA's
ongoing focus on employment opportunities for veterans. The
Veterans Employment Through Technology Education Courses, or
VET TEC program, provide participants computer training through
select providers to advance careers in high technology
industry. Due to high demand, allocated funds tend to run out
before the end of the fiscal year. However, as participants
exit the program for various reasons, funds are de-obligated
and become available for new enrollments. Past practice was to
wait for the upcoming Fiscal Year to start new enrollment.
However, the program is entering its final year of the 5-year
pilot.
VA wanted to ensure as many veterans as possible had the
opportunity to train through this program. As such, VA
developed and executed a plan and outreach campaign to allow
new VET TEC participants to enroll through the use of the de-
obligated funds. In a matter of days, VA received over 6,000
new applications and over 300 participants are now enrolled.
These numbers exceed what typically occurs in a month, and over
6 million of the 13 million that was de-obligated has been
reallocated. Average salary for the VET TEC graduates is
66,000, employment secured in an average of 57 days. The
success of this initiative is proof of the importance of
keeping the veterans first in mind.
As a final point, I would like to express our thanks to
NASAA and our SAA partners. Their ongoing commitment ensures
accurate and timely delivery of high-quality educational
benefits to veterans and their families. Mr. Chairman, VA looks
forward to continued opportunities of working with Congress to
provide the best possible GI Bill experience for our veterans.
This concludes my testimony. My colleague and I look forward to
answering any questions you or other members of the
subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Joseph Garcia Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Garcia. The written statement
of Mr. Garcia will be entered into the hearing record. Mr.
Wescott, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH WESCOTT

Mr. Wescott. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, I am
pleased to appear before you today on behalf of the 52-member
state agencies of the National Association of State Approving
Agencies. I appreciate the opportunity to provide comments to
this committee pertaining to the impact of bureaucratic red
tape on veterans' education benefits. I am accompanied today by
NASAA President Frank Myers.
Today, 52 SAAs in 49 states, as well as the District of
Columbia and the Territory of Puerto Rico, composed of only 215
personnel, are supervising over 13,000 active facilities and
nearly 220,000 programs. SAAs work in collaboration with the VA
and our other partners, such as National Association of
Veterans' Program Administrators (NAVPA), to promote and
safeguard quality education and training programs for veterans
and to assist the VA in preventing fraud, waste, and abuse.
NASAA believes the primary responsibility and focus of the
SAAs is, and should continue to be, to review, evaluate, and
approve programs at schools and training facilities utilizing
State and Federal criteria. We do this through an approval
process that allows us to carefully evaluate many factors,
including curriculum, instructors, and the facilities
themselves. We take this responsibility seriously and consider
ourselves the gatekeepers of quality by ensuring only quality
programs are approved.
Congress rightly concerned that inadequate oversight
allowed some bad actors to prey on veterans and too often
closed their doors with little warning. Included in the Colmery
Act of 2017, provisions that for the first time allowed SAAs to
perform risk-based survey, NASAA, emboldened by congressional
action and recognizing that compliance surveys alone could not
address quality and risk, approached the Lumina Foundation in
the summer of 2019 for a grant to provide funding to develop
and test an oversight model. The end result was a model that
looked at meaningful metrics, was programmatic in application,
and most importantly, veteran centric. In other words, the
model could determine if schools were offering quality programs
which kept the promise of better jobs and opportunities.
The key to the model's success was that it allowed SAAs to
focus their risk-based survey visits on those institutions most
likely to present risk. This is why a searchable and
comprehensive data base that SAAs can access was and still is
absolutely necessary for success.
State approving agencies are adamant about only approving
quality programs that provide good jobs and a better future for
our veterans and their families. Unfortunately, in recent
years, VA interpretation of certain laws have resulted in
requirements that led to some schools deciding to withdraw from
the GI Bill program or being unable to participate. An example
of this is requiring accredited institutions to offer Title IV
funding. Unfortunately, the requirement as interpreted and
written has resulted in numerous seminary, pastoral, and
religious training programs, as well as several medical
training programs being withdrawn due to a situation where
accredited facilities are unable to participate in the program
but nonaccredited ones are.
Likewise, the VA's interpretation that all institutions,
including small Non-College Degrees (NCDs), apprenticeships,
and On the Job Trainings (OJTs), must undergo hours of
certification training and provide their personal Social
Security numbers to gain access to the new VA certification
software, has resulted in quality training establishments
requesting to be withdrawn.
In the past year, largely due to the leadership of Director
Garcia, communications between the VA and state approving
agencies have improved markedly. Likewise, we sense a renewed
commitment to partnership. However, if we are to be successful
in assuring the long-term success of the GI Bill educational
program, there must be a renewed commitment to this historic
State and Federal partnership. Mr. Chairman, today SAAs
throughout this great Nation are diligently working with our VA
partners, VSO stakeholders, and educational institutions to
protect the quality and integrity of the GI Bill, and to ensure
that our veterans and their families have unfettered success,
access to quality training and educational programs. Thank you
again for this opportunity, and I look forward to answering any
questions that your committee members may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Joseph Wescott Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Wescott. The written
testimony or statement of Mr. Wescott will be entered into the
hearing record. We are now going to proceed to questioning. You
are going to see that clock in front of you. I see the same
thing, and I am not going to ask you, I am going to tell you
that 5 minutes is 5 minutes. That is for me, too. The chair
will now recognize himself for 5 minutes. That is me.
Mr. Garcia, Mr. Wescott has brought up a very salient point
in that we seem to be having a declining number of schools
participating in this program. The stated goal of this program
and your job and mine and all of ours up here is to make sure
we have well educated veterans. Can you like spit ball how many
schools have self-selected out of this program recently?
Mr. Garcia. Sir, I believe what Mr. Wescott is referring to
is Enrollment Manager, which was a release as part of the
Digital GI Bill in March 2023. We were very proactive with the
Customer Experience Group to assist all schools, and it was
very well received by the schools in the transition and we want
to do more things permanently like that going in the future.
It is a requirement to use id.melogin.gov for credentials
to protect that information for both the school certifying
official and the school. We have partnered and listened to
NASAA. We have made an exception for 90 days to accept paper
for OJT and apprentice programs because they may have issues
getting in. We continue to work with them. We will reassess
that after October 31 to see what needs to be done.
Mr. Van Orden. I understand.
Mr. Garcia. We are providing training for them.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Garcia, I understand. Are there more
schools now participating in this program than there were
previously? Are there more or less? There are less. Let us,
listen, man, regulations and programs are designed to make
things better and more fluid and easier so you can accomplish a
task. If the regulation is getting in the way of accomplishing
a mission, then the regulation needs to be looked at. It is
pretty simple.
You guys have implemented a quota system? This is correct.
So, X, so certain schools will have to do X amount of these
risk-based surveys, right? Like school X has to do 10 of these
and you assign that number. Is that correct?
Mr. Garcia. We assign assignments of risk-based surveys and
other supervisory visits to the states, yes, sir. That is being
finalized now. That will go out effective 1 October.
Mr. Van Orden. I get it. You were in the service. I respect
your service, Mr. Garcia. You know that you send troops out to
the pumpkin patch and you say, bring me back 10 pumpkins, they
are bringing back 10 pumpkins. If you tell them to go out and
pick pumpkins, they are going to come back with 100, right? My
concern with establishing quotas is this, if you say school
access to do 10 of these risk-based surveys, they are doing 10,
when in fact they may only have to do nine or they should be
doing 11.
When you artificially impose these things on these
different groups that have, you know, the real touch with their
students and they understand the vibe that is going on there, I
think that we are not serving our veterans well because we are
either putting on too much an administrative burden on these
institutions. Or on the other side, we are not making sure that
we are preventing as much fraud as possible.
I am going to ask you to really rethink what you are doing
and have a much more open line of communications with these
schools concerning the risk-based surveys. That we had the
chance to talk about how these are implemented. You got 24
hours to do this and that. I want to continue to engage with
you and your staff and the schools to make sure that we work
this out appropriately.
Mr. Garcia. Yes.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Wescott, I have 1 minute, 9 seconds. In
your testimony, you indicated that NASAA and the Education
Council undertook the pilot designed by convening an Advisory
Council of 22 members representing student veterans, state
approving agencies, schools, accreditors, states, and other
experts. You also stated that the Advisory Council members
developed a model of oversight. Did the VA utilize this model
that you developed or some of its tenant in developing the
risk-based surveys, to your knowledge?
Mr. Wescott. They did not utilize the model as we developed
it. Over the course of a year, they revised many elements
within the model. Of course, we did not get a data base, which
is critical, as I said earlier, to implementing that model, you
know. That has been a personal concern of mine because I was in
this from the beginning.
Mr. Van Orden. You guys did a whole bunch of work, compiled
a whole bunch of stuff. You gave it to some people and they did
not act on it.
Mr. Wescott. Well, and we gave them a finished product,
basically.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Wescott. That worked, that we had data, that we had
proven worked.
Mr. Van Orden. Very well. Let us try that again. With that,
my time has expired. I now recognize Ranking Member Levin for 5
minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Garcia, the
Isakson-Roe Act set forth eight factors that would prompt a
risk-based survey. Can you explain how VA is utilizing those
eight factors?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir. Two of those would trigger a risk-
based survey.
Mr. Levin. Could you explain? I will repeat the question.
Could you explain how VA is utilizing those eight factors?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir. Like you say, they are identified and
then based on the model and what looks like a potential risk
association with the school, then if two of those factors are
triggered, again, things like rapid increase in veteran
enrollment, 90/10 violation, 85/15, there is a list that you
know of. If at least two of those factors are identified or
triggered, then that would be a risk-based survey.
Mr. Levin. Got it. You brought up rapid increase in
enrollment. Has VA selected the school with the largest
enrollment increase over the last year?
Mr. Garcia. Sir, I am not sure how the numbers play out,
but you are right. We do not want to have a school that went
from four to eight, right? That is a rapid increase of over 30
percent, the same as a larger school that had a 35 percent
increase. We evaluate based on that information.
Mr. Levin. It would follow that if you are using the
factors in Isakson-Roe that you would have in fact reviewed
that school?
Mr. Garcia. We would have looked at the information to
start, but then there is judgment by the SAAs to determine if
in fact that school had visited. There, to me there would be
some qualitative data to assess.
Mr. Levin. Okay. Maybe you can take that question back and
figure it out. Isakson-Roe also set forth the requirement that
educational programs need to either participate in the
Department of Education Title IV programs or receive a waiver
from VA. How does that waiver process work?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir. As you know, we want Title IV and GI
Bill delivery benefits to be used, right? If not, then the
veteran does not have access to Federal loans, Federal grants,
that kind of thing. If they do not have access to Title IV, it
might be more expensive private loans. We would grant a waiver
if the school could not participate for whatever reason, in
Title IV. That would generate a waiver. We would not generate a
waiver just because that school does not want to, okay? That is
the difference.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Wescott, can I get your input on the waiver
process? How you think it is going?
Mr. Wescott. Well, I, of course, disagree with that. I
think that SAAS, when we approve programs, are very careful to
make sure that those programs are quality. I will give you a
quick example, sir, and that is in North Carolina, we had to
withdraw Reform Theological Seminary because they simply did
not wish to, you know, be involved with Title IV. A fine
seminary, a seminary that had been approved for many years.
There was no reason for that to be the case, and there should
have been a waiver granted.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Garcia, I will turn back to you. We have
heard concerns from schools regarding a lack of transparency
with the process by which complaints submitted via the GI Bill
School Feedback tool are posted to the GI Bill comparison tool.
First, the statute requires VA to publish, and I quote, ``only
feedback that conforms with criteria for relevancy that the
Secretary shall determine.'' Can you please describe this
internal review process and most importantly, who is
responsible?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir. The complaints are reviewed and
validated before they are submitted for the comparison tool.
That is something that, in fact, James' section, Mr. Ruhlman's
section looks at, and then they are provided to another section
that actually uploads them. If there is an error or mistake,
and that could happen, I have gotten emails from a school that
says, hey, looks like that was posted erroneously, we deal with
it and take it down if necessary. We are open to if something
like that occurred by mistake.
Mr. Levin. Who is responsible?
Mr. Garcia. I would say I am responsible.
Mr. Levin. You are responsible. Okay, good. Second, the
statute requires VA to allow schools, and I quote, ``to verify
feedback and address issues regarding feedback before the
feedback is published.'' Same question what is the process and
who is responsible?
Mr. Garcia. It is going to be the same process. It would be
me.
Mr. Levin. You are responsible?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir, I am responsible.
Mr. Levin. All right, that is good to know. You heard it
here. Another question for you with the time I have left.
Schools are given just a few days to prepare for risk-based
surveys. Is this an appropriate timeline? Should the timeline
be the same for all risk-based surveys? Or should higher risk
or lower risk cases change the timeline?
Mr. Garcia. There is a different timeline across compliance
surveys, risk-based surveys, and targeted risk-based surveys.
Targeted risk-based surveys, there is a known issue there, and
that is the one that could be one day or less. I think there is
legislation to make it 2 days, but they are quick notice on a
targeted risk-based surveys where there are known issues to
address.
Mr. Levin. Thanks for your time. I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. The chair
now recognizes Mr. Franklin from the great State of Florida for
5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member.
Appreciate you holding the hearing today. Thank you, gentlemen,
for spending time with us this morning. Kind of reiterating
what they had stated in opening comments. This is about
veterans. This is about how to improve the product that we
deliver. We are all inside this room deliberating it today, but
this is all about those who are not in the room, so we keep
that in mind.
You know, we will often put in bureaucratic measures with
good reason. Over time, it is inevitable, you need, at a
minimum, course corrections. Sometimes, if there are problems,
we need to really take a deeper look at those.
Kind of piggybacking on that last question, I did want to
ask Mr. Garcia, the risk-based surveys my understanding are
limited to only providing one business days' notice. Is that
correct as it stands now?
Mr. Garcia. Sir, that is on targeted risk-based surveys?
Mr. Franklin. Yes, targeted risk, okay.
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Franklin. The idea there, I guess, is the suspicion is
they are doing something wrong. You do not want to have them
cover their tracks, so you want to catch them in the act?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. Of the risk-based surveys that you have
done, how many did you say you have done so far this year?
Mr. Garcia. Close to 1,200.
Mr. Franklin. How many of those are targeted versus just
routine RBSs?
Mr. Garcia. Targeted risk-based surveys, about 167 have
been completed.
Mr. Franklin. Okay.
Mr. Garcia. Versus the roughly 1,200 for the risk-based
surveys.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. But even the rest of those still have a
day's notice for an RBS?
Mr. Garcia. They should have more days' notice on an RBS,
not the targeted risk-based surveys.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. Mr. Wescott, how many typically do you
see for just a routine risk-based survey?
Mr. Wescott. Well, I can tell you, sir, when we built that
model, it was at least 30 days, because the idea was that they
would send us the information that we would review advertising,
financial stability, and those things prior to us getting
onsite, so that when we got onsite, we could look at things and
talk to veterans that were necessary.
Mr. Franklin. So, in practice though, are they getting 30
days?
Mr. Wescott. I am sorry?
Mr. Franklin. You said when designed they were supposed to
give 30 days, but in practice----
Mr. Wescott. Right.
Mr. Franklin [continuing]. is that what routine risk-based
surveys are getting now, 30 days?
Mr. Wescott. Sadly, they are sometimes less than that.
Mr. Franklin. Like how much less?
Mr. Wescott. Twenty-something.
Mr. Franklin. Because really, an institution, any
organization that is not anticipating this basically has to
stop in their tracks and accommodate that so, that is----
Mr. Wescott. It should be 30 days.
Mr. Franklin. Should be, okay. The 2023 cooperative
agreement says that VA and SAAs must complete 1,308 RBSs. That
is a very specific number. Mr. Garcia, can you tell me how you
arrive at that specific a number?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir. Every year we look at, again, the
risk factors, the data base that shows past risk-based surveys
to kind of predict what we are going to look at next year. I
will say that for 2024, we are looking at about a 40 percent
drop in risk-based surveys compared to the previous year. We
are looking at things like a supervisory visit, a two-for-one
ratio. If you do two supervisory visits, that would count as a
risk-based survey. We are working to try and determine what the
optimal number is.
Mr. Franklin. That actually leads me into another question.
We have gotten some feedback from those who are getting these
inspections, these surveys, that oftentimes they feel that it
really should be a compliance inspection, but instead the RBSs
are being used instead. Would you agree with that? If we are
changing the system now, are we changing because the system is
so much better out there, or are you just overstaffed and
overworked and it is let us just conveniently cut the target?
Mr. Garcia. By statute, VA has to do the compliance survey
every 2 years for a school that has more than 20, right? So
that is by statute, we have to do the compliance survey. Then,
of course, the new statute with Isakson-Roe mandates risk-based
surveys either for a reactive notice of action, government
action, right, that would prompt a survey. Or again, the
proactive approach around the risk factors that might lead to a
potential fraud, waste, and abuse, or a situation like that.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. Mr. Wescott, of those who have dropped
out, in your experience, how frequently is it that someone
drops out who has been subjected to one of these RBSs that
really did not find any major compliance issues, but they
dropped out anyway?
Mr. Wescott. We often lose schools due to because
scheduling, having compliance and risk-based survey coming in
too close together, those egregious administrative
requirements. I can get you that number, sir, and I will.
Mr. Franklin. Okay.
Mr. Wescott. It is not a large number. I can tell you I did
find we only have 2 weeks now to notify schools. We need to
double that on risk-based surveys.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. All right. I think that would be fair.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Franklin. I now recognize my
dear friend, Mrs. Ramirez from the great State of Illinois.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, chairman and ranking member, for
holding today's hearing. I also want to thank the witnesses for
joining us today to talk about a critical issue, which is
education and how we protect and we deliver on our promise of
quality education for our veterans. Over the past several
months, this subcommittee has convened on multiple occasions to
discuss how vital education is for our veterans adapting to
their life after service. I believe that education is one of
the many pathways toward self-improvement, self-sufficiency,
and provides communities the opportunity to better live their
lives economically, socially, and professionally.
That is why it is essential that when schools are being
evaluated, the systems and processes in place are intentional
about targeting bad actors like these for-profit colleges that
see student veterans as a way to pad their pockets rather than
seeing them as people, members of our community with dreams and
aspirations. It is why I am so proud of my bill, H.R. 1767, the
Student Veteran Benefits Restoration Act that passed through
this committee with bipartisan support a couple of months ago.
This bill will restore the GI education benefits for student
veterans who are wrongfully defrauded by for-profit schools.
While my legislation when signed into law will provide relief
for many veterans, we still have to get to the root of the
issue.
As part of providing student veterans a quality education,
I want to ask a couple of questions regarding the complaints.
Mr. Garcia, can the VA explain why information about schools
that have closed or lost approval disappears from the
comparison tool without explanation? Then the follow up to that
would be, what steps are you taking to correct the issue?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, ma'am. On the comparison tool question, as
far as impact on a school that might have withdrawn from GI
Bill benefits, you know, participation, I have to take that
back to find that out. I can take that for the record.
Ms. Ramirez. You will go ahead and take back the question
about why information about schools that have been closed
disappear from the comparison tool, is that correct?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. All right. Well, I guess a follow up to
that is, how does the VA plan to provide prospective student
veterans with access to a school's history of complaints? I
particularly am interested in knowing, especially for
information that has hit beyond those most recent 2 years,
which is obviously crucial for them making an informed
decision.
Mr. Garcia. Yes, ma'am. The comparison tool, I think,
currently tracks 2 years. There have been requests to have more
years, 7, 10 years of information. Coming from a higher
education background myself before taking this job at three
different colleges and universities, I think we should take a
look at that, because if it goes back that far, let us say 10
years, for example, all complaints I have heard as a
recommendation, could that not potentially hurt the veteran
because that is old, dated complaints that have been resolved.
I think we need to look at both sides of that.
Ms. Ramirez. What would you say would be the right number
of years?
Mr. Garcia. I like 2 years because I think that is fairly
current. Presidents and administrations turn over. That is my
experience. If you had something that is 10 years old and that
was a problem, it is likely that that administration changed
over. I think we need to be careful that you are hurting the
veteran by having a complaint that had probably been addressed.
Ms. Ramirez. When a student is looking into the schools and
they are looking at complaints, is it easy for them to be able
to access information that determines that these issues have
been resolved, therefore, making it easier for them to make a
decision if this is the right kind of school for them to go to?
Mr. Garcia. I think that is part of it, right? The
comparison tool shows a lot of information about what is
offered, Yellow Ribbon, just not only the complaints that are
part of the comparison tool, side by side in terms of tuition
and fees and graduation rates, that information comes over from
Department of Education. It is more than just complaints that I
think a prospective student would look at.
Ms. Ramirez. A good summary of the school.
Mr. Garcia. Yes.
Ms. Ramirez. Let me ask you now another question which is a
little different. This is in regards to nonstudent complaints.
Has the VA received anonymous or non-student complaints against
a school? If it has, how are these handled?
Mr. Garcia. What kind of complaint, ma'am?
Ms. Ramirez. A nonstudent complaint. So, anonymous or
nonstudent complaints against a school. This is not a student.
Perhaps it is----
Mr. Garcia. Oh.
Ms. Ramirez [continuing]. a parent or a friend or someone
that had some interaction with the school.
Mr. Garcia. It could be anonymous, right?
Ms. Ramirez. Correct.
Mr. Ruhlman. I can answer that question, Congresswoman. We
can and do accept both anonymous complaints as well as
complaints from third parties against schools. We do forward
that to----
Mr. Van Orden. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Ramirez. I will follow up with you. Thank you,
Chairman.
Mr. Van Orden. Absolutely. I now recognize my friend Mr.
Mrvan from the great State of Indiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mrvan. Mr. Wescott, one of the concerns you raised in
your testimony is the increased administrative burden placed on
school certifying officials. How much is each individual
utilizing the GI Bill benefits worth to a school?
Mr. Wescott. Wow, I am not sure that I can give you that
exact figure, sir, but I can tell you it is a very valuable
benefit, especially underneath Chapter 33. I mean, that is
basically tuition and fees. You are talking about 1,000-plus,
you know, for living, basic housing allowance or basic living
allowance. You are talking about 1,000 for books. It is great
for the school when you sign up a veteran under Chapter 33 or
35.
Mr. Mrvan. If that is the case, there is a revenue benefit,
why do schools not employ more certifying officials?
Mr. Wescott. Well, and I am glad you bring that up, sir,
because it is a concern of ours as well, and SAAs have gotten
involved in that in the past. On the next panel, my friend, the
president of NAVPA, will bring some information about that. The
bottom line is lack of understanding sometimes of the true
benefit of veterans, you know, who is the president? You know,
there should be at least a school certifying official for, you
know, 100 veterans or something, 200? I do not know. We have
done surveys. The bottom line is I do not understand why they
do not engage more.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay, thank you. Then the follow up if you could
finish the answer for my colleague's question.
Mr. Ruhlman. Yes, thank you. We do accept anonymous and
third-party complaints. Those are not published to the GI Bill
comparison tool. One of the things that we do generally is
ensure that the individual was attending a school. Really that
is more of an informational type thing. However, we do share
that information with our Federal agency partners, who can also
search our data as well as data from other Federal agencies
that is submitted to the Federal Trade Commission Consumer
Sentinel data base. We do accept that and we do share that.
However, if we cannot validate that someone was a student, then
there is really no way to identify or validate or remediate it.
Mr. Mrvan. Very quickly, what do you believe are the
majority of the anonymous complaints?
Mr. Ruhlman. I do not know off the top of my head. We would
have to research that. Anonymous complaints tend to be a small
portion of what we receive.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. I am going to give a hypothetical. In this
instance, a Commercial Driver's License (CDL) school in Indiana
is charging four times the amount for a GI participant than
they would charge for a regular participant. Does that fall
under the fraud, waste, and abuse category or are there
exceptions to higher costs, because this has been brought to my
attention. Same CDL license, four to five times the cost for a
veteran GI Bill. If someone off the street who does not have
the GI Bill pays significantly less. Where does that fall and
how is that investigated?
Mr. Ruhlman. Thank you for that question. That would be
illegal. The law does require that program charges are the same
for both GI Bill beneficiaries as well as non-GI Bill
beneficiaries. That would be an overcharge of VA benefits. Even
if we receive an anonymous complaint of that, because of the
egregious nature, that is something that would generally, while
not treated as a normal complaint, would cause us to take a
look at that school, share that with our SAA partners, as well
as Federal law enforcement partners. That is actually how a
number of sort of high-profile prosecutions, Federal
prosecutions, have started out, is because of anonymous
complaints.
Mr. Mrvan. Is there an educational process to the veteran
who is using the benefit to look out for these types of things?
Mr. Ruhlman. I do not think I understand the question.
Mr. Mrvan. If I am a veteran and I am signing up for these
classes or a school and I recognize myself that something is
more expensive or there is something illegal, is there any kind
of toolkit available to the veteran who is going out to apply
for these classes of what is and is not legal and what their
rights are?
Mr. Ruhlman. No, sir, not that I am aware of.
Mr. Mrvan. Yes, sir, 16 seconds.
Mr. Wescott. I can tell you that in North Carolina, if we
were to learn of such, that school would be immediately
suspended and withdrawn. In the catalogs for the schools,
particularly truck driving schools, there should be a statement
in there about the SAA and getting in touch with them if they
have concerns.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. We are going to proceed to a second round of
questioning because I know that you guys you need some more in-
depth answers, as do I. We are going to do that. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia, again, thank you for answering so many of these
questions. We really have to talk about this error rate because
I am concerned about it. We have been getting, us, the
subcommittee, and our staff, have been getting complaints from
VA employees about the extra workload of fixing errors in
automated claims. I got to do this automated, air quotations. I
am concerned about the government paying for claims that are
not correctly automated. I understand that the automated error
rate is nearly 50 percent. Is that correct?
Mr. Garcia. Sir, I had 40 percent.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Well, you know, a 40 percent error
rate is not good. I understand that the automated error rate is
nearly 40 percent. Is that correct?
Mr. Garcia. From reviews that I have seen, yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I understand that you commissioned and
received a report that studies automation in the Regional
Processing Offices (RPOs). Is that correct?
Mr. Garcia. As part of their review, yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Garcia. We asked them to do that.
Mr. Van Orden. Very well. I understand that this is called
the RPO Report. Do you commit to providing the RPO Report to
the subcommittee by the end of this week?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir, be glad to do that.
Mr. Van Orden. Dang. Thanks, man. Mr. Wescott, it was
really interesting, can you elaborate on your testimony in
reference to faith-based schools and their issues with the 10/
15 waivers for religious institutions?
Mr. Wescott. Referring to the Title IV?
Mr. Van Orden. That is correct, sir. I mean, this is
something that the general public needs to understand.
Mr. Wescott. Yes, exactly. Many of these schools just do
not see the need to offer Title IV, nor do they want to go
through the process of engaging with that. They do not really
want the, you know, the Federal oversight into their religious
instruction. These are, like I said, Reform Theological, we are
not talking about schools in storefronts or church basements.
We are talking about legitimate schools that are finding other
sources to provide for their students and therefore see no
reason to engage with Title IV.
Mr. Van Orden. I mean, just as a side note, my grandson
goes to kindergarten in a church basement. Just throwing that
out there. Those are valid, too.
Mr. Wescott. Yes, that was in no way to discredit.
Mr. Van Orden. I know. I get you, man. Hey, do you think
this is onerous? Are our veterans not able to attend
religiously affiliated schools due to this onerous process, in
your opinion?
Mr. Wescott. Yes, I really do. I mean, the bottom line is
we had a school call in North Carolina and say we would like to
get accredited. We said, well, if you do, you are going to have
to go for Title IV. They said, well, forget know. You know,
they do not want to spend thousands to get accreditation. That
is the wrong answer. We should encourage accreditation and we
have the mechanisms in place to make sure that those are
quality programs.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. What we are doing is what we do not
want to do.
Mr. Wescott. Exactly, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Let us just not do that, man. Let us
do great things.
Mr. Wescott. Totally agree.
Mr. Van Orden. Yes, can you suggest a fix for this, please?
Mr. Wescott. Well, yes, my personal preference would be to
do away with that requirement.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Wescott. The second fix would be to find some realistic
waiver that will allow those schools to be granted a waiver
that does not involve applying for Title IV. I mean, you know,
as long as SAAs say these are quality institutions, let us
trust the SAAs. We have got the results from the schools and
drive on. Requiring them to apply for and have Title IV is just
unnecessary.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, sir. Mr. Garcia, can you noodle
on this? Think about this with, again, the stated intent of our
purpose here and your purpose really is to make sure that our
veterans have the appropriate amount of educational benefits
that they have earned. Can you sit down and can you guys talk
about this, please?
Mr. Garcia. Sir, but if, again, if the purpose is to
provide support for veterans, if removing Title IV, though,
removes financial aid that they could get, right? If we have
schools choosing okay, I do not want to do Title IV, now you
are limiting what veterans can get in terms of the educational
goal pursuit, right? I think we need to look at that as well,
look at the impact on the school. What is the impact on the
student veteran? By removing Title IV opportunities, then you
are driving veterans to private loans. They are more expensive.
That actually hurts the veteran. They need to look at it both
sides.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Garcia, I really do not believe that is
what Mr. Wescott was saying. I would just leave you with this.
It is just not that, you know, cut and dry. This is not a
conundrum. It certainly is a quandary. I would like you to work
on it with Mr. Wescott. With that, my time has expired. The
chair now recognizes Ranking Member Levin for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to turn back to
last Congress when we passed legislation to resolve issues that
foreign based students were having using their GI Bill. What we
are hearing is that these students, some of them anyway, are
still having delays having their schools approved for the GI
Bill. Can you provide us an update on where things stand
ensuring foreign students can use their GI Bill?
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir. A couple of things at foreign
schools. One is that we are also allowing for Enrollment
Manager, paper based for them, just like the OJT and
apprenticeship. That helps there. Another improvement is around
the direct payment. We actually came up with a solution where
the schools were not getting timely electronic funds transfer
payments because there was a requirement to use a U.S. bank
account. We found a way to get around that recently. That
allows the payments to go through electronic means. Again, the
enrollment part of accepting paper at least until October 31,
so we can reevaluate Enrollment Manager participation.
Mr. Levin. I appreciate that very much. Also, to your
earlier comments about taking responsibility, I really
appreciate that you stood up and you said that you take
responsibility. It is really critically important. We will hear
from our next panel as well about, you know, the work that they
are trying to do to just make sure that we are all trying to
share this burden to prevent bad actors. I think everybody
wants the same thing here. We are going to continue to hold you
to account and appreciate the input of our next panel as well.
With that, I will yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. The chair
now recognizes my dear friend from the great State of Florida,
Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Mrvan is not
here now, but I did want to add just to kind of put a point on
a point he was making earlier about the economics for schools.
I would just argue if the schools are voting with their feet
and not participating, then for whatever reasons, and there may
be varied reasons, the juice is not worth the squeeze for them.
You know, schools are facing declining enrollments. They need
students. They need every opportunity for revenue they can get.
If they are not doing it, that needs to be a significant
warning to us. As you, Mr. Garcia, as you had said in earlier
things, we will find workarounds. We do not want to compromise
our standards. I do think we need to sit down and think really
hard about how can we make this more palatable to the
institutions because we need them to serve the veterans.
Mr. Wescott, we talked about the religious institutions,
but whether it is a design, whether it is the way the system is
designed, or if it is just misperception, sometimes the
nonprofits and some of the online institutions feel like they
are being unfairly targeted. Now, anybody that gets targeted is
going to feel like they are being picked on. I understand that.
Do you think either purposefully or inadvertently, the way the
system is constructed, and actually, this question will be for
both of you, because we have time. Is the system set up to
unfairly penalize online and nonprofit institutions?
Mr. Wescott. Well, thank you for that question,
Congressman. I would consider it inadvertently. I do have some
memory of when this requirement was placed into law. The
concern was primarily of those schools that lost Title IV would
then lose their approval. Not that, you know, that we would
require them to have Title IV. At least that was my
interpretation of what we were doing in the earlier days on
this legislation. I would hope, and I believe it is
inadvertent, but it certainly needs to be addressed----
Mr. Franklin. Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Wescott [continuing]. because you are 100 percent
correct.
Mr. Garcia. Sir, real quick, I think you hit on perception.
The term religious schools is not in the statutory language at
all, right?
Mr. Franklin. Right.
Mr. Garcia. It is all accredited programs have to
participate under the statute.
Mr. Franklin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garcia. We would be willing to take a look at it,
though.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. That is all I have, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Franklin. I want to thank
everybody. The witnesses are now excused.
Please stick around. I think you are going to get some good
institutional knowledge from the next panel. Again, thank you
very much. We will adjourn shortly while we get readjusted
here.
[Recess.]
Mr. Van Orden. Will the witnesses for the second panel
please be seated? On our second panel, we will be hearing from
the following witnesses: Mrs. Anne Meehan, Assistant Vice
President of Government Relations at the American Council on
Education (ACE), Dr. Jan Del Signore, President of the National
Association of Veterans' Program Administrators. Mr. Will
Hubbard, Vice President for Veterans and Military Policy at
Veterans Education Success, and Mr. Joe Rasmussen, Director of
the University of Wisconsin Veterans Services at the University
of Wisconsin, Madison. I want to welcome you here for this
panel, and I am going to ask you to stand and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Let the record reflect the witnesses have all answered in
the affirmative. Mrs. Meehan, you are now recognized for 5
minutes to deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ANNE MEEHAN

Ms. Meehan. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify. My name is Anne Meehan with the American Council on
Education. ACE represents 1,700 public and private colleges and
universities and related associations. Colleges and
universities recognize the important role that VA plays in the
oversight of education benefits. Congress has made significant
investments in these programs, and it is critical that
safeguards are in place to protect against waste, fraud, and
abuse, both to protect taxpayer dollars and to ensure veterans
are receiving a high-quality education.
At the same time, in our effort to root out problems and
identify bad actors, we must be mindful that we do not
inadvertently create unnecessary burdens on institutions that
are serving veterans well. Risk-based surveys, when done right,
provide a valuable and efficient oversight tool that allows
regulators to focus limited resources on the areas of greatest
concern. While we commend VA for its efforts developing the
survey, we believe VA's model reflects a misunderstanding of
how risk-based surveys are intended to work. Moreover, we are
concerned that in several respects, VA's effort may be
inconsistent with congressional intent.
In recent months, ACE has heard several concerns from
institutions regarding VA's risk-based survey. In general,
these concerns fall into three areas. One, concerns related to
the triggers VA uses to select an institution for a survey;
two, concerns about the information that must be provided once
selected for a survey; and three, concerns about information
required as part of the Financial Soundness Review.
First, regarding the triggers. Over the past year, VA has
selected more than 1,200 institutions of higher learning and
more than 600 colleges and universities for a risk-based
survey. Given the large number of institutions selected, we
questioned whether VA's model is sufficiently targeted to
institutions posing a substantial risk of noncompliance. Many
campuses report that they are unaware of the reason why they
were selected for a risk-based survey. For colleges and
universities who know why they were selected, the reason given
is often limited and technical in nature, and not one under any
reasonable standard that would be indicative of increased risk.
For example, some campuses were selected based on a failure
to satisfy VA's prior flawed interpretation of the 85/15 Rule,
an interpretation which has subsequently been corrected through
legislation. Some campuses were selected based on a single
complaint. In one case, the complaint was decades old and had
never been verified. In another case, the complaint was from a
nonstudent. Some were selected based on a modest increase in
the number of veterans enrolled in a program, which was common
as we emerged from the pandemic. Finally, some campuses were
selected due to nothing more than a standard tuition increase.
None of these reasons are ones that suggest a heightened risk
of noncompliance by the institution.
I note that we did not hear from any institutions that were
chosen for a risk-based survey based on one of the events
listed in Section 3673(e) of the law. However, we strongly
agree that any of those events should trigger a risk-based
survey.
Second, we have heard concerns about the breadth of the
information required by VA's survey and the limited time given
to respond. One large university reports providing tens of
thousands of documents in response to VA's request.
Coordinating this response across a university is a massive
undertaking, requiring assistance from campus officials in
multiple offices. While most offices are happy to help, others
may not understand the immediacy or importance of this work,
particularly when it requires them to drop other mission
critical work in order to comply. As one example of the breadth
of the required information, campuses are required to provide
copies of any complaint received by the institution over a 3-
year period. Institutions are instructed to provide all
complaints, even complaints about the dining hall. More
problematic, institutions are required to allow the SAA to
monitor a class in order to determine the quality of the
instruction. While this requirement is well intentioned, it
misses the mark, particularly at a large research university,
where it is viewed as an inappropriate intrusion into academic
matters.
Third, we have heard concerns about VA's required financial
soundness review, which appears to confuse the financial audit
information that for-profit institutions report with financial
audit information that public and nonprofit institutions
typically report.
To summarize, we support risk-based surveys and we believe
they are an important oversight tool. However, we believe that
VA's model needs further work to ensure it is meeting its
intended purpose. We hope that Congress will help VA refocus
its efforts on the institutions that pose a serious risk of
noncompliance while shielding good institutions from an
unnecessary compliance burden. We stand ready to assist in
these efforts. Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your
questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Anne Meehan Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mrs. Meehan. The written
statement of Mrs. Meehan will be entered into the hearing
record. Dr. Signore. I am pronouncing that correct, are not I?
Signore, right? Dr. Signore, you are now recognized for 5
minutes to deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JAN DEL SIGNORE

Ms. Del Signore. Thank you. Good morning and thank you for
the opportunity to speak today representing the National
Association of Veterans Program Administrators, or NAVPA. My
name is Dr. Jan Del Signore, U.S. Air Force retired veteran.
Today I am here to speak to you as the NAVPA President on
behalf of the men and women who are conducting the daily
operations of certifying and administering the GI Bill
benefits.
NAVPA is the only national organization comprised of SCOs,
school certifying officials, and school administrators working
to deliver educational opportunities for veterans since 1975.
Our members have seen the SCOs--have been the SCOs who are in
the trenches with boots on the ground serving student veterans
daily while trying to maintain compliance. I am here to discuss
two concerns: risk-based surveys and the impact of increased
duties placed on the SCO.
Our primary concern today is the risk-based survey, RBS,
and the criteria the VA is using to select schools they deem as
at risk. Schools welcome accountability and are proud to
maintain compliance with reasonable regulation. However, there
has been an unreasonable burden placed upon the institutions
through an excess of well-intended oversight. NAVPA conducted a
survey of SCOs nationwide and discovered most of the schools
selected for our risk-based survey were for minor or unclear
reasons. The top reasons these schools were identified for an
RBS are student complaints, unknown criteria, an increase in
student population, or an unwarranted 85/15 violation. There
are examples nationwide of RBS being deployed against all types
of institutions, including public and accredited schools.
Several schools reported they received an RBS based on an old
student complaint that was addressed by the institution and
closed. Other schools reported they were identified for an RBS
from a complaint that was never received by the institution and
deemed as invalid by the VA. One school reported receiving
complaints because of benefit processing errors by the VA, not
the school, yet the school still had to respond and an RBS was
triggered.
Some institutions reported that they had no idea why they
were identified for an RBS, as the state approving agency, SAA,
did not or could not explain why this RBS was being conducted.
A third top reason schools reported they were selected for
an RBS was due to an increase in student population during the
COVID recovery period when students were returning back to
campus. The fourth top reason included schools with a 35
percent exemption criteria for 85/15, as they had programs
suspended by the VA during spring 2022, with no veterans
enrolled because of the calculations implemented by the VA. The
VA introduced these new methods during the pandemic and caused
many programs to be erroneously suspended nationwide.
None of these situations confirmed a school was at risk to
close, nor were they guilty of exploiting or misusing veterans'
benefits. NAVPA recommends correcting these measures by
establishing an Advisory Council of Higher Education Officials,
the SAA, and the VA to develop a model using public data to
identify criteria that would trigger an RBS. In the spirit of
today's hearing, less is more. The actual key players should be
developing the criteria that would meet the intent of Congress.
NAVPA respectfully requests outside agencies who have never
worked in higher ed and have no understanding of daily
operations of an institution not be involved, as this often
leads to misleading advice, oftentimes a lack of experience.
Our next concern involves the increased duties placed on
SCOs. There have been several changes implemented by the VA on
how to administer GI Bill benefits. This includes additional
requirements for a catalog approval, less time to prepare for
compliance reviews, and return of funding to the VA. Due to the
insurmountable requirements for schools to obtain approval and
maintain compliance requirements with limited time for
preparation, institutions nationwide have withdrawn from
administering the GI Bill because of the increased workload and
regulatory demands. These schools include first responders,
Emergency Medical Technicians (EMTs), police and fire
academies, truck driving schools, and religious orders. This
creates an economic disparity for the veteran when trying to
find needed instructional resources, but unable to use their GI
Bill benefits for training.
NAVPA would like to see legislation that would give relief
of the many burdensome tasks placed on accredited institutions
and recodify Public Law 117-333 to allow the institution
sufficient time to prepare for reviews and provide a reasonable
response. Additional information can be found in our written
testimony. I thank you and I welcome your questions today.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jan Del Signore Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Dr. Del Signore.
Ms. Del Signore. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. The written testimony of Dr. Del Signore
will be entered into the hearing record. Mr. Hubbard, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF WILL HUBBARD

Mr. Hubbard. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin,
members of the subcommittee, we thank you for the opportunity
to provide testimony before the subcommittee today. Veterans
Education Success is a nonprofit organization with the mission
of advancing higher education success for veterans, service
members, and military families, and protecting the integrity
and promise of the GI Bill and other Federal education
programs.
Drawing from our team's experience and direct interactions
with student veterans, their families, and stakeholders, we
submit our observations for the subcommittee's consideration.
We would like to express our general gratitude to the
leadership and staff in Education Service at the Department of
Veterans Affairs. Their collaboration on many of these issues
and commitment to serving veterans are worth highlighting
specifically. However, we also feel it is important to
highlight areas where we believe there is room for improvement.
Since the very first GI Bill in 1944, there have been scammers
looking to take advantage of veterans' benefits. In 1952, a
House Select Committee led by Congressman Olin Teague of Texas
exposed the trend of predatory schools targeting veterans for
their GI Bill benefits. In 2012, the Senate Health Committee
issued an alarming report that found widespread deception by
predatory schools.
Given the issues of the past decade and prior, including
numerous sudden collapses of risky schools, Congress passed
several significant bipartisan laws. These laws aim to combat
fraud by bad actor schools and programs ultimately protecting
veterans' benefits and taxpayer dollars. This includes the
Isakson-Roe Act, the authorizing legislation for risk-based
surveys. Risk-based surveys are important both for protecting
veterans and taxpayers and for ensuring the efficient use of
the limited resources of VA and state approving agencies.
However, our testimony, along with our colleagues at this
table, highlights a fundamental point, VA's current approach
does not match the clear direction of Congress. As our
colleagues at ACE point out, VA is currently selecting an
overly broad set of schools for risk-based surveys, in contrast
with what the statute had contemplated. Specifically, Congress
established five triggers for risk-based surveys. Yet, VA
continues to launch risk-based surveys even in the absence of
one of these five triggers. As the University of Wisconsin
rightly notes, increased enrollment is not a mandatory trigger,
but instead listed in another section of the statute, which
lays out the issues that the SAAs should consider during
review, if and only if such review has been triggered by one of
the five mandatory issues.
We also strongly support NASSA's comments that the VA
should follow the pilot model and implement the data base,
which would result in a dramatically smaller number of schools
being selected for review. In addition to risk-based surveys,
persistent red tape, and VA statutory misinterpretations
continue to hinder the potential of veterans' education
benefits. As outlined in our written testimony, this includes
first, school closures and GI Bill restoration policies, where
VA continues failing to implement unambiguous statutory
guidelines even after the committee clarified them in the Vets
Credit Act. Second, a lack of necessary transparency on the GI
Bill comparison tool. This harms veterans who should rightfully
expect transparent information in their school search process.
Third, VA's refusal to exempt Marines under the Excess Leave
program from a newly revised interpretation, despite the legal
obligation to do so.
We believe there is a pattern to these issues. Time and
time again, this body passes thoughtful, well positioned
legislation based on stakeholder input with the intention of
supporting veterans and their goals. Then VA executes a
surprising interpretation, unsupported by law and inconsistent
with congressional intent. Couple that with some schools under
resourcing the appropriate offices on campus, and the result is
that the laws put in place to safeguard hard earned benefits
are not being properly executed. We hope to continue our
efforts in collaboration with the VA and the committed people
here in this room who simply want to do right by veterans, for
they and their families should be VA's one and only focus.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Will Hubbard Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Hubbard. The written
statement of Mr. Hubbard will be entered into the hearing
record. Mr. Rasmussen, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JOE RASMUSSEN

Mr. Rasmussen. Thank you. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking
Member Levin, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the invitation. I am excited to share my testimony before the
subcommittee on behalf of the veteran and military connected
students at the University of Wisconsin, Madison and my staff
that serves them. I have also consulted with my peers across
the State of Wisconsin, as well as in the Big Ten.
Hearing the conversation thus far, I can tell I am in good
company. While I might be critical of this process, it is only
because I care. I feel like we are all on the same team, Team
Veteran. I would briefly like to share my background, as I hope
it provides perspective. I get to serve as the director of
Veteran Services at the University of Wisconsin. I am also the
grandson of two World War II veterans, the son of a Vietnam
veteran, and I proudly served 4 years in the Marine Corps right
out of high school. The GI Bill was personally important to me.
It helped me pay rent, buy food, and a little further down the
road, it even helped pay for my father's gravestone. This
program matters.
I would like to introduce one of our student veterans,
Eddie. Eddie's a senior who is studying finance. He grew up in
Florida, served in California, and moved to Wisconsin, sight
unseen. He is a first-generation college student, a first-
generation veteran, and a first-generation American. When I
think about this process, I think about how it impacts Eddie.
Today, my highlights are that risk-based surveys is a good
idea, but we need more collaboration. In general, there is too
much red tape, and the systems need to be updated, students
like Eddie need to be centered in the conversation, and that we
at the schools want to be partners. We need more of mes and my
colleagues in the room when we are talking about creating new
policies. When we cannot be there, we need trusted partners
like my colleagues at the table and folks like the Association
of Public Land Grant Universities, or APLU.
Many of our student veterans like Eddie had a difficult
time adjusting to campus. UW Madison research tells us that too
many of our veterans are not making connections to their
college peers or university staff or faculty. That same
research shows that students who do connect with veteran
service staff specifically rank higher in metrics we know that
lead to student success. College veteran service staff have
earned the trust of these students, but that trust is eroding
as we focus more time on bureaucracy and less time on direct
student support.
Enrollment Manager is a great point. There is a lot that
could have happened to make the administration on the school
side much less time consuming. However, VA chose to build the
process close hold, and there was very little in the way of
partnering. Unfortunately, today, entering information into the
new system takes longer than the old system, and we find too
many errors that are leading to students being underpaid, paid
late, and in some cases, not receiving payments at all.
There are also longer standing issues with the VA rules
that they outline in their handbook. One such rule says that
undeclared juniors cannot use the GI Bill. This simply does not
work. Most students at UW are transfer students and many come
in close or already at the junior mark. Competitive programs
such as engineering, computer sciences, and nursing require on
campus prerequisites, because these rules run counter to how
things work on campus, many student veterans cannot enjoy the
same academic college experience as their nonveteran peers.
Each breakdown in this system leads to worse outcomes for
our student veterans, and as this process gets more burdensome,
we see more veterans driven from our high-quality schools. I am
not naive enough to think we can solve every issue overnight,
but we are certainly not moving in the right direction with
this status quo. It is time for VA Education Services to find
real, meaningful ways to bring education partners into the
fold. In my experience, GI Bill benefits are often the first
place veterans interact with the VA. I often refer to the GI
Bill and our schools as the front door to the VA. The GI Bill
is a fundamental promise, something that many veterans are
proud to earn and proud to use, and we owe it to them to create
a system that honors that service and earns their trust. I
invite you to come to campus and meet Eddie and our other
student veterans. I thank you for the time today, and I look
forward to working with you in the future.

[The Prepared Statement Of Joe Rasmussen Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Rasmussen. Mr. Rasmussen's
written testimony will be entered into the record. I am going
to reserve my questions until the end. Now I recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Levin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. I thank the chairman, and I told him I am ready
to go to Wisconsin. I look forward to that. I want to make sure
that just as we held VA to account in the first panel, that we
make sure to talk to you and to schools and that we understand
we all have a responsibility to make this work. I will start
with Ms. Del Signore. I am empathetic to the struggles and the
issues that schools are facing. VA can absolutely improve their
processes. I think we made that clear. Should not some of the
shared burden to prevent bad actors also fall on schools?
Ms. Del Signore. I thank you for the question, sir. The bad
actors, from my understanding, that in the past historically
have not been accredited institutions. Many of the current
risk-based surveys are being applied and focused on accredited
schools instead of the unaccredited schools. It is going to
take a partnership moving forward to make sure that these bad
actors are not doing what they have done in the past. We can
definitely provide the quality education to our veterans so
they can have a successful academic goal and be able to
transition effectively and satisfactorily back into the
civilian sector.
Mr. Levin. We share that objective. I think the key here is
taking the time to have enough staff to do the preventative
work, making sure that the burden that is being caused by VA
regulations is being met by enough people on the ground at your
campuses. Could you tell us the--actually, I will turn to Mr.
Rasmussen for this. Could you tell us the ratio of veteran
program administrator staff that you have compared to the
number of student veterans that you serve and what you think
that rough ratio should be?
Mr. Rasmussen. Certainly, at the University of Wisconsin,
we have four full-time positions in my office, including
myself. Two of those folks, 100 percent of their time is
dedicated to making sure that the GI Bill works. I would also
add to this that we do not live in a vacuum. This is obviously
a conversation about Federal benefits, but many states like
Wisconsin also offer very high-quality State programs. Those
numbers are larger than what they look like just when we
examine these numbers.
I agree. I heard earlier, you know, 1-to-100, 1-to-200, I
think those are very great goals to work toward. We are not
quite at 1-to-200, but we are pretty close. I will tell you, as
a former student veteran, as somebody who works with students,
I wish that number would be higher. I wish that we would have
enough time to give every single student the time that they
have earned.
Mr. Levin. It is true that student veterans using the GI
Bill are bringing full in-State tuition to the table, reducing
the amount of aid that schools need to provide, correct?
Mr. Rasmussen. If I understand the question correctly, it
is, that the GI Bill then is taking the place of other school
aid. I can tell you in Wisconsin, and specifically at UW
Madison, we have Bucky's Tuition Promise. Student veterans who
qualify for Bucky's Tuition Promise get 100 percent of that
promise, plus their GI Bill. We do not change their package
based on post-911 GI Bill one bit. I cannot speak for other
institutions. We are lucky enough to be able to provide
everything that we would give a non-GI Bill student to our GI--
--
Mr. Levin. Is it fair to say that having more student
veterans is good in every conceivable way for your campus and
for every campus, and therefore, it would make sense to do the
preventative work to make sure you have got enough support
staff to deal with whatever VA throws your way. Is that fair?
Mr. Rasmussen. Absolutely. I cannot agree more that we need
to be able to rise and meet the needs.
Mr. Levin. I appreciate that. With the time I have left,
Mr. Hubbard, I think you knocked it out of the park with your
comments, particularly at the end where you talked about that
balance. We try to do the best we can in this subcommittee and
throughout the House Veterans Affairs Committee to pass well
intentioned legislation to try to improve the lives of our
veterans and improve their educational opportunities. We often
do not agree with how, you know, specifics are implemented at
VA. Sometimes they do a fantastic job, on the other hand, but
it is all a balancing act. What do you think the balance is
between preventing bad actors from accessing GI Bill funds and
making it easy and enticing for good actors to serve veterans?
Mr. Hubbard. Thank you for the question, Mr. Ranking
Member. I think it is an imperative one. I recognize the time
has expired. I can answer perhaps at a later point or in
writing.
Mr. Levin. We will come back to you.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes Mr. Franklin from the great State of Florida.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hubbard,
actually, I would give you the time now to answer that because
that is something I am very interested in hearing about.
Mr. Hubbard. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that. In terms of
incentivizing good schools to bring in student veterans, I
think there is one important factor to consider, which is these
are literally the best students in higher education today. They
are nontraditional students. They often have families. They are
a little bit older, typically, but they have world experience
and they make the best alumni. They offer the most to the
classroom and they offer the most by way of packaging. These
are fully packaged students that come with full funding. I
think any school would be lucky to have student veterans in
their classroom and that is really what they should recognize.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you. Actually, I read all your
testimony. There are a lot of great ideas and suggestions in
there. I do recognize too, as the ranking member had said, that
the reason that a lot of this oversight is in place now is
because there were a lot of institutions, some rogue actors out
there that did not do the right thing. There is a need and we
got to strike a balance.
Mr. Garcia had said earlier, where we had talked about ways
that we could improve this process, I think, you know, in
looking at this hearing today, you know, according to staff,
you all were advised of this about a month ago. You have had a
month to prepare for this. I would submit that the four of you
and the institutions you represent could get together with the
representatives of VA and in 30 days you could probably fix a
lot of these problems we are talking about or at least have a
good roadmap to move ahead. Just in the brief time, if you
could each take about 30 seconds, if you had your way for a
day, what would be the first and fastest things you would fix?
Starting with you, Mrs. Meehan.
Ms. Meehan. I think that a more collaborative process to
sort of understand the differences between different types of
institutions. You know, we have over 4,000 colleges and
universities that are degree granting institutions and it is a
very diverse group and so one size does not always fit all. I
think that is one of the areas where risk-based surveys could
be improved--by thinking about ways that we want to make sure
we are identifying the greatest risk and figuring out what
those factors are so that we are not putting a compliance
burden on the other schools that do not have that level of
risk. There is just such a variety when you think about the
types of programs that VA provides. They are not all college
degree programs, some of them are training programs. I think
that is a challenge that VA has in a lot of areas, trying to
make sure that we have an approach that is appropriate for the
different types of institutions and addresses any challenges.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you. Dr. Del Signore.
Ms. Del Signore. Thank you for the question, sir. Yes, I
think communication is a key factor moving forward, looking at
quality improvement. There is always processes in place that
could be improved, whether from the institution, or from the VA
or the SAAs. Coming together as a team, definitely working
together to look at those triggers that may or may not be a
true risk assessment of that institution based on the
institution type, with their accreditation factors involved,
but looking at all the moving parts and coming up with a solid
data base for the VA to use the actual----
Mr. Franklin. Well, thank you. I do want to hear from the
others. You all have given a lot of very, very specific things
that are more tangible than just we need to communicate better.
I mean, there are a lot of specific things in your testimony.
Mr. Hubbard.
Mr. Hubbard. Thank you for the question. In our written
testimony, we identify for every issue that has come up, an
executive branch solution. I think all of these issues on the
table today could be solved at the executive level. We believe
it ultimately comes down to following the letter of the law. We
believe the statute is clear and unambiguous and should simply
be followed as stated.
Mr. Franklin. Well, if it is clear and unambiguous, I do
not know that the solution for fixing laws is more laws, but
your point is noted. Mr. Rasmussen.
Mr. Rasmussen. I hate to sound like a broken record, but it
is communication. Earlier, I heard Mr. Wescott say that NAVPA
is a partner, but I did not hear our colleagues at the VA
mention schools as they talk about and think about this
process. I would make there be groups. Dr. Jan mentions a
committee. Ways in which information from people like myself is
inserted into the process before it happens and not after it
happens, and then we have to clean up the mess.
Mr. Franklin. All right, thank you. I would like to note
that you all had today far more time to prepare for this
hearing than the institutions that you are saddling with these
risk-based surveys that in many cases are having to provide
tens of thousands of documents. It is not fair, and I can fully
understand why a lot of them are not wanting to participate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Franklin. The chair now
recognizes my great friend, Mr. McGarvey from Kentucky.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all so
much for being here. It is good to see you again, Mr. Hubbard.
Thanks to all of you for the work you do. One of the most
important things to keep in mind while having this discussion
today is to highlight what we are seeing on the ground and what
is actually happening in the implementation and the
administration of these benefits. I wanted to focus on the
school certifying officials and their role. Mr. Rasmussen, I am
particularly interested to hear your perspective as someone in
an educational entity overseeing GI Bill education benefits.
Mr. Rasmussen, how hard is it for you to hire and train up
someone to work in your office as a school certifying official
or GI benefits bill administrator? What are we seeing right now
in terms of staffing?
Mr. Rasmussen. I very much appreciate this question. Let us
actually start with the school certifying official role. It is
not something that naturally exists in higher education. The
duties that a school certifying official does probably overlaps
four or five different offices. It is extremely complex and it
is very specific. It is rare that we could hire somebody who
has worked in administration, or VA, or any other entity, and
they can immediately be a productive school certifying
official. The most recent hire I had, a retired lieutenant
colonel, took him about a year from when he started until I
would say that he can operate independently, not asking a bunch
of questions. It is really complicated and it is, to get to
your question, hard to hire good school certifying officials
and even harder to train them.
Mr. McGarvey. I do not know if there is an answer to this
next question. Just so the question is sincere, right, is there
anything we can do to help in that?
Mr. Rasmussen. I do think about, and again, communication.
There was a communication that went out several years ago from
VA telling schools what an expected ratio of school certifying
officials were. That went to a bunch of my staff. A bunch of
school certifying officials got a note saying, we need more of
you all.
I think if it was a serious act, then that sort of thing
should have been communicated in a way where our college
presidents and chancellors can hear how important these roles
are and they can take action. I put every year into my budget a
request for more school certifying officials, but what I need
is direction from the top.
Mr. McGarvey. I appreciate that. You know, I like what you
said when you said we are all on Team Veteran. I think
everybody on this committee is on Team Veteran. One of the
reasons we get along is to help our veterans get what they have
earned and what they deserve. If you do think of anything, any
of you all think of anything we can do to help in that regard,
whether it is a legislative action or even it is whether using
the platforms of our offices and letters in communication with
people in charge to let them know how seriously we take that,
you know, please do that. Mrs. Meehan.
Ms. Meehan. I was going to mention in my--oh, excuse me. I
was going to mention that a common repository for all of the
training materials on the VA's website would be really helpful
because school certifying officials, it is a relatively junior
position on many campuses. The changeover rate may be high, and
they need a quick way to come up to speed and have all those
resources available for them. That is one thing you might
consider.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you very much. Mr. Hubbard, just a
similar question to you. We know Veterans Education Success
highlighted in your testimony how schools are struggling to
maintain enough school certifying officials. What do you see as
some of the main barriers here and are seeing in terms of
staffing, like, what more can we do? What thoughts do you have
on this issue?
Mr. Hubbard. Thank you for the question, sir. First off, I
want to offer my congratulations on the recent passage of your
Isakson-Roe Oversight Act. That is a huge win and obviously
something that you have championed and led on for good reasons.
One thing that I think is important is that schools are paying
attention to the requirements of the administrative burdens
that are associated with compliance and providing that relevant
support.
As we talked about earlier, the GI Bill is the most
generous benefit out there when it comes to education, both
providing for tuition and fees, but also housing. There is
literally nothing in higher ed that is more generous. It is
important that schools devote the appropriate resources to make
sure that folks like our friends at University of Wisconsin on
the ground doing the real work, are getting the right support
staff.
Mr. McGarvey. Cool, thank you. Just one last question in
the very short remaining time. Do you guys have an idea of what
you think the ideal ratio is, please?
Mr. Hubbard. I believe VA recommends 1-to-125, but I
certainly defer my colleagues currently.
Ms. Del Signore. Currently, sir, in the SCO Handbook, it is
1-to-200. It would be nice to have 1-to-100. Chapter 33 is a
very complicated process, so any help would be greatly
appreciated.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McGarvey. I appreciate that. I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey. The chair now
recognizes my friend from the great State of Arizona, Mr.
Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman Van Orden, for giving me
the time, but also for holding this important hearing. Thank
you to the witnesses here today that are here today to help us,
inform us, and to better understand how these risk-based
surveys are utilized and how the subcommittee can look into
streamlining the steps for universities, for colleges, and for
veterans that are utilizing the GI Bill benefits.
I represent Tucson, Arizona, and that area which includes
the University of Arizona. As a University of Arizona alum,
Bear Down, I know that the important work that the U of A does
in providing students the tools for success, including with
student veterans. Actually, earlier last month, I visited the U
of A and I--no, it was this month, actually--and I visited the
U of A and I toured their Veterans Education and Transition
Services Center. I was very impressed by their work there. I
learned about the important work they do in supporting veteran
students, especially since the center is staffed by veterans
and that are students at the U of A that have transitioned out
of the military to the U of A.
The university has over 5,000 military connected students
with about 2,300 veterans in active duty, National Guard, or
reserves. These numbers consistently increase every single
year. I am proud of the support that they are providing to
student veterans, but I also know we can do more. That is where
my question leads into. Mr. Rasmussen, what type of factors do
you believe should trigger a risk-based survey? Do you feel
that the current risk-based surveys are focused on the right
factors?
Mr. Rasmussen. Thank you for the question. I think risk-
based survey, and I said in my testimony, the idea is solid,
right, that there is limited amount of resources and that we
need to focus those resources in the right place. I do not know
that I have the best answer on exactly which factors. I think
the factors need to be informed by people on the ground. I
think that when we have prescriptive factors that come down
from a central office here in Washington and it goes out to the
states and it is you must visit these schools, that that needs
to be also mixed with somebody in a state education capacity
who can put real world context to whatever factors those are.
Some rapid increases, you know, they can be easily
explained by many different factors. I said in my written
testimony, rapid increase could be because a bunch of post-911
veterans now have kids who are college age. Also, thanks to
Congress, those children get to get in-state tuition rates at
public schools. I think instead of giving you good answers
because I am not the guy who has the best answers on what
should be risky, and I am also not at a school that is risky, I
would say that they need to be informed by professionals.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. Thank you for that. Then, Dr. Del
Signore, did I pronounce that correctly? Okay, good, good. What
are the biggest concerns schools have about risk-based surveys
and bureaucratic red tape, and how can we help solve them?
Ms. Del Signore. Thank you for the question, sir. The
survey that NAVPA did to SCOs nationwide, the two biggest
reasons that we received were student complaints that were
normally old, and closed, addressed, taken care of, or not
valid. Or they were not even sent to the institution prior to
the risk-based survey, so the institution had the opportunity
to read through and understand what the issue was prior to the
risk-based survey happening.
The second largest reason was the school was never told by
the state approving agency as to what triggered the risk-based
survey. They were just, you know, said, hey, you guys have a
risk-based survey, give us all this information. We do not
know, we cannot tell you why.
Mr. Ciscomani. How much time do you feel is needed for a
risk-based survey inspection to be conducted appropriately?
Ms. Del Signore. Again, thank you for that question, sir.
Having gone through that experience myself, it is probably 30
days or more for the institution to prepare. In our testimony,
we did say it takes a multitude of different departments to
pull together this information. It is not something that is
normally hands on. For example, the school is required to
provide the last 2 years of all advertising to include all your
social media. If you are a public institution, you have
football season right now, those are all your football posts
that have to be provided for the SAA. Thank you for the
question, sir.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. I yield back, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani. The chair now
recognizes the fact that my microphone's not up here. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Hey, before I get going here, Mr. Hubbard and Mr.
Rasmussen, I want to thank you very much for the herculean
effort of getting yourself here from South Carolina after you
recovered your lost F35. That was amazing. Thank you for
getting up here. Yes, I just said that.
Mr. Hubbard. I think I would get in trouble if I commented
on that, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. That is okay. Let us work on that one later.
Hey, the subcommittee, we have heard a lot about the Enrollment
Manager from the VA in the last few months. Thank you, Mr.
Ciscomani. However, we have not been able to hear from you
guys. What has your experience been with the Enrollment
Manager? To a greater extent, with the Digital GI Bill? I am
going to throw that out to you, Mr. Rasmussen.
Mr. Rasmussen. Thank you, Mr. Van Orden. I really
appreciate the question. I think that is why I am here, right?
I am representing the real on the ground experience.
I said in my testimony, it takes longer. It takes longer to
use. It is not accurate. The data that we see in that system is
not the truth. It is very one way we submit things.
Then there is things that happen outside of the system. The
system is not adequate in capturing what we need it to capture
in order for the process to work. Then we get secondary emails
from processors at regional processing offices almost daily,
asking for questions about what an individual certification
means. Then because it is tied into this ID.me, or whatever,
and my staff being veterans themselves, this last weekend, one
of my staff members got an email from the VA processing office
to his personal Gmail that contained data about a student
enrollment. It is not working anywhere.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I am going to ask you all real quick.
Can we all agree or do you agree that there is the potential
for, and more likely than not, fraud involved in this education
system because of its size? Mr. Rasmussen.
Mr. Rasmussen. I am sorry, sir, I did not hear the last
part of your question.
Mr. Van Orden. Because of the size and scope of these
programs, do you agreed that fraud does exist?
Mr. Rasmussen. Oh, absolutely, fraud exists.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Hubbard.
Mr. Hubbard. Yes, without a doubt.
Mr. Van Orden. Dr. Del Signore.
Ms. Del Signore. There is definitely opportunity there.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Mrs. Meehan.
Ms. Meehan. Agreed.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay, good. We can clearly determine that
some type of system has to be in place, right? Okay, so let us
figure out how to do it better. What I get from your written
testimony, which I have read and it is awesome talking to you
guys, is what I have heard is that it seems to be a huge lack
of communication between your institutions and the Veterans
Affairs Administration. Did I characterize that accurately? It
seems like you are just not talking. Do you have a way, Mr.
Rasmussen? Do you have a formal way to get a hold of VA when
you need to?
Mr. Rasmussen. I am noisy enough that I have found a couple
of contacts, but that is not common for my peers at other
schools that are, you know, not quite as well received.
Mr. Van Orden. How often do you talk to your Big Ten
colleagues?
Mr. Rasmussen. Well, almost daily in email. We meet on Zoom
calls at least once a month, but more frequently.
Mr. Van Orden. How often do you and your Big Ten colleagues
speak to the Veterans Affairs Administration?
Mr. Rasmussen. Almost never.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Rasmussen. There is no avenue in.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Garcia, I have got a huge ask for you,
man. Will you give Mr. Rasmussen your personal cell phone
number?
Mr. Garcia. I have got it right here.
Mr. Van Orden. Is that your personal or is that the office?
Mr. Garcia. It is my personal.
Mr. Van Orden. Please do. That is a big ask because he is
from Madison, so you may get some inappropriate phone calls
about 2 in the morning. Here is what we want to do. We want to
solve this problem. Do you have something you would like to
say, ma'am? Please do.
Ms. Del Signore. Yes, if I could, sir. At one point, the
schools had access to our education liaison representatives,
ELRS. We do not anymore. During the pandemic, emails went out
unanswered from the VA, and those were our go-to people to
receive those answers. We need our ELRS back. I know there has
been a huge shortage. I know the VA has filled those for the
most part, that shortage, but they are not ready to basically
hit the ground running. They need to be trained to answer and
help support the SCO in administering the GI Bill, because, as
I said earlier, it is a very complicated process and any help
you could give would be greatly appreciated.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I found from personal experience that
oftentimes we ascribe the worst intentions to people simply
because we do not know what they are thinking. I think there is
a case of that, because I talked to Mr. Garcia on the regular
and his intentions are pure. They really are. It is just, you
know, the bureaucracy is so huge. You are getting his number
and you are going to talk. You got a group of Big Ten dudes
together with, you know, 50-pound brains and whatnot to think
about this stuff all the time. I want you to share your lessons
learned with this cat. Mr. Garcia, I would love it if you would
listen to them. This is awesome. My time has expired. Kate
always wants one more. Okie doke. Let us get Mr. Levin. I now
recognize Ranking Member Levin for his closing statement.
Mr. Levin. I want to thank the chairman for helping to
improve the communication between VA and our second panel. I
think it is so critically important that it just does not stop
there, but that each of you take the time and the effort to get
to know one another. You are all here. You might as well stick
around, get to know one another. I think that the eight risk
factors in Isakson-Roe are not the problem, but I do think that
they really should only be triggered when schools have grossly
failed at one of the standards in law.
I would hope that you would understand the intent at the
time was not that we have this overwhelming administrative
burden on these schools, but that we reserve, you know, for bad
actors and, you know, try to make the best judgment that we can
on that basis.
Just the same, I would hope that the schools would do more
to try to hire folks and to try to hit the 1-in-100. When I
think about the revenue that--and forget about all the things
that Mr. Hubbard said and that I agree with about all the
reasons why you want more student veterans on your campuses,
they are the best of the best. It is also a tremendous amount
of revenue for your schools. That was the point that we were
trying to make earlier. To that end, when you consider the
amount that you are actually going to be spending that
incremental cost of having one more person on your staff or two
more people on your staff who can handle these matters
regardless of how difficult, to Mr. McGarvey's question, how
difficult it might be to find qualified people. Even just a
couple more people would hopefully go a long way toward
addressing the issue and really would be a drop in the bucket
when you consider the amount of revenue that we are talking
here to a school like the University of Wisconsin or anywhere
else.
I think there is plenty of criticism that can be levied. I
do not think that is helpful or useful. I think to my friend
the chairman's point, communication is really useful. I hope
that you will take this opportunity. I hope VA will take the
opportunity. I hope the schools will take the opportunity. I
hope you will continue to communicate and that we get this
right because our student veterans are caught in the middle.
With that, I will yield back to my friend, the chairman.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. Gosh, you
know what? This is such a weird feeling because I think we have
actually moved the ball down the field today in Congress. That
is shocking to me personally. It is, man. I am just, just talk
to each other and please, please try not to ascribe negative
intentions to another party unless they prove it, man. Ronald
Reagan, trust but verify.
If you have noticed, we are a single unit moving forward,
and that is not changing anytime soon. Mr. Garcia, if you have
issues with these cats, I want you to come talk to us.
Everybody at this panel, you have issues with that dude, get a
hold of us and we will respond. The demand signal comes from
you, Okay? That is why we are here.
I want to thank you all for coming. Your testimony is very
valuable and all the members that participated today. I believe
that this hearing has helped illuminate some issues, and we are
moving forward with a purpose. With that, I would like to thank
you all for coming.
I ask unanimous consent that all members may have 5
legislative days to review and extend their remarks and include
any extraneous materials. Without objection, so ordered. This
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:52 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Joseph Garcia

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin and other Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA or the Department)
education benefits programs. I will highlight the current partnership
between State Approving Agencies (SAA), the National Association of
State Approving Agencies (NASAA) and VA; risk-based surveys (RBS); and
the status of VA's Digital GI Bill (DGIB) modernization effort.
Accompanying me today is James Ruhlman, Deputy Director of Education
Service.

NASAA and SAAs

I would like to start by acknowledging and thanking our NASAA and
SAA partners for their continued commitment to work with their
respective educational institutions and VA, to ensure the accurate and
timely delivery of high-quality educational benefits to the Nation's
Veterans and their families. As you know, VA administers educational
benefits to eligible Veterans and dependents, while SAAs ensure the
quality of the educational and vocational programs pursued and monitor
the institutions providing education and training to Veterans.
SAAs are VA's vital frontline partners in ensuring Veterans receive
the quality education and training they deserve. SAAs have a long
history of serving Veterans dating back to when they were first created
by Congress as part of the original GI Bill in the Servicemen's
Readjustment Act of 1944. Although the DGIB program has evolved
immensely since its inception, the need and function of SAAs have not
diminished. Today, thorough oversight is more necessary than ever with
the evolving programs available to Veterans. There are now more
schools, many of which have multiple campuses spread across the country
and more training programs and options, such as distance learning.
Furthermore, online education has become a regular modality for
Veterans and many fully accredited institutions have a majority of
their students participating through online courses.
Title 38 of the United States Code establishes the parameters for
the relationship between VA and SAAs. Section 3671 requests that each
state create or designate a state department or agency as the ``State
Approving Agency.'' SAAs are charged with approving courses, including
apprenticeship programs, in accordance with the provisions of chapters
34, 35 and 36 of title 38. SAAs ensure that education and training
programs meet approval requirements through a variety of approval
activities, such as evaluating course quality, assessing school
financial stability and monitoring student progress. SAAs provide data
on all programs approved under their authority to VA's Education
Liaison Representatives (ELR) who review the information and enter data
pertaining to the programs into VA's approval system. VA also utilizes
the services of SAAs to assist VA in conducting program oversight
activities by performing RBSs at educational institutions with approved
programs. The assistance of SAAs in the performance of these activities
has been, and will continue to be, invaluable in ensuring that Veterans
receive the highest quality post-secondary education in accordance with
statutory requirements.
VA currently has contracts with 52 SAAs in 49 states (with 2 in the
State of Washington), the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico. VA does not have an SAA contract (during fiscal year (FY)
2023) with the state of New Hampshire; in which case VA performs the
SAA duties. SAAs continue to play a vital role in program approval,
outreach, training and oversight of VA-administered education benefits.
VA values its collaboration and partnership with SAAs and anticipates
entering into contracts with all 53 SAAs, including the state of New
Hampshire, for FY 2024.
Currently, there are 18,623 domestic and international Institutions
of Higher Learning (IHL) and Non-College Degree Programs (NCD) with
programs approved for VA educational assistance benefits by the SAAs or
approved by VA for foreign schools. Of the 18,623 approved, there were
12,675 active IHL and NCD institutions in calendar year 2022. During FY
2022 and FY 2023, VA and SAAs completed over 6,200 surveys, with just
over 3,000 compliance activities completed to date in FY 2023. These
activities include compliance surveys required under 38 U.S.C. Sec.
3693, as well as Targeted Risk-Based Reviews and RBSs. VA anticipates
completing a similar number of compliance activities in FY 2024.

Risk-Based Surveys (RBS)

The Risk Based Survey is an onsite review conducted at educational
and training institutions, with three principal objectives. First, the
survey serves as a mechanism for SAAs to review and mitigate potential
fraud, waste and abuse by utilizing data and risk factors outside of
the normal program approval and compliance survey processes. Second, it
allows the SAAs to verify the propriety of educational benefits paid
under the provisions of the laws administered by VA, to education and
training institutions on behalf of eligible individuals. Third, the RBS
ensures SAAs initiate prompt action when risk factors and associated
deficiencies are substantiated.
There have been two influential pieces of legislation that directly
address RBSs. First, section 310 of the Harry W. Colmery Veterans
Educational Assistance Act of 2017 (P.L. 115-48) amended 38 U.S.C.
Sec.  3673(d) to allow VA to utilize the services of SAAs for
conducting compliance and RBSs. Second, section 1013 of the Johnny
Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits
Improvement Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-315) established new requirements for
the performance of RBSs at educational institutions. Section 1013
amended title 38, United States Code, by adding 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3673A,
which directs VA to develop, in partnership with SAAs, a comprehensive
program to conduct RBSs and establish a searchable data base. In
addition, section 1014 mandates the performance of RBSs by SAAs when
notified or informed of certain actions or conduct concerning
educational institutions.
The RBS process allows for the identification of risk factors from
continuous data collection and analyses gathered from various Federal
and state sources. The data analyses are used to identify facilities
with risk factors that indicate potential need for corrective action in
order to remediate problems and ensure successful outcomes for GI Bill
beneficiaries. In August 2021, VA added a module to its existing
Salesforce-based application to capture institution risk-factor
information from completed surveys, as required by P.L. 116-315 Sec.
1013. Additionally, the information is searchable through data mining,
allowing for research and revision of the RBS model in a data-driven
manner. VA believes the requirements of the law, effective October 1,
2022, have been met.
VA continues to work collaboratively with SAAs in the execution of
RBSs. Surveys are completed in accordance with legislative
requirements, including identifying and measuring risk factors present
at institutions and taking appropriate actions to mitigate risks that
violate program approval requirements, jeopardize the integrity of the
GI Bill or negatively impact the outcomes of Veterans and other
beneficiaries.

Partnership

During the first quarter of FY 2022, NASAA and VA's Education
Service leadership established an RBS workgroup to discuss best
practices, gaps and other areas of concern. The main purpose and focus
of the workgroup were strategizing and formulating the future State of
the RBS process by evaluating the results of the FY 2021 NASAA pilot
model.
The RBS workgroup refined the RBS job aids initially developed for
the NASAA pilot to eliminate duplicative information and to streamline
the risk-review process. The job aids are used during visits to
schools, helping SAA staff by providing clear and concise step-by-step
instructions, information or guidance. Additionally, a standard
operating procedure (SOP) was developed to consistently execute RBSs in
accordance with legislative requirements. The SOP \1\ identifies risk
factors potentially present at institutions and provides direction on
taking appropriate actions to mitigate any risks that jeopardize the
integrity of the GI Bill and the outcomes of beneficiaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/
va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/
554400000220722/Standard-Operating-Procedure-Risk-Based-
Surveys?query=RBS percent20standard percent20operating
percent20procedure
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In June and July 2022, NASAA conducted two virtual training events
and one in-person training session during the NASAA Summer Conference.
The training provided an understanding of the RBS process from
beginning to end. In addition, NASAA created an FY 2023 RBS Guide to
assist SAA members in conducting RBSs. This guide addresses specific
areas in greater detail and provides guidance and recommendations on
how to address each step of the process.

FY 2023 RBS Results

For FY 2023, educational institutions were identified for RBSs
using a data-driven decision-making approach, as described above. This
sought to find patterns or correlations between different data points
indicating problems that may impact compliance with program approval
requirements and/or the ability to effectively educate VA
beneficiaries. It was determined that, apart from the statutorily
specified RBS triggers, facilities need a minimum of two risk factors
to trigger a review. The modifications were made based on feedback from
SAA staff, reviews and analyses of data.
Data are derived from public sites such as the Department of
Education; extracts from the GI Bill Comparison Tool; and information
from Education Service's Data Analytics Team. The risk factors and
thresholds include but are not limited to:

Rapid Increase in Veteran Enrollment. Evaluates prior
Academic Years to determine a 30 percent increase or more in the
Veteran population.

Rapid Increase in Tuition and Fees. Reviews the facility
as a whole and the total tuition and fees paid to the institution. The
difference is calculated between successive years and is a function of
the number of trainees and the total tuition and fees paid. The
threshold for a 'rapid' increase is 30 percent.

Volume and/or Severity of Student Complaints. Reviews GI
Bill complaints or complaints received from Federal partners, consumer
agencies and state partners. The GI Bill Feedback Tool is the primary
source of this information.

90/10 Rule Violation. The established threshold to
trigger an RBS is established at 85 percent, prior to exceeding the
Department of Education's requirement.

85/15 Rule Violation. Reviews for compliance with 38
U.S.C. Sec.  3680A(d), as outlined in 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3673A.

Caution Flag. One or more flags displayed on the GI Bill
Comparison Tool notifying users of issues that should be taken into
consideration when choosing an educational institution.

The FY 2023 Cooperative Agreements between VA and SAAs requires the
completion of 1,308 RBSs over the course of the fiscal year. As of
September 13, 2023, 1,195 (91 percent of the required 1,308) RBSs have
been conducted. There have been 55 education and training institutions
withdrawn from GI Bill participation due to RBS findings. The following
discrepancies were identified by SAAs:

Enrollment Certification Errors

o Incorrect term dates;

o Incorrect tuition and fees;

o Graduation not reported;

o Leave of absence not reported;

o Incomplete grades not reported;

o Operating on-line instruction and hybrid courses beyond June
1, 2022;

o Non-compliance with Dual Certification, as required by 38
U.S.C. Sec.  3313(l);

o Late report of enrollment certification;

o Satisfactory academic progress not properly applied; and

o 85/15 rule violation; multiple programs exceeded ratio.

Approval Violations

o Operating with unapproved catalog;

o Inappropriate marketing and advertising;

o Prior credit evaluation;

o Lacking proper articulation agreements in place;

o Discrepancy with grading policy;

o Operating without business license;

o Inconsistent attendance records;

o Incomplete financial ledgers;

o Certifying unapproved program; and

o Enrollment agreement clause imposing penalties and/or denying
attendance or participation prior to the earlier of the date of
VA benefit payment for tuition and fees or 90 days from date of
certification of tuition and fee charges to VA; violation of 38
U.S.C. Sec.  3679(e).

Miscellaneous Errors

o GI Bill Trademark violation.

During the last quarter of FY 2023, VA has been working with the
SAAs to revise the RBS model, thresholds, procedures and job aids based
on SAA feedback and the findings of the RBSs completed during this
fiscal year as part of an ongoing process of continuous improvement.
The revisions are being made in collaboration with VA's SAA partners,
and updated materials will be released prior to October 1, 2023. In
addition, ELRs and supervisory staff have held meetings with the SAAs
to discuss the selection of RBSs for completion during FY 2024. Each
SAA is expected and encouraged to take advantage of the opportunity to
identify any RBS candidate(s) and priorities at the beginning of the
fiscal year, and any that may arise throughout the year, based on data
that support risk factors and align with RBS objectives.

Regulatory Changes

VA has also taken the initiative to reduce burdens on schools and
improve customer service to Veterans by modernizing several regulatory
requirements.
Stakeholders have expressed confusion regarding VA's regulations
when it comes to which SAA they should apply for program approval of an
online course. In October 2021, VA published a proposed rule to clarify
SAAs' jurisdiction for approval of online distance learning courses.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/10/14/2021-
21496/state-approving-agency-jurisdiction-rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA proposed that the SAA with jurisdiction over the school's main
campus would be the only SAA to which the school needs to apply for
approval of any of its solely online courses. Additionally, the rule
seeks to clarify the adjudicatory outcomes available to an SAA when
reviewing an approval application (i.e., an SAA may approve, deny,
suspend or withdraw approval. VA proposed to remove the option for an
SAA to simply not act on an application). Furthermore, VA proposed that
when an SAA denies an application for approval, suspends a program or
withdraws a program, the SAA must provide schools with a notice of
decision outlining reasons for the denial, suspension or withdrawal. VA
believes the proposed rule would make the program application process
simpler for schools and SAAs to understand. VA also believes that
student Veterans would be positively impacted by more expedient
approvals, resulting in faster additions of program choices for
training. Additionally, certain online and distance learning modalities
that may have been previously denied may be able to be approved.
In October 2022, VA published a proposed rule to simplify the rules
and clearly state that aid provided by the educational institution is
considered institutional aid.\3\ This would reduce the administrative
burden on schools in calculating the ``85/15 rule'' where statute
requires that no more than 85 percent of the students in a program of
education can have all or part of their tuition, fees or other charges
paid to or for them by their educational institution or VA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/10/12/2022-
22107/8515-rule-calculations-waiver-criteria-and-reports.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Digital GI Bill (DGIB)

As discussed during the July 2023 ``Reviewing the Digital GI Bill''
hearing, VA is modernizing the GI Bill's Information Technology (IT)
platform to deliver benefits faster and enhance customer service. The
goal of this effort is to develop a modern digital platform, leveraging
cloud-based automation, digital service transformation, human-centered
design, world-class communications, analytics and other important IT
services. The improvements will provide world-class customer and
benefit services to Veterans and VA's partners, enabling more timely
and accurate delivery of education benefits, providing near real-time
eligibility and benefit information and allowing for first contact
resolution.
Since March 2021, when VA awarded a contract to Accenture Federal
Services (AFS) to develop the DGIB, there have been 6 major releases
and several smaller releases to modernize GI Bill services. Notably, VA
incorporated legislative updates from the Johnny Isakson and David P.
Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020
(P.L. 116-315); activated the DGIB Managed Service platform; deployed
capabilities to make enrollment-related processes faster and simpler,
such as verifying enrollment status via email or text message; migrated
Veteran Employment Through Technology Education Courses claims into the
DGIB Managed Service platform; improved the application process for
first-time applicants by automating portions of the Post-9/11 Bill
application experience and launching Enrollment Manager to modernize
the system for School Certifying Officials (SCO). VA received positive
feedback from SCOs and its customers, and these systems are continuing
to improve the Veteran experience every day. For instance, VA is
pleased to note that Enrollment Manager has just reached its 2
millionth enrollment just 5 months after its initial release and 1
month after it reached 1 million enrollments.
VA currently fully automates 33 percent of original and 62 percent
of supplemental GI Bill claims \4\ and is targeting December 2024 to
automate 35 percent of original and 70 percent of supplemental claims.
VA is further targeting July 2025 to automate 50 percent of original
and 80 percent of supplemental claims. To achieve this, VA has
scheduled the following five upcoming automation deployments:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ As of 31 July 2023.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. October 2023: Enrollment Manager Custom Remarks

2. December 2023: My Education Benefits Transfer of Entitlement
(TOE)

o Non-College Degree Enrollment Received for Claimant

3. February 2024: A Change in VA Defense Information Repository
(VADIR) TOE Data Has Been Detected

o Claimant Disagrees With Service Data From VADIR

4. March 2024: A Change in VADIR Service Data Has Been Detected

5. October 2024: Reserve Officer Training Corp/Service Academy/Loan
Repayment Plan Discrepancy

o Validation of Initial Active-Duty Training/Entry
Level Skill Training Time Requirement

VA continues to leverage a human-centered design to inform its
conceptualization and development of the future state of DGIB. VA has
worked with AFS and VA stakeholders to develop a schedule that takes
DGIB through 2025 when VA's major deployments in the modernization
effort will come to an end.
Major deployments planned include Enterprise Management of
Payments, Workload and Reporting Release, Business Manager, Benefits
Delivery Network-C and Approval Manager. VA has made tremendous strides
in the administration of VA education benefits in recent years through
modernization efforts. Many lessons have been learned along the way,
and VA continues to seek feedback from partners and find ways to
improve education benefits delivery through modernization. VA looks
forward to continued opportunities of working with Congress to address
Veterans' concerns to provide a better GI Bill experience.

Conclusion

VA will continue working closely with NASAA, SAAs, AFS and VA
stakeholders as we deliver the accurate and timely educational benefits
the Nation's Veterans have earned. VA remains committed to ensuring
proper oversight of those benefits and that VA systems are modernized
in a customer-centric way while remaining effective stewards of
taxpayer dollars. VA appreciates the support of this Committee and
looks forward to continued opportunities to work with Congress to
address Veterans' concerns and provide a better VA experience. Mr.
Chairman, this concludes my testimony. We would be happy to answer any
questions you or the other Members of the Subcommittee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Joseph Wescott

Introduction

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin and members of the
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, I am pleased to appear before you
today on behalf of the fifty-two member State agencies of the National
Association of State Approving Agencies (NASAA). I appreciate the
opportunity to provide comments to this committee pertaining to ``Less
is More: The Impact of Bureaucratic Red Tape on Veterans Education
Benefits,'' and particularly how we can work together with federal and
state agencies to ensure unrestricted access to quality education and
training, while continuing to protect students from substandard
programs and predatory practices. I am accompanied today by NASAA
President Frank Myers.

Role of the State Approving Agencies: Past and Present

State Approving Agencies (SAAs) play a critical role in the
administration of GI Bill benefits. Shortly after passage of the
Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, or the GI Bill of Rights,
Congress, recognizing it was the responsibility of the states within
our federal system of government to oversee the education of its
citizens, required that each state establish a ``State Approving
Agency.'' In response, the Governor of each state designated a state
bureau or department as the SAA. The SAA was to be supported through
reimbursement of its expenses by the US Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA). Thus evolved a truly cooperative federal-state partnership that
maintains the rights of the states while monitoring and protecting a
federally sponsored program administered under the terms and conditions
of federal law.
The original GI Bill, as enacted in 1944, relied on state agencies
to establish standards for and to approve programs of education in
which eligible individuals could use GI Bill benefits. Over time SAAs
have evolved to become the primary means of assuring institutional
accountability. Federal law is clear in that SAAs are the primary
governmental body through which approval of education and training for
Veterans' educational benefits is to occur. With specialized
authorization under the Code of Federal Regulations and State statutes,
they exercise the state's authority to approve, disapprove and monitor
education and training programs. The SAA brings to this mission
knowledge of state law and regulations as well as knowledge of the
local environment and needs of the state. SAAs also assist the states
and VA with exposing fraudulent and criminal activity involving the
payment of Veteran's benefits.
In 1948, SAA representatives met to form a professional
organization to promote high professional standards, create a forum for
the exchange of best practices, and promote uniformity of purpose and
practice. For more than seventy-five years, NASAA has worked with our
VA partners, VSOs, and all agencies to ensure the greatest numbers of
quality programs are available to those eligible for education and
training benefits. We do this through our primary mission of program
approval and our related efforts-compliance, oversight, training,
liaison and outreach. Indeed, with the exception of federal facilities,
the State Approving Agencies are the sole authority responsible for the
approval of all programs of education and training within the nation.
We take this responsibility seriously and consider ourselves the
``gatekeepers of quality'' to protect the integrity of the GI Bill by
ensuring only quality programs are approved.

Practice and Partnership

Today, fifty-two SAAs in 49 states, as well as the District of
Columbia and the territory of Puerto Rico (One state has two SAAs),
composed of approximately 215 professional and support personnel, are
supervising over 13,000 active facilities and nearly 220,000 programs.
The Subcommittee is no stranger to our fundamental role as it is the
same today as when we were created by Congress. SAAs work in
collaboration with the VA and our other partners, such as the National
Association of Veterans Program Administrators (NAVPA), to promote and
safeguard quality education and training programs for Veterans and
other eligible persons and assist the VA in preventing fraud, waste,
and abuse in the administration of the GI Bill. NASAA believes the
primary responsibility and focus of the SAAs is, and should continue to
be, to review, evaluate, and approve programs at schools and training
facilities, utilizing state and federal criteria.
It is critical that, as Congress intended, each state has an
adequately resourced SAA to protect the integrity of the GI Bill. In
2022 alone, SAAs across our nation completed over 304,000 approval
actions for all of NASAA's Core Functions: Approval, Compliance,
Technical Assistance, Outreach, and Liaison. Almost 220,000 programs of
education and training at universities, colleges, training
institutions, vocational flight schools, and correspondence schools
were approved. We do this through an approval process that allows us to
carefully evaluate many factors including curriculum, instructors,
policies, facilities, equipment, and advertising. At new facilities,
after a careful review of the completed application, we schedule an
inspection visit to the facility to ensure the institution understands
federal and state requirements and has the capability to oversee and
administer the program. If we find that they do, we provide training on
the remainder of the approval process and the continuing expectations.
After our initial approval, we continue to review the facilities on a
recurring basis as schools and training providers add or change
programs and policies. Also, as a part of this approval process, where
applicable, we ensure that schools are in compliance with Public Law
112-249 and are not providing any ``commission, bonus, or other
incentive payment based directly or indirectly on success in securing
enrollments or financial aid to any persons or entities engaged in any
student recruiting or admission activities.'' For schools who are
signatories of the ``Principles of Excellence (POE),'' we provide
training and information to them as well. We also explain important
requirements such as the 85/15 rule, notification to us if there are
negative accreditation findings, and other areas of concern.
In 2011, with the implementation of Section 203 of Public Law 111-
377, the Post-911 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act, we
began assisting VA with their requirement to perform compliance survey
visits at SAA-approved institutions. By 2018, we were conducting over
2,000 compliance survey visits. An unintended consequence of Section
203 was the diminution of the ability of SAAs to devote adequate time
to approvals and robust oversight to ensure student veterans were being
provided quality education and training. P.L. 111-377, specifically
Section 203, established ``deemed approved'' programs that do not
require an in-depth review because another agency with an established
process and related mission has approved them. As interpreted and
implemented by VA, an unfortunate and unforeseen consequence was all
programs at institutions meeting such ``deemed approved'' criteria did
not receive the rigorous oversight required by the SAA approval
process. This hindered our oversight of these approvals, in some cases
to the extent that certain contracted programs, particularly flight
training, became approved costing taxpayers millions and graduating
Veterans who were hard pressed to find meaningful employment.
Furthermore, the increased focus on compliance surveys adversely
impacted the SAA's ability to dedicate time and personnel to our
critical approval and oversight functions, as codified by law. Prior to
2011, SAAs generally visited more than 80 percent of all institutions
with approved programs in their states annually. Today, most SAAs visit
less than 50 percent of these institutions. All of these factors, and
those addressed below, called for change. Congress recognized the need
for a new day in compliance and oversight.

Risk Based Surveys

The House and Senate Veterans Affairs committees watched with
growing bipartisan impatience as inadequate oversight allowed some
schools to prey on veterans, capture millions in taxpayer dollars, and
too often close their doors with little warning. In response to this
situation, in 2017, they included in the Harry W. Colmery Veterans
Educational Assistance Act (also known as the Forever GI Bill)
provisions that for the first time would allow SAAs to evaluate the
risk of these programs: the risk of poor finances, of harming student
veterans, and of leaving taxpayers holding the bag when schools
consistently fail students or abruptly shut down. The Colmery Act also
authorized a modest, and much needed, funding increase for SAAs and
mandated the Government Accountability Office issue a report on SAA
capacity and performance. That GAO report found that a focus on risk
was indeed warranted. Recognizing that compliance surveys were
insufficient as a tool to address low-quality education leaving
students worse off or the use of misleading and deceptive practices,
the Colmery Act required for the first time that SAAs begin evaluating
the risk that schools approved to disburse GI Bill funds posed to
veterans and their families. This was the first time such a robust
requirement for risk-based reviews was passed in any higher education
context. Yet in the first two years following passage, VA and the SAAs
did not have either the resources or the experience required to design
and create a risk-based system, and there was no publicly transparent
precedent to use as a model.
In late 2020, the Colmery Act's focus on risk-based surveys was
reinforced with the passage of P.L. 116-315, the Isakson and Roe
Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 (Isakson-
Roe), which was championed by veterans' service organizations (VSOs).
Isakson-Roe further strengthened the SAAs' risk-based survey authority
and required that SAAs exclusively conduct risk-based reviews beginning
in October 2022. The law would further specify minimum criteria that
must be examined during risk-based reviews. NASAA, aware of the intent
of Congress and recognizing that compliance surveys alone could not
address questions surrounding quality and risk, sought to establish a
new model of oversight. We approached the Lumina Foundation in the
summer of 2019 for a grant to provide funding to develop and test that
model. That early effort would lead to a dedicated effort to design,
build, pilot, and scale a model that could be effectively used by all
SAAs, from those in small states with only one full-time employee, to
large states that must oversee hundreds of GI Bill recipient
institutions. This process resulted in the development and
implementation of a quantitative model that evaluated programs based on
risk to veterans and taxpayers and focused limited resources on those
programs evincing the highest level of risk--with attendant
requirements for improvement or risk of loss of GI Bill eligibility. A
report produced by the American Legion in January 2022 entitled
``Lessons from a Risk-Based Oversight Model Designed to Protect
Students and Taxpayers'' summarized the collective efforts to design,
build, and pilot these statutorily required risk-based surveys, learn
from the pilot and make any needed adjustments, and in the coming year,
scale to all 50 states by October 2022 consistent with the law.
With funding from Lumina Foundation and pro bono support from
Nelson, Mullins, Riley, and Scarborough, a total of almost half a
million dollars, NASAA and EdCounsel undertook the pilot design by
convening an advisory council of 22 members representing student
veterans, State Approving Agencies, schools, accreditors, states, and
other experts. These advisory council members--along with many others
who were consulted throughout this process--provided regular and
invaluable guidance on the overall structure and principles of the
model. NASAA and EdCounsel also worked closely with six pilot SAAs (in
addition to the two non-pilot SAAs serving on the advisory council) to
understand their capacity and perspectives on risk. Research was
conducted on precedents and examples of risk-based surveys in other
contexts, such as higher education oversight models from other
countries and models predicting housing foreclosure risk and financial
oversight of publicly traded companies; and previous work on risk-based
surveys. During the design of the initial risk filter and deeper review
tools and forms, the focus was intentionally on feasibility of
implementation and scaling across SAAs as well as other federal
contexts. The end result was a new model of oversight that looked at
meaningful metrics (graduation and retention rates, advertising,
financial security, increases in veteran's enrollment, etc.), was
programmatic in application and oversight, and most importantly,
veteran centric. In other words, the model would determine if the
schools were offering quality programs which kept the promise of better
jobs and opportunities.
The key to the model's success was that the risk-based survey
system seeks to separate low-risk schools from high-risk schools using
quantitative measures, and to then prioritizes further data requests
and site visits to those schools showing the highest levels of risk
within a specific state. The system uses publicly available data to
automate the process of ranking programs in a state from higher to
lower risk. This allowed SAAs to focus their risk-based survey visits
on those institutions most likely to present risk to students and
taxpayers. This is why a searchable data base that SAAs could access
was and still is absolutely necessary for the success of the nationwide
rollout. The risk-based model had received positive responses from VA,
the SAAs, and lawmakers on the Congressional veterans authorizing
committees. With a data base to guide them to potentially troubled
institutions, SAAs could then conduct an extensive review of detailed
data and documents furnished by schools prior to a site visit that
looked closely at curriculum, instructors and veteran support services.
In the end, schools are evaluated on the opportunities and outcomes
provided for and to student veterans. The model proved that SAAs were
able to better identify schools that were at risk of closure due to
substandard programming, fraudulent advertising and/or improper
practices.
So, what went wrong? As already stated, the absence of a data base
as required by law, resulted in the VA assigning schools for a risk-
based survey that were not actually at risk. SAAs spent valuable
resources reviewing accredited institutions that had experienced minor
increases in veteran enrollment but were otherwise operating sound,
quality programs. The time spent conducting unnecessary reviews created
a waste of SAA, school official, and ultimately taxpayer resources. In
addition, due to an inordinate interest in process and being able to
perform quality assurance at some future time, VA insisted that SAAs
upload almost all documents produced during a Risk Based Survey. While
the intent of the model had been a focus on outcomes with a final
comprehensive report to detail the findings, SAAs were instead required
to direct their time toward cataloguing and uploading survey materials.
Finally, the VA took several months reviewing and revising the model,
which would have been better spent developing a searchable data base or
preparing for and providing training for SAAs and institutions.
Thankfully, Director Garcia and his team are attempting to move in the
direction of the original model with a more streamlined process for the
coming year, and I believe they understand the critical necessity of
the searchable and comprehensive data base.

Red Tape and Bureaucratic Overreach

State Approving Agencies are adamant about only approving quality
programs that provide good jobs, opportunities and a better future for
our veterans and their families. This consists of ensuring that all
veterans, including those in rural areas, have access to quality
education programs and job training. Unfortunately, in recent years, VA
interpretation of certain laws have resulted in requirements which led
to some schools deciding to withdraw from the GI Bill program. In fact,
in the last year alone, almost 500 schools have requested that their
approvals be withdrawn due to SCO certification training requirements,
audits performed too close together, too many requirements for
reapproval, and ID.Me requirements. Sadly, the impact of these
withdrawals has been more severe on small but high-quality programs,
often serving rural areas or programs of specialty training that are
not housed at a large school where interaction with student-veterans is
more frequent. The result of this is that veterans in rural America are
losing access to essential training and quality education aimed at
serving those who are not attending a large college or university. With
the loss of these in resident programs, there is concern that veterans
from rural areas may be driven to lesser quality online education or
worse, not even be able to utilize the benefits they have rightfully
earned. Equally troubling are the VA plans to redefine ``independent
study'' and ``online education'' in such a way that there will no
longer be a regulatory barrier to offering online training at
unaccredited Non College Degree (NCD) programs. While SAAs are
generally welcoming of a change to approving online education and would
welcome additional language in law surrounding this modality of
learning, there is some concern that implementation of these changes
could create a perfect storm of approving a plethora of inadequate
education and training programs. As we are witnessing these small in-
residence facilities withdraw due to administrative burdens, we
hesitate to open the flood gates to larger online facilities that may
have more capacity but offer asynchronous instruction that is difficult
to regulate or monitor for quality.
Another example of unnecessary bureaucratic red tape is requiring
accredited institutions accepted by the US Department of Education to
offer Title IV funding. P.L. 116-315 Section 1015 implemented this
requirement, and as I recall from the drafting of the statute in this
area, the intent was to create a mechanism allowing SAAs to suspend or
withdraw approval from institutions that lost the ability to offer
Title IV due to actions that would indicate a concern with a facility
being able to continue offering high-quality education. Unfortunately,
the requirement as written has resulted in numerous institutions,
particularly those offering strictly religious education, medical
residency, EMT, and paramedic programs, feeling forced to withdraw from
the GI Bill program. These are programs and facilities that are
accredited by regional accrediting bodies that oversee other colleges
and universities large and small, but because these facilities do not
participate in the Federal Title IV program, they are no longer
eligible for GI Bill benefits. The VA's restricted reading of their
waiver authority, as allowed by the law, has resulted in numerous
seminary, pastoral, and other religious training programs, as well as
several medical training programs being withdrawn due to a law change
that creates a situation where accredited facilities are unable to
participate in the program, but nonaccredited ones are.
Likewise, the VA's interpretation that all institutions, including
small NCDs, Apprenticeships and OJTs, must undergo hours of
certification training and provide their personal SSN information to
gain access to new VA software that certifies veteran attendance
participating in education programs, has resulted in quality schools
requesting to be withdrawn. An example of the impact of this
requirement is that today, there are NO private truck driving schools
approved in the State of Illinois. Until recently, the VA offered low-
bar online methodologies for small facilities to submit accurate
enrollment information in a quick and efficient manner but that is no
longer an option. While many of these affected programs had small (1-2)
veteran enrollments, NASAA firmly believes that every veteran should
have access to use their entitlement. The VA should work in partnership
with the State Approving Agencies to find meaningful ways to address
these areas if we are to assure continued veteran access to quality
training and education, particularly in rural America.
While SAAs always believe in strong approval criteria and oversight
of training programs accepting GI Bill benefits, some specialty areas
of training who wish to become approved are subject to undue burdens
that often duplicate the efforts of other State or Federal agencies
that oversee and approve their curriculum. For example, public criminal
justice, fire, and rescue academy programs which lead to certification
as a law enforcement officer, correctional officer, sheriff,
firefighter, or first responder are subject to the same approval
criteria and mechanisms as colleges, universities, and trade-schools.
These criteria are often unnecessary given the type of training
provided at these facilities, such as providing a financial aid
shopping sheet or designating to the VA that specific employees are
providing academic or career counseling. In addition, accredited
medical residency and fellowship programs, and Part 141 and Part 142
pilot schools and flight training centers, are subject to approval
criteria that is poorly defined in US Code and often subject to
confusion by veterans, facilities, SAAs, and the VA. NASAA supports
efforts to formally move these programs as being approvable under 38
USC Sec.  3672's ``deemed approved'' criteria, as another agency with
an established process and related mission has accredited or approved
them. It is our belief that these programs meet the spirit of the
reason the deemed approved law was created, and formalizing these
facilities approval criteria would continue strong oversight by SAAs
while also allowing access to a wide variety of career and technical
training opportunities.

Real Partnership and a Renewed Focus on Veteran Success

In the last year, largely due to the vision and leadership of
Director Joseph Garcia, communications between the VA and State
Approving Agencies have improved markedly. Likewise, we sense a renewed
commitment to partnership in formulating policy and process. However,
if we are to be successful in assuring the long term success of the GI
Bill educational program, there must be a renewed commitment to this
historic State and Federal partnership as well as an undiminished focus
on ensuring that there are limited or no negative impacts on our
veterans and their families. We can begin this new partnership with the
VA, as it did for many years, by sharing the funding model for SAAs
with the NASAA Cooperative Agreement Committee so we can better
understand what governs the distribution of funds allocated to each SAA
and States can better plan how to best use resources to protect our
Veterans. Likewise, regulatory and policy/process changes should not be
made in a vacuum. SAAs should be at the table, early on, so as to help
the VA make practical changes which avoid unpleasant and unforeseen
consequences for our student veterans. Finally, enhanced communication
with SAAs and particularly the educational and training institutions we
serve will go far to renew trust and ensure quality service for our
veterans. The recent late great unpleasantness surrounding complex and
confusing 85/15 requirements, which eventually required congressional
intervention, is an example of how real partnership and meaningful
communication could have avoided a painful process for all.
State Approving Agencies desire to perform robust risk-based
surveys, combined with less comprehensive but equally important
supervisory visits, as part of the approval and oversight function of
the SAAs. SAAs are committed to protecting Veterans by identifying high
risk activities at the institutions we approve through the completion
of these visits in addition to our equally important focus on approval.
Both of these activities will help proactively identify red flags at
the institutions and entities we oversee and thus enable SAAs to
properly identify systematic issues so as to prevent educational or
financial harm to our veterans and loss of taxpayer funds. As such,
NASAA strongly believes the VA and SAAs must remain committed to the
more proactive approach provided by risk-based surveys and enhanced
approval requirements. We must continue to look rigorously at
accreditation issues, enrollment practices and where possible,
employment data. As trained educators, we are best suited to provide
this important rigorous oversight and in-depth evaluation. Though we
maintain the approval of non-Federal programs is properly vested in the
States, we believe the VA should ensure states are adequately
protecting the integrity and independence of SAAs and ensuring Federal
funds are properly expended. In the long term, this proactive approach
will continue to protect the integrity of the GI Bill and taxpayer
interests in our combined efforts to serve Veterans and their families.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, today, SAAs throughout this great nation as well as
US territories and the District of Columbia, are committed to ensuring
that our Veterans and their families have unfettered access to quality
training and educational programs while utilizing their earned benefits
provided to them by the GI Bill. We are extremely grateful for the
opportunity to once again appear before this committee to share our
positions on the important topic of protecting our veterans and the GI
Bill from unnecessary red tape that restricts veteran access to the
benefits they need for better lives. We remain committed to working
closely with our VA partners, VSO stakeholders and educational
institutions on these and other initiatives designed to protect the
quality and the integrity of the various GI Bill programs and the
Veterans and family members who have sacrificed so much for this great
Nation. They are truly our greatest treasure. I thank you again for
this opportunity and I look forward to answering any questions that you
or committee members may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Anne Meehan

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting me to speak at this hearing on ways to
remove bureaucratic red tape and streamline the administration of
veterans education programs. My name is Anne Meehan, Assistant Vice
President of Government Relations at the American Council on Education
(ACE). ACE represents approximately 1,700 public and private colleges
and universities and related higher education associations.
I would like to highlight for the Subcommittee some of the issues
that have arisen with the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) recent
implementation of a ``risk-based survey'' compliance tool.
Colleges and universities recognize the important role that
Congress and the VA play in the oversight of veterans education
benefits. Congress has made a significant investment in these programs,
and it is critical that appropriate safeguards are in place to protect
against waste, fraud and abuse - both to protect taxpayer dollars and
to ensure veterans are receiving a high quality education. At the same
time, in our effort to root out problems and identify bad actors, we
must be mindful that we do not inadvertently create unnecessary
compliance burdens on colleges and universities that are serving
veterans well.
We commend the VA for its efforts to develop and implement a risk-
based survey model, as required under the Johnny Isakson and David P.
Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020
(``Isakson Roe''). We recognize VA's commitment to ensuring oversight
of all institutions approved to receive veterans education benefits. At
the same time, we believe VA's tool, both in design and practice,
reflects a misunderstanding of how a risk-based, or risk-informed,
compliance tool is intended to work. Further, while we recognize that
portions of the statute could be clearer, we believe that VA's model is
inconsistent with the statutory requirements and Congressional intent.
To be clear, the higher education community is not opposed to the
concept of risk-based models.\1\ To the contrary, we believe that risk-
based surveys, when done right, can be a valuable and efficient
oversight tool. The goal of a risk-based survey model is to identify a
limited number of institutions exhibiting certain ``red flags'' on
readily available public metrics. Based on these flags, the institution
is then subject to further scrutiny to determine if there is a risk to
students or taxpayer funds and to allow the regulator to take further
action as needed. A risk-based model is a way to target finite
oversight resources to address the areas of greatest concern.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A risk-informed approach to regulation and oversight is not a
new idea in higher education circles. In fact, as part of a 2015
bipartisan task force on regulation, ACE commissioned a white paper
examining a risk-informed approach to reduce regulatory burden while
maintaining adequate safeguards for federal dollars. See Appendix III
of the task force's report at https://www.acenet.edu/Documents/Higher-
Education-Regulations-Task-Force-Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACE has heard from a number of institutions who have been subject
to VA's risk-based survey over the past year. In general, concerns have
fallen into three areas: (1) concerns related to the triggers VA uses
to select institutions for a risk-based survey; (2) concerns about the
information required once selected for a risk-based review; and (3)
specific concerns about the ``financial soundness review'' required as
part of a risk-based survey.

1. Concerns related to the triggers used to select an institution
for a risk-based review.

Over the past year, VA has selected more than 1,200 institutions of
higher learning--including more than 600 public and private, degree-
granting college and universities - for a risk-based review. The large
number of institutions selected suggests that VA's model is not
sufficiently focused on the institutions of greatest concern. We have
heard that some State Approving Agencies (SAAs) have been required to
conduct risk-based surveys at hundreds of institutions. This raises
questions about whether, despite their best efforts, SAAs will be
spread too thin, and unable to focus on institutions that pose the
greatest risks.
Many campuses report they are unaware of the reason why they were
selected for a risk-based review, and we would urge the VA to be more
transparent about these triggers. In cases where institutions know what
has triggered the review, the purported reason often appears
insufficient to suggest a heightened risk of non-compliance.
For example, some campuses were selected on the basis of having a
program fail the 85/15 rule during a period when VA had drastically
changed its policies around compliance and before Congress overrode
these policies through legislation. In one case, the 85/15 ``failure''
occurred in a program without a single veteran at an institution that
qualified for the 35 percent exemption and had a total veteran
population below 5 percent.
Some campuses were selected based on a single complaint on matters
unrelated to the quality of the education program. In one case, the
complaint was decades old and had never been verified. In another case,
the complaint was from a non-student.
Some campuses were selected due to nothing more than a standard
tuition increase. Some were selected because of a slight increase in
the total number of veterans in a program - which was common in 2021 as
we emerged from the pandemic and a positive sign, not a sign of
risk.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Some of the reasons given sound similar to items listed in
section 3673A, which defines the ``scope'' of the risk-based surveys.
While parts of this section could be clarified, it is clear that the
items listed were not intended as a second list of mandatory triggers.
Rather, these appear to be items that considered together or in
conjunction with other information might form the basis for the SAA to
conclude, in its discretion, that a risk-based survey is warranted at a
particular institution. Further clarification to distinguish the
specific purposes and goals of sections 3673(e) and section 3673A may
be instructive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are unaware of any cases where the risk-based survey was
triggered by one of the events listed in section 3673(e), even though
we believe those situations are ones that should trigger a risk-based
survey.

2. Concerns about the information required once selected for a
review.

Campuses also have expressed concerns regarding the large amount of
information they must provide to their SAA - typically within 10 days
or less. One large university was required to produce ``tens of
thousands of documents'' in response to the survey. Coordinating this
response is a massive undertaking requiring assistance from campus
officials across multiple offices. While most offices are happy to
help, many may not understand the immediacy or importance of the
response and it is difficult to ask them to drop everything when they
are busy assisting students and engaged in other essential tasks. When
one campus raised concerns about their ability to gather the necessary
documents in time to meet a two-week deadline, the SAA noted that they
were only required to give the school two days' notice.
To some, the risk-based review appears to be ``a large fishing
expedition'' resulting in a massive information dump that would be
impossible for the SAA to review in any meaningful way.
Among the requirements, campuses must provide:

complaints received over a three-year window on virtually
any topic (e.g., complaints about the dining hall or complaints to
information technology that a server was down);

all advertising for the prior 24 months including
digital, print and video aids, student handouts and brochures, a list
of entities paid for advertising or marketing, and websites created or
used by third party contractors for purposes of advertising, marketing
or recruiting; and

detailed student information for selected students
including admissions documents, test scores, attendance records,
student transcripts, and student financial records.

In addition, institutions must permit the SAA to monitor a class in
order to ``determine the educational quality of the instruction.'' As
one campus put it:

``This is another item which, while well-intentioned, severely
misses the mark when put into practice at a major research
institution. It is insulting to both the faculty and the [SAA]
to put them in a position to determine the suitability of the
instruction.''

This level of intrusion into institutional academic and curricula
matters is highly inappropriate, which is why Federal statute
specifically prohibits the U.S. Department of Education (ED) from
engaging in this type of interference.

3. Concerns about VA's ``financial soundness review.''

Campuses also raised concerns about the information required under
the ``financial soundness review.'' The balance sheet and income
statement categories requested on this form oversimplify financial
information on audited financial statements. It also fails to comport
with definitions in U.S. GAAP promulgated by the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB) and the Governmental Accounting Standards Board
(GASB) used for nonprofit and public higher education institutions,
respectively. The requested financial information appears to confuse
what business entities, such as for-profit institutions, report in
their audited financial statement as compared to what nonprofit and
public institutions are required to report. In short, the financial
information requested appears to parallel for-profit financial
reporting but does not work for nonprofit and public institutions. We
question the need for public institutions to complete this survey,
given that they are backed by the full faith and credit of their
respective states, and they do not receive a financial composite score
from ED.
By requiring institutions to provide additional financial
information from audited statements directly to the VA, the financial
soundness review runs contrary to the intention behind the Single Audit
Act. Nonprofit and public institutions are subject to the Act, and
annual federal audits are conducted using a regularly updated Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Compliance Supplement, with related audited
financial statements submitted through the clearinghouse to OMB. Such
financial statements are available upon request. Duplicating audited
information already submitted to the federal government creates an
additional and unnecessary burden for nonprofits and public
institutions.
If the current risk-based survey remains in place, VA runs the risk
that some colleges and universities will begin to question their
continued participation in VA's education programs, particularly at
institutions where veterans make up a small percentage of the student
population. We hope that Congress will encourage the VA to narrow its
risk-based survey to focus on institutions that pose a serious risk of
non-compliance, while shielding other institutions from an unnecessary
compliance burden. We stand ready to work with the Subcommittee and
with the VA to help VA improve its current risk-based survey protocol.

Other Issues:

In addition to our concerns around risk-based surveys, I would like
to mention three other issues for the Subcommittee's consideration:

1. A dedicated webpage for all VA's Education Service policies,
guidance, and training:

We have long recommended that VA create a website that provides
links to all policy guidance, email notices, electronic announcements,
webinars, and training modules related to the administration of veteran
education benefits. We believe that the Department of Education, Office
of Federal Student Aid's ``Knowledge Center'' provides a useful model
in this regard. See https://fsapartners.ed.gov/home.

2. 85/15 Reporting:

Despite passage of the Ensuring the Best Schools for Veterans Act,
we continue to hear concerns about VA's oversight of 85/15 rules at
traditional college and universities. 85/15 reporting continues to be
tedious, as it is calculated by program and academic term. It is also
required even when there are no VA students enrolled in a given program
and term. Further, schools with a 35 percent exemption are still
required to maintain calculations, despite having a waiver in place.
Finally, the definition of a supported student includes students
utilizing a payment plan, unless that payment plan is offered to all
students. Some schools within an institution may not allow payment
plans, which brings the payment plan into the calculation as support.

3. School Catalogs:

When administering veterans' benefits, one of the most significant
roadblocks schools encounter is the annual catalog process. There is no
standard catalog checklist to help school certifying officials compile
their catalog and often, the SAA and VA disagree on the requirements
for program approval. These issues, in addition to the volume of
catalogs the VA must review, can cause delays (often years) in catalogs
and new programs being approved, which has negative financial
implications on veterans and eligible dependents.
For accredited schools with Title IV eligible programs, it would be
prudent for the VA to mirror the ED's requirements, removing the
cumbersome program approval process if a program is listed on the
Program Participation Agreement and the school has a valid Eligibility
and Certification Approval Record, allowing standard degree programs to
be deemed approved as laid out in 38 U.S. Code 3672(b)(2). For non-
accredited programs, the VA should focus on a clear and consistent
catalog approval process.

Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee,
and for your efforts on behalf of our nation's veterans. I would be
pleased to answer any questions.

Prepared Statement of Jan Del Signore
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Will Hubbard
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Joe Rasmussen
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of Charles Bernstein
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of The American Legion
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
