- VA SUPPLY CHAIN MODERNIZATION: READY FOR PRIME TIME?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA SUPPLY CHAIN MODERNIZATION:
READY FOR PRIME TIME?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY
MODERNIZATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-59

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-603 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
KEITH SELF, Texas                        Florida, Ranking Member
GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Matthew M. Rosendale, Sr., Chairman................     1
The Honorable Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick, Ranking Member.........     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Michael D. Parrish, Chief Acquisition Officer and Principal
Executive Director, Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and
Construction, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs..............     4

Accompanied by:

Mr. Ronald Miller, Ph.D., Deputy Assistant Under Secretary
for Health for Support, Veterans Health Administration,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Dewaine Beard, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Office of Information and Technology, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs

APPENDIX
Prepared Statement Of Witness

Mr. Michael D. Parrish Prepared Statement........................    33

VA SUPPLY CHAIN MODERNIZATION:
READY FOR PRIME TIME?

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2024

Subcommittee on Technology Modernization,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 4:34 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Matthew M.
Rosendale, Sr. (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Rosendale, Self, and Cherfilus-
McCormick.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Rosendale. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come
to order.
Today we will examine the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) Supply Chain Modernization (SCM) project. The VA refused
to share basic information about this effort until a little
more than 24 hours ago, giving us no choice but to hold this
hearing.
We know the Department spends billions of dollars each year
on medical supplies and other goods, and struggles to manage
its inventory effectively. The Government Accountability Office
(GAO) and the inspector general has written a mountain of
reports documenting these problems.
There is waste and dysfunction in every step of the
process, and it is frustrating to the healthcare providers who
expect to get the right supplies in a timely fashion to care
for our veterans. The broken supply chain was on full display
in 2020 when COVID-19 caught the VA completely unprepared, and
medical center managers were desperately compiling and
exchanging inventory lists and rationing supplies to their
frontline staff.
After that, the VA attempted to install the Department of
Defense's (DOD) medical supply chain system but had to abandon
it in 2022 when it failed to meet the most VA requirements.
More recently, the VA put together the Supply Chain
Modernization project, which is even more ambitious. I
absolutely agree that the VA needs to modernize some key
systems and connect purchasing to inventory and payment, but
the Department already has a project to do that called
Financial Management Business Transformation (FMBT), which we
have had several hearings about, and is struggling to finish.
The Supply Chain Modernization project is a gigantic
effort, the likes of which we have only seen in the Electronic
Health Record (EHR), and we know how that has turned out. It
would not only replace the systems I mentioned, it would try to
knit together an all-encompassing system to manage every aspect
of a unified VA supply chain, from tongue depressors to x-ray
machines to printer paper to headstones.
The VA has been soliciting proposals from contractors to do
this for nearly a year. Now, we are hearing that a contract
award is imminent, but we still have only a rough idea of what
the project may entail. The lifecycle cost estimate is
stratospheric, huge, and there does not seem to be any approved
budget. The effort may extend for a decade, but there is no
schedule. The concept is grandiose, but there is very little
detail about how it might be accomplished. The VA may actually
be preparing to pay a contractor to finish writing its work
plan as scheduled.
May--we hear May, May, May, but we do not have any details
about this. Our witnesses will assure us the VA's financial
liability is limited. However, I am concerned that, in effect,
the government will be paying a contractor in order to find out
what the government will be buying from that company. That does
not bode well. I cannot be the only person that sees this
conflict.
In the real estate development business, if you start a
project without blueprints or a budget, you are sure to end up
with a half-built empty building. This is much the same.
Without a doubt, the VA and the veterans it serves would
benefit from a functional inventory management system, and the
Department could make better use of taxpayers' dollars if the
system used to order medical supplies were connected to the
systems that pay for and track them. However, what is described
in the VA's request for proposals (RFP) seems to be a
bureaucratic empire building mega project.
This needs to come down to Earth before it is too late. We
have had expert testimony time and time again come before this
committee and say these large software programs do not work. We
need to break it down into smaller bites and allow competition
to bring the prices down and the strongest vendors to come
forward, instead of relying upon two or three of the largest
vendors that continue to show up before us that are not
delivering on what they are supposed to.
This subcommittee expects truthful and complete answers so
we can carry out our responsibility to make sure VA's
Information Technology (IT) modernization efforts are on solid
ground and prevent more costly failures.
With that, I would like to yield to Ranking Member
Cherfilus-McCormick for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, RANKING MEMBER

Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
This committee takes up many important issues, from
ensuring quality healthcare access to efficient and effective
benefit delivery. Underscoring many of these efforts is a
timely, successful, and integrated supply chain process.
The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) oversees 170
medical centers that serve over 9 million veterans. VA is one
of the most largest purchasers of goods and services in the
Federal Government, both in obligations and number of contract
actions, spending tens of millions of dollars on medical
equipment and supplies, construction, and other purchases each
year.
In my 14 years as a healthcare executive, I have seen the
importance and necessity of an accessible and effective supply
chain system. Without these tools, the hospitals remain ill-
equipped to handle the demand. This became painfully evident
during the COVID-19 pandemic, when VA facilities were forced to
use Excel spreadsheets to report Personal Protection Equipment
(PPE) inventory up to the central office.
VA patients and providers deserve a modernized supply chain
resources, and it has yet to be proven that VA has the capacity
to provide this solution. The COVID-19 pandemic also revealed
longstanding vulnerabilities in VA's aging supply chain
management system, which led to gaps in the availability of
essential supplies and equipment for patient care and safety.
VA's attempt to modernize this system through the Medical
Surgical Prime Vendor program and the Defense Medical Logistics
Standard Support, or DMLSS, system have been lackluster at
best. Government Accountability Offices VA ultimately enlisted
in using the DMLSS and is currently in the final steps of
procuring a new contract.
Last year, VA testified that it was far along in the
process of selecting a modernized enterprisewide supply chain
and logistical management tool at least in its third attempt to
provide these key services to VA. Yet VA is still operating off
a coal-bolted together system as we wait for this new contract
to be awarded.
Chairman Rosendale's IT Reform Act, which was passed last
Congress, thanks to the support from this subcommittee,
requires VA to submit information regarding contracts for major
IT modernization projects prior to the award of these contracts
to ensure adequate congressional oversight. However, VA has not
labeled the supply chain modernization effort as such, leaving
the committee largely in the dark regarding to this contract.
To this end, in preparation for this hearing, committee
staff have been requesting briefings on the supply chain
modernization effort for months. However, VA has dragged its
feet on getting information to us in a timely manner. For
instance, to date, we have yet to receive an official briefing
on this project. Further, just 24 hours ahead of this hearing,
VA dispersed nearly 200 pages of documents connected to this
supply chain project and forthcoming contract award. This is
unacceptable.
Large modernization efforts, specifically those that are
highly integrated across the VA enterprise, such as electronic
healthcare records and supply chain modernization, require the
full breadth of VA support. VA must maintain a leadership role
in the modernization and not allow its vendors to dictate
product requirements, success metrics, and implementation
plans.
I acknowledge VA's assertation that this project is one
that expands beyond the Office of Information and Technology
(OIT), spanning across the VA's enterprise. However, I remain
concerned that the Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and
Construction is leading this effort rather than OIT.
I look forward to hearing how VA has strengthened its
acquisition framework requirements following DMLSS setbacks and
how they plan to develop specific requirements for the eventual
vendor of this supply chain modernization solution. I do
believe VA can be successful in this effort if they communicate
requirements and resources related to programs effectively, and
as of now, we have not seen that effective communication.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Ranking Member
Cherfilus-McCormick.
I will now introduce our witnesses on our first and only
panel today. First, from the Department of Veterans Affairs, we
have chief acquisition officer, Michael Parrish. We also have
Dr. Ronald Miller, the deputy assistant under secretary for
health and support. Finally, we have principal deputy chief
information officer (CIO), Mr. Dewaine Beard.
The acting executive director of the Veteran Affairs
logistics redesign program, Ms. Chanel Bankston-Carter, is not
appearing to testify today. It is deeply concerning that the
director of the office running the project that we are here to
discuss has either refused to appear or has been prevented by
the VA from doing so. We will continue to pursue that matter.
I ask the witnesses, please stand and raise your right
hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all witnesses have
answered in the affirmative.
Mr. Parrish, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your opening statement on behalf of the VA.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL PARRISH

Mr. Parrish. Good afternoon, Chairman Rosendale, Ranking
Member Cherfilus-McCormick, and members of the subcommittee. I
am pleased to appear before you today to discuss VA's supply
chain modernization achievements thus far and next steps for
this critical initiative. Joining me today are my colleagues,
Dr. Ronald Miller, deputy assistant under secretary of Health
for Support for the Veterans Health Administration, and Mr.
Dewaine Beard, principal deputy assistant secretary for the
Office of Information and Technology.
VA supply chain's mission is to ensure cost-effective,
clinically focused delivery of the highest quality care and
benefits with the greatest value in customer experience for our
veterans, their families, and our VA's workforce. The success
of this mission depends on the input and support of VA's many
stakeholders, and we are committed to engaging them throughout
this process. This includes Congress, and I welcome today's
discussion with you to provide an update of this critical
project.
Modernizing today's VA's supply chain is much more than
just mechanically deploying an IT system. It also presents us
with opportunities to transform the way we fundamentally do
business and deliver healthcare in VA. It also allows us to
standardize that delivery using an integrated approach to
achieve improvements in patient safety and efficiency, all
while focusing on human center design to ensure user acceptance
across the enterprise.
It is also important to note that there is no singular
technology solution that will modernize VA's supply chain
because VA's supply chain is not a singular system but a
combination of multiple component supply chains, including but
not limited to, facilities, high-tech medical equipment, IT,
medical supplies, the National Cemetery Administration,
pharmaceuticals, prosthetics, and the Veterans Benefit
Administration.
Through this supply chain modernization effort, VA is
changing how complex systems are acquired in VA by
incorporating lessons learned from previous programs, as well
as the GAO and Office of Inspector General (OIG), as well as
industry recommendations, to ensure success. Additionally, we
are using the Supply Chain Modernization program as our initial
pilot for the deployment of our new acquisition lifecycle
framework process known as ALF.
ALF aligns acquisition and program management practices
with laws, regulations, and policies, including leading
industry acquisition and standards. This has been and will
continue to be a deliberate, field-driven, iterative process in
that the project has to complete multiple milestones before we
fully commit to spending taxpayer dollars in deploying the
expected enterprise solution.
This effort has been ongoing for several years now, which
is necessary to get the hard decisions right before we commit
taxpayer dollars. For example, in September 2023, VA appointed
VHA as a supply chain modernization executive agency and
chartered the VA Logistics Redesign, or the VALOR program
office, to oversee this Supply Chain Modernization program.
VA also established an enterprise supply chain board, known
as ESCB, to integrate VA supply chain efforts under a single
governing body to bring together the goals, governance
structure, and roles and responsibilities of this program. The
ESCB also governs the overall enterprise effort by establishing
supply chain policy, alignment of enterprise supply chain
operations, and standardizing systems and data management.
Additionally, VA conducted an enterprise assessment of our
existing supply chain structures, processes, and technologies.
This was followed by a visualization of what VA needs to
modernize the supply chain. Finally, we established measurable
outcomes to define what success looks likes when we get there.
All of these were required building blocks prior to getting to
the final decision of determining the appropriate industry
solutions needed to accomplish this modernization.
We have also recently completed a rigorous phase
solicitation that culminated with a prototype evaluation by our
field users. In any acquisition will be an indefinite delivery,
indefinite quantity, or IDIQ, cloud-based services contract. It
is important to note that only task order one, the validation
phase, has been approved through the Federal Information
Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) process led by our
chief information officer. This initial phase will last no
longer than 5 months, and it is designed to validate the
winning bidder's proposal, as well as define the pilot phase
and establish incremental deployment strategy.
Upon completion of this initial phase, VA will accomplish a
milestone review, including, again, a FITARA compliance, to
determine whether to proceed with our pilot phase. Like the
solicitation process, the pilot phase requires our industry
partner to conduct a technology demonstration and satisfactory
user acceptance testing by our field users before we commit to
full-scale deployment, by functionality, not location of each
component.
Upon completion of these initial phases, a go/no-go
milestone review will be held to determine if this effort
should proceed to the next phases, which are deployment and
sustainment.
Completion of the pilot milestone review will also inform
determination by the CIO of this program being designated as a
major IT project pursuant to the Cleland-Dole Act of 2022,
which VA has not yet assessed this program as a major IT
project.
VA remains committed to getting supply chain modernization
right for veterans, and we aim this to serve as a model for
innovation, applying industry best standards with an eye toward
adapting for the future as veterans' needs evolve. To that end,
we are committed to working with VA stakeholders, including
this subcommittee, to accomplish this important initiative.
Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick, and
members of the subcommittee, this concludes my testimony. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak about VA supply chain
modernization, and my colleagues and I are pleased to answer
any questions you may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Michael Parrish Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Mr. Parrish. The written
statement of Mr. Parrish will be entered into the hearing
record. We will now proceed to questioning, and I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Parrish, why is not someone here from the VA Logistics
Redesign, or VALOR program, testifying today?
Mr. Parrish. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Rosendale. We do have Dr. Miller, who is the lead of that VALOR
office in part of his role.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Mr. Parrish, Dr. Miller, or Mr. Beard,
have any of you read the contractor's proposal for the supply
chain modernization project or otherwise familiarized
yourselves with the details of that--of what the VA is about to
buy?
Mr. Parrish. No, none of us are involved in that
solicitation effort.
Mr. Rosendale. We have got information that was presented
to us yesterday afternoon, several hundred pages dating back to
December, that you actually had access to it. This is
information that I have been trying to get for a year.
Do you understand how insulting it is to this committee and
to the taxpayers to come up here deliberately uninformed to be
the folks that are supposed to be the face, the front of this
project?
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir, I believe so.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Parrish, almost a year ago, I sent a
letter asking VA to comply with the IT Reform Act and report
this project's costs, schedule, and the objectives. You and
your colleagues repeatedly insisted that you do not have to
report to Congress because the project does not meet the major
IT project threshold of $1 billion in lifecycle cost. Lo and
behold, yesterday afternoon, the VA finally produced some of
the documents and the lifecycle cost is somewhere between $9
billion and $15 billion.
Mr. Parrish, please explain to me why you believe this
project is exempt from the reporting requirements.
Mr. Parrish. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Rosendale. The key reason it is not a--considered a major IT
program is because we have not established a firm budget or a
firm schedule, and that is the way we have structured this
organization in this process to make sure that whatever we
decide to do is established and has been validated upfront. The
very first phase, once this contract is awarded, is to ensure
that the--that this----
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Parrish, if we--we just received
documents yesterday that you have been sitting on for several
months----
Mr. Parrish. Sure.
Mr. Rosendale [continuing]. that says that the lifecycle
cost is going to be somewhere between $9 billion and $15
billion. How can you--how can you exempt yourself from that
when the legislation and the law says that you are supposed to
report?
Mr. Parrish. Well, first of all, that was an initial cost
assessment, and that is a working estimate that is changing as
we get more information. There is a significant amount of
assumptions that have been found to be ultimately incorrect,
and so that is not a valid budget to be able to commit to yet
with VA.
Mr. Rosendale. Did the VA design the project specifically
to avoid those reporting requirements process?
Mr. Parrish. No, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. I am still befuddled, Mr. Parrish, when you
have documents, again, that you have been sitting on, that we
have been trying to get, that you have intentionally been
keeping away from this committee that shows that you are well
over the amount that the law requires you to report, and that
you are keeping it from this committee. I do not see how you
can tell me that you are looking at scaling back the program to
the point that it is going to get below. You are going to take
one-tenth? You are going to take 90 percent of those costs and
somehow eliminate them?
Mr. Parrish. Well, Congressman Rosendale, to use your
comment that we have talked about multiple years is your
concern that this is too big of an effort, and what we are
doing is we are modularizing this. Think of subcomponents as I
talked about. Each one of those are separate technology
solutions, and we are doing it as a service, so we are not
buying any hardware that otherwise would be obsolete over time.
We have that flexibility based upon integrating with other
major programs that we have in VA to assess that at a later
time.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Parrish, according to the documents VA
provided, you will be asking Congress for hundreds of millions
of dollars every year until 2043 for this supply chain project.
Do you think that hiding information until you are forced to
provide it the day before you testify under oath inspires
confidence in this project and your management?
Mr. Parrish. I am sure you can see it that way,
Congressman, but I will tell you we are not committed to
hundreds of millions of dollars per year on this program yet.
Mr. Rosendale. Yet. Mr. Parrish, you are not coming--you
are not being forthright with this committee when we ask you
for information about what you are even planning. We have--you
have not come forward and presented a reasonable plan that we
can sit down and have a conversation to try and help the VA,
and that is where this committee gets very upset.
I will now yield back to Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have one follow-up question. Could you please go
through the budget process of how you came up with that
estimate?
You made a little comment earlier when you were answering
the chairman's question about how you came up to that estimated
amount that you provided to us last night.
Mr. Parrish. The initial lifecycle cost has been part of
the documentation that were provided or the new requirements we
have established through this rigorous and methodical process
of the acquisition lifecycle framework. One of those components
is to get an initial lifecycle cost estimate, and so working
with the teams and working with the functions of the
enterprise, because that is another big difference and what I
consider a major success in VA working transparently and
jointly across the enterprise. It is the field and it is those
functional areas that establish what we call objectives, not
requirements but objectives, to be able to assess that.
Then the cost estimate was established based upon some
major assumptions initially that we have subsequently found out
was--is--are incorrect, that put that based upon previous
experience and other efforts.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What would you say that budget is
now?
Mr. Parrish. I think that would still be - it is still a
work in progress, ma'am.
Cherfilus-McCormick. Are you certain that it does not meet
the threshold for reporting?
Mr. Parrish. I am not convinced of that yet, no.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Okay. The documentation that we
received does say that it meets the threshold, so we are trying
to figure out why is it that you came to the conclusion not to
report. If at this moment you are not substantially sure that
it meets below the threshold, the documentation says that it
meets the threshold, where is the ambiguity that makes you
think that you did not have to report?
Mr. Parrish. Well, it is the uncertainty. We do not know
that it is going to meet it or not meet it. The initial
assessment has some hard assumptions that is allowed us to
change--as I mentioned, we are using this as a service-based
contract. We are not buying hardware. Some of the assumptions,
if you look in there, assume that we are buying billions of
dollars of hardware and we are not, and that----
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. The main assumption that you have
to negate it is that you are not buying billions of software.
Is that what it is, because I am trying to see where the
ambiguity is so we can understand.
Mr. Parrish. Sure. The uncertainty is understanding the
actual technology solution that is going to be provided to be
able to achieve what we are--you know, what we have asked to
do, and that is exactly what the validation phase is for, is we
have gotten the proposal, there is an apparent winner, none of
us know who that is yet because we have not awarded that
contract. When we are ready to do that, that first phase, that
apparent winner is going to have to validate what they had
proposed to us for what they think the technology is.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Then you believe that the
reporting standard is meant to be after you give the actual
contract and they give those numbers?
Mr. Parrish. We anticipate it actually being after the
pilot phase. The other greatness of this--the way we have
structured this is the flexibility that we are not obligating
taxpayer dollars without fully understanding what our veterans
are going to get and our workforce are going to get for a
solution. If the solution does not work after the pilot phase--
so first phase is to validate that, you know, what is being
offered is indeed what is going to--what they are going to
deliver as opposed to changing assumptions or getting more--
applying more risk back to government. If they pass that
threshold, we have another go/no-go milestone, do we continue
this project or not?
Assuming they pass it, then we have them do a pilot, in DOD
terms low-rate initial production, at a singular location per
component, not this massive, you know, silver bullet as we say,
so it is per component, say for example, an inventory
management system. Then we would have the field come in and
test-drive whatever that inventory management system, at that
point, knowing what that technology is, because technology
obsolescence happens----
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. I understand what you are saying.
I just want to lean back on to the letter of the law and what
the actual act was designed to do, which was to create a
transparent conversation and relationship between Congress and
the VA, and that is not being met. We just want to make sure
that that reporting is being met. Right now, with everything
you submitted to us and everything you just mentioned, it has
met the threshold. I have not heard anything yet to see--to say
that, you know, with a substantial certainty it has not met it.
I do want to shift over--I just wanted to give you an
opportunity to explain that, because everything we are looking
at says you have met it.
Just switching gears a little bit to talk about the Reform
Act compliance. Last Congress, we were able to pass the IT
Reform Act, which provided guidelines and support for the VA
before it began its new large IT modernization project. Is the
VA actively complying with the IT Reform Act for its major IT
projects?
Mr. Parrish. Beyond supply chain you are asking, ma'am?
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Yes.
Mr. Parrish. I believe we are, and I will pass that to Mr.
Beard if he wants to clarify that.
Mr. Beard. Yes, ma'am. The two major other projects are
EHRM, Electronic Health Record Modernization, and our financial
management modernization program, and both of those are
reporting.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What are the guidelines for what
the VA determines to be a major IT project?
Mr. Beard. We are using the letter of the law, as passed. I
could go back and talk about why this project, we feel at this
point, does not yet meet the threshold. The initial cost
estimate was unconstrained based on no particular assumptions
and was provided to us by an independent contracting
organization that looked at everything we could possibly want
for a supply chain project. As you can see from the estimate
provided, it is quite large and unconstrained.
Then we went through the solicitation process evaluating
what really is the realm of the possible. Then we scoped--so
after we get a particular vendor that seems usable to work with
them in the validation phase to understand, with very modest $5
million, to see what would be possible, and then from that
unconstrained universe that was actually unreasonable to come
back to something more constrained. We only believe after we
get that nailed down would we be able to, with confidence, have
a better budget, and then----
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Well, before my time runs out, I
just want to actually--could you explain why the supply chain
does not meet that threshold?
Mr. Beard. Right now, in our budget we do not have any
budget beyond 23 and 24 dollars to put toward it, and we do not
yet know what we could put in that budget. Right now, it is
under 50 million that we are looking at, so we do not really
feel that it is risk enough, and we do not feel like we have
enough information to give you to have a useful conversation
yet about the project.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much.
I recognize the Representative from Texas, Self.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I am right, at least four major areas in VA have been
addressed recently. Construction was taken away from the
Veterans Administration and given to the Corps some years back.
We are dealing with an EHR today, massive failures there. You
are trying to do financial management to upgrade, I believe, as
a major project, and now we are adding an IT major project.
Even if we do away with the construction, you have got three
major projects going on, and this seems to be a major IT
project regardless of your protestations to the contrary.
If I read the history right, your system, your Generic
Inventory Package (GIP), which is abandoned, mainly--many
people keep their inventory manually today; you attempted the
Catamaran, which was abandoned in 2017; and you adopted the
Defense Medical Logistics Standard Support system, which was
abandoned in 2022; and now we have got the VALOR program, which
you are going to try to establish.
I cannot reconcile--you intend the new contract to be 10
years in length, and yet you tell us that you are going to
have--you are going to spend between 12 and 15, initial
estimate, between now and 2043, which is about 20 years. I am
trying to reconcile all the information we have gotten from the
committee staff here to see exactly what is truth. Then you say
this is a services contract, and yet your seventh--what do you
call these things--objective talks about optimizing warehouse
processes and bulk inventory tracking, and then your number
eight, which is more important, is involving the purchase,
maintenance, and replacement of medical devices and equipment
and their components.
Are you purchasing medical devices and equipment and their
components or are you contracting for the services by those
devices?
Mr. Parrish. Congressman Self, for the latter question you
are asking about, are we purchasing medical devices and
products, we are absolutely doing that today, and that is where
we are buying--that is part of medical services buying vendor
and it is also buying some of the high-tech equipment and other
things.
The supply chain services contract is about creating that
backbone to be able to get us that enterprise visibility into
order management, asset management, IT--or inform---inventory
management, as well as supply chain risk management, and----
Mr. Self. Yes. Number nine is your IT hardware and
software.
One of the weaknesses that apparently you determined was
your organizational structure to even support this huge
contract. Why are you moving forward--my question is, why are
you moving forward with even a pilot if you do not have the
organizational structure within the VA to handle this huge
contract?
Mr. Parrish. I will have Dr. Miller answer, but first I
will just highlight that a lot of the documents--and I
acknowledge that we could and should do better and be more
timely in providing documents, but to realize a lot of these
were written and established back in 2021 and 2022, some of the
earlier times, and we--I think we are in a much better place
over the last 2-plus years.
Congressman Rosendale, as we have had these different
hearings, you know, we have talked about as we are going
through this process, and we have delivered what we have--you
know, what we have committed to as far as establishing that
roadmap to get to the point that we are at. From a people
standpoint, a resources, I will pass it to Dr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Congressman, currently the VALOR program is
sufficiently staffed for its current activities. As the supply
chain modernization effort progresses and we identify the need
to increase the staffing, we will appropriately do so
expeditiously.
Mr. Self. Okay. Before I run out of time, what do--what is
the output of the 5-month contract? You talk about
stakeholders. In 5 months, how are you going to get significant
input from your stakeholders, and I assume that is more than VA
headquarters?
Mr. Parrish. I will ask, Congressman Self, is some of the
great wins we have had in this project beyond just the IT,
because, remember, technology is the last decision in this
effort and that is where we are. The first steps were that
jointness and transparency and establishing what success looks
like, and we had that established. Those requirements, those
objectives were developed by the field and tested by the field.
This 5-month initial validation phase is to then create a
work breakdown structure and a commitment by the vendor,
working in partnership with us, to deliver what we have asked
for to ensure we get a level of comfort in our decision-making
before we commit to spending, again, taxpayer dollars. That
first effort is to validate, because we have seen too many
times around Federal Government when projects are--you know,
they look good on paper and then, when they get delivered, you
have change orders and you have everything else, and we are
trying to avoid that from lessons learned from previous
projects and previous efforts.
Mr. Self. Okay. Before I yield, I will just say, every IT
project for everyone that does a IT project, remember, it is
always over budget, over time, and less capable than suggested.
Just remember those three principles of IT projects.
I yield back.
Mr. Parrish. Congressman, I will acknowledge that. It is
the reason we canceled the DMLSS program, exactly because of
that.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative Self.
According to the lifecycle cost estimate, the site hardware
and infrastructure total is $1.1 billion. If you take that out
of the cost estimate, you are still looking at a $14.7 billion
obligation by the taxpayers. I think it was you, Mr. Parrish,
that said that the numbers included a lot of hardware.
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir. It was me.
Mr. Rosendale. Maybe it was Mr. Beard, one or the other,
said that it--that that was not going to be necessary
investment, that that could immediately be taken off the bill,
if you will. That still is leaving us with $14.7 billion, which
is well within the amount. It is 14 times the amount that you
would be obligated to come before this committee and have this
conversation about.
Mr. Beard, my question to you is that--so have we
dramatically narrowed the scope of the request of the work that
is going on? Again, we are talking about an enormous project,
and if you are going back in and trying to modify and massage
these numbers, there is a dramatic difference in what has been
requested and what is going to need to be requested in order to
fall within the guidelines that you are not obligated to come
before this committee and start making requests and have a
conversation about what is going to take place or what is not
going to take place or, in your words, what would be possible.
Are you trying to talk to the contractors about what would
be possible to get below the $1 billion range, or are you
talking about what is going to be possible in the scheme of
technology to deliver a system? One means that you should be
before this committee on a regular basis giving us our updates
and the other is not. Where are you landing on that, and what
are we to expect?
Mr. Parrish. Congressman, let me jump in first, and I will
pass it to Dewaine, is, again, I will just reiterate that this
is a services contract, and we are not committed to what is on
that piece of paper that you saw originally from a--the--a----
Mr. Rosendale. Well, then why is that the only information
that I received, because that is the information that we have
received and that is what we have to base our questions upon,
because, quite frankly, you have kept us in the dark on the
whole system and providing us what in the heck is going on.
Mr. Parrish. Noted, Congressman.
Mr. Beard. Congressman, to return to your question, as I
said before, the initial estimate was all the universe of the
possible. As you know, our budgets are quite constrained, and
we have--as Mr. Self said, we have plenty of other projects
that are competing for those limited budget dollars.
Mr. Rosendale. Are we looking to narrow the scope of the
work or are we looking to start having a good, honest
conversation with Congress about what you are going to develop?
Mr. Beard. We first need to understand the scope and
understand what is affordable, what are the foundational things
we must do in order to get a great result for veterans and
those that are being served in VA.
Mr. Rosendale. Simple question, Mr. Beard: Are you
narrowing the scope so that you can get down below the $1
billion level or are you going to be coming forth and being
forthright with us about what you are planning to do?
Mr. Beard. Congressman Rosendale, our goal is not to game
the system in attempt to get below the reporting threshold that
is in law. We are trying to understand what it is possible for
us to afford and then roll forward.
Mr. Rosendale. Then we should be expecting to get regular
reports from you, because, clearly, you are not going to get
below that $1 billion level, okay.
Mr. Beard. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Then what the other thing is I want to
make sure we are exceedingly clear about, any kind of proposal
that starts getting structured that says and this will be added
on later and this will be added on later, those costs are all
going to need to be identified upfront, because we are tired of
going through a process where the software companies continue
to milk the American taxpayers on change orders and additions
later on that we are not aware of what the prices are.
Mr. Beard. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Parrish. Absolutely.
Mr. Beard. I agree with you completely.
Mr. Rosendale. We can establish, then, that this is going
to be a program that is going to be well above the criteria
that is necessary for you to be reporting here?
Mr. Beard. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. We are going to be looking forward to
having those.
Dr. Miller, which of these systems are you planning to
keep--oh, I am sorry. I need to go--are we ready to bring the
honeycomb up? I will do that on the next round of questioning
because it is going to--yes, yes, yes. We will get ready for
the next round of questioning.
I am going to go head and yield to Ranking Member
Cherfilus-McCormick.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My question is for Mr. Beard. It seems that VA is
increasingly moving its major IT modernization efforts out of
the Office of Information and Technology. What concerns do you
have with this trend, and do you feel that the business lines
have the requisite capabilities to develop these efforts?
Mr. Beard. I really appreciate the question. In my
experience, whenever IT has tried to lead a project, there is
significant pushback from stakeholders and end users. The
perception is often that IT is trying to do something to the
user community that forces changes in business practices and is
uncomfortable for them, which leads to many projects failing
because users failed to adopt them.
What we have determined in VA is it is better to partner
with the stakeholders, understand what the outcomes are that
they are after and bring them along every step of the way, so
that they are driving the outcomes that any technology solution
must deliver, so that they are owning their requirements, they
are understanding the changes in business processes that may be
required in order to implement a technology solution
effectively.
While it may seem unorthodox to have IT not at the helm,
rest assured we are integrated fully throughout the process,
but we are letting the business lead the requirements and the
change management so that they feel complete ownership of the
project. Gartner and others say a best industry practice is to
have a unified team where there is no separation between the
business and IT as we develop especially these large projects
that will have a significant impact on business processes.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. You do not have any concerns?
Mr. Beard. I do not have concerns about the past as well as
the future. Every IT project, especially one of large scope, is
fraught with risk. It requires active management and constant
attention. That is why we show up every day shoulder to
shoulder with our business partners to work on this project. It
is not something we do as a part-time effort. We are dedicated
to making this work as we are with EHRM and FMBT.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mr. Parrish, in June 2023 letter,
the Secretary noted that the supply chain modernization
solution would seek to facilitate enterprisewide integration
and data sharing between other VA modernization efforts, like
electronic health records and the Financial Management Business
Transformation program. We have already seen delays occur with
the FMBT program due to forced interdependencies with EHRM and
the previous supply chain modernization efforts. How does VA
plan to align supply chain efforts with the EHR in the midst of
these nationwide pauses?
Mr. Parrish. Well, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman Cherfilus-McCormick. I will add to the earlier
question also, I will say that part of our acquisition maturity
and acquisition processes that we are putting in place around
governance, I think that we are very comfortable working across
the enterprise with the OIT team as well as the functional
champions, if you will.
To your point specifically about how we are integrating
with other programs, part of the maturity, again, is developing
that integrated master schedule and saying here is where supply
chain fits. Supply chain is what we have established working
already with the EHRM program and the FMBT program is they are
the leads on their current efforts because they are ahead of
supply chain. Technologically that we have to meet their
requirements, whatever it is at that point, so that we are not
going to disrupt that, and we are not going to go back to the
change orders, and we are not going to make a lot of
dependencies on vendor lock, if you will. We want to keep the
maximum flexibility to the government to minimize those
taxpayer dollars and the reuse.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. How does the fact that VHA is
currently using two different EHRs and the lack of a baseline
EHR impact plans for supply chain modernization?
Mr. Beard. Can I take that one?
Mr. Parrish. Sure, go ahead.
Mr. Beard. The integrations that we have with our legacy
systems, including our financial management systems and our
legacy inventory systems for the EHR, have already been worked
through at our initial sites. Those interfaces are well
established and are functioning today. That is already well
known, and we have a clear path for the same interfaces or same
types of interfaces for any supply chain modernization effort.
We are really clear about what is required for the--both
electronic health records for use of any supply chain
modernization.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mr. Beard, according to VA's
Office of Inspector General, one of the main operational gaps
was the deficiencies in managing data and information sharing.
How does the VA plan to reinforce the privacy of veterans' data
in the new supply chain modernization solution?
Mr. Beard. Right. In cooperation and collaboration with our
Data Governance Council and our chief data officer, we are
baking privacy and security in at the beginning. We are looking
at categorizing data as private or secure based on its--what it
is, where it rests and the systems that it is in, and then
throwing--flowing through data loss protection around those as
they are used by individuals based on their role. That is part
of our enterprise data warehouse and data management strategy
and the technologies we are building today.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Ranking Member
Cherfilus-McCormick.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go back to the governance. You said, Mr. Parrish,
that you answered the--you corrected the governance several
years ago. When did you identify the weakness most recently to
us?
Mr. Parrish. Are you addressing the DMLSS program, sir?
Mr. Self. I am addressing your needs statement, your
business and mission needs statement.
Mr. Parrish. Please repeat the question.
Mr. Self. I believe it was written this year, in January of
this year, and identified the weaknesses in your governance
program. I question your memory on when you actually identified
the weaknesses that you are going to have to correct.
How in the world--I want to ask you what you mean by the
analysis said you are going to leverage the supply chain
program to gain consensus from all of your stakeholders. I do
not even know what that means. You are going to leverage the
supply chain program that we are developing on the fly now to
gain consensus or you are going to gain consensus before you
move forward?
Mr. Parrish. We are gaining--we already have consensus and
are gaining consensus as we continue this process across the
enterprise.
Mr. Self. Okay. Before you go to your validation phase, you
have gained consensus?
Mr. Parrish. From----
Mr. Self. If I went to the Veterans Integrated Service
Networks (VISN), the various VISNs, all of your offices, they
would agree that what you have outlined is what they want, what
they need?
Mr. Parrish. Congressman, I will defer to Dr. Miller to
validate that, but we have--part of--what we have done here
successfully is ensure that the field from the very beginning
is involved in the decision-making as well as involved in the
establishment of those objectives.
Mr. Self. When did you establish VALOR?
Mr. Parrish. VALOR was established before DMLSS. It was the
program office that was running the DMLSS program before we
stopped that, and they just--they transitioned into operating
here.
Mr. Self. That is right. Evolved from the failed DMLSS, is
that the way you say it?
Mr. Parrish. DMLSS, yes, sir, Defense Medical Logistics----
Mr. Self. Okay. So--but you transitioned in probably 2022
or 2023?
Mr. Parrish. 2022, yes, sir.
Mr. Self. 2022.
Mr. Parrish. What we did is we took a step back after we
saw how DMLSS was over budget, behind schedule, and not
delivering what was needed in the field.
Mr. Self. Those are my three points.
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir. Cost, schedule, performance. That is
what we believe.
Mr. Self. I am telling you, that is what we are going to
see here. I question the fact whether you have consensus in
that short a period of time.
Mr. Parrish. In the last 2 years?
Mr. Self. Absolutely.
Mr. Parrish. Okay. I will----
Mr. Self. You are still designing the program. You cannot
even give us a budget, which means you do not have the program
designed, de facto.
Mr. Parrish. I respectfully disagree with that,
Congressman, but I will pass it off to Dr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Congressman, I will go back to your earlier
question and answer both your questions. The field has been
involved since day one, and I will start back from governance,
on your question of governance. The gap analysis that was
completed in early 2023 identified the need to restructure the
governance. Because of that, we have established an enterprise
supply chain board that is represented by every administration
and every program office, to include having a network director
on the supply chain board as an adviser who keeps the field
abreast.
We also keep Greg Goins, from VISN 9, network director. He
is also the person I keep informed throughout the process that
informs the field. Not only do we--do I inform the field
through him, I inform the field through VHA small group
meetings and established governance boards as well.
Mr. Self. Okay. Let us explore that. The supply chain board
I was going to ask you about because that is something that VA
does very well, establishes new organizations to do things that
you have been doing. If I went to Jason Cave, the director of
the Dallas big VA, what is he going to tell me about this
program? What is he going to know about this program, the
director of the second largest VA medical center (VAMC) in the
system?
Mr. Miller. I will not--Congressman, I will not speak to
what he knows, but I will tell you that he is aware of the
supply chain modernization effort. He has been--the field has
been involved in that, to include the acquisition process as
well, and as we established governance. I am not--I cannot say
what he knows and does not know.
Mr. Self. I am going to ask him, Dr. Miller, because I
think that is a great way to figure out who knows what. If you
say--tell me that you have got consensus from the stakeholders
before you even do your 5-month validation, I think you used
the word, I am going to ask Jason Cave what he knows about this
program. I think that is--I think we ought to probably ask that
question of all of the VISN directors, just to see what the
field knows before we go further, Mr. Chairman. I recommend
that.
I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative Self.
I find it fascinating that we sit here and you claim that
this was not necessary to bring before this committee, and yet
then, as you sit there and talk to Representative Self, you say
that we have had these discussions with all of these key
players, and we have been gathering all this information. We
have documentation that shows that you have financial
information brought, but yet you tell us that we really were
not committed to anything yet. That is doublespeak.
The American public is sitting here listening to this, and
they are hearing you say we did all this work, we got all this
information, we got all these estimates, and then you sit here
and say, but we are not committed to anything because we did
not have to talk to you folks about it.
Can we bring the honeycomb up now? Thank you.
Mr. Parrish, I want to bring this project down to Earth. If
you can find commercial software to meet your requirements, you
may be able to succeed, otherwise you will wind up like the EHR
Modernization program paying a company to rebuild its software
to meet your needs.
We are up there. Okay.
Mr. Parrish, this is VA's diagram of all its systems
related to supply chain.
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. I think that you are familiar with this.
Mr. Parrish. Very much, yes, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. What is the commercial software, either as
one system or a combination, able to accommodate out of that
honeycomb right now?
Mr. Parrish. Well, Congressman, I do not know any
particular singular solution that does that, as I mentioned.
You know, back to your earlier point, we are very much----
Mr. Rosendale. Do you know of any system that is able to
accommodate some, part of that, that you are talking to?
Mr. Parrish. I think there is--there are a couple of known
products that we are using already that could take over some of
those different sections, but I am not going to comment on
current technology.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Dr. Miller, which of these systems are
you planning to keep and integrate with the new software?
Approximately how many new systems do you expect to buy, and
how will all that work together?
Mr. Miller. Congressman, to answer your question what do we
expect to take off line, that is an unknown right now. As we
work through the objectives and the requirements of what the
functionalities are, then we will assess each of these to see
which can come offline at that time.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. This is heading us down the exact path
that we saw EHR go through, and that is we want to develop a
system that is going to accommodate all this data. It is going
to accommodate the pharmaceutical department, it is going to
accommodate all the records for the veterans, and it is going
to flow very smoothly, as we were told. Yet all these different
components had never been put together by one software company
to manage all that data before. We, as taxpayers, are on the
hook now for a $9 billion system that is supposed to be
functioning at 179 hospitals, and it is rolled out at five and
is not even fully functioning at them.
I am very concerned, again, that you are heading down this
exact same path where you are going to get into work orders,
you are going to get into these different contracts that are
making long-term commitments based on additional components
being brought in that a current software company is not able to
accommodate right now that we are going to be on the hook for.
This is how, unfortunately, I believe that you are avoiding
bringing all this information before this committee, because
you are taking a small component at a time and you are putting
us on the hook for all of that.
Mr. Parrish, when your requirements are this massive, you
limit the pool of companies that can compete for this work, and
we have had many hearings about that. We held a hearing last
May examining this exact problem.
Did you consider this problem when you came up with your
strategy, and do you agree that it is even--is a problem?
Mr. Parrish. I do agree that single contractors or vendor
lock-in are a major problem inside Federal Government, and I
think that a key component of this is maintaining that main
flexibility. What we are not buying, to your earlier point,
Congressman, is we are not committing to a singular technology.
We are committing to partnering with someone who has a service
who then can find those multiple technologies. Again, it is
sort of like a Rubik's Cube. It's subcomponents. It is not a
singular silver bullet. It is seven to ten different types of
technologies for that honeycomb structure that you show, which
is also a great win when we finally figured out how many
different systems we had. That was up in the very beginning of
this as-is process.
We are not committing dollars. We are committed to solving
the problem, but we are not going to commit taxpayer dollars or
technology to something that is going to be obsolete in a year
or two that we are going to be stuck back here again, to your
point, Congressman.
Mr. Rosendale. Well, we expect for you to be back here
before us as we go through this process, as Mr. Beard has said.
We have already established that you are going to be well above
the threshold in order to keep this from this committee, so we
expect to have you back before us on a regular basis now.
Mr. Parrish. Thank you.
Mr. Rosendale. I yield back to Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the foundational issues the VA cites as a barrier to
effective managing the full supply chain modernization effort
is adequately staffing levels, citing that these
responsibilities are often an additional duty rather than a
core responsibility. What steps is the VA taking to bolster its
modernization workforce? Amidst the rollout of several
modernization efforts like supply chain, the electronic health
records, and others, why has the VA not prioritized a
modernization workforce?
Mr. Parrish. Well, ma'am, I will start, and then I will
pass it to my colleagues. I will say that, you know, one of the
successes we did with the EHR program, if you recall from last
year, is it was establishing dedicated functional champions,
and going--taking that lesson learned as a best practice inside
this program with supply chain is we have functional champions
from those different functional groups, pharmacy and whatnot,
that are dedicated to doing this effort. We have teams that are
co-located, you know, between OIT and VHA to--that are
dedicated to this project.
I do not know if you want to add on there?
Mr. Beard. I cannot speak to what the other components of
VA are doing around modernization workforce. In terms of the IT
department, our entire workforce is committed to becoming a
continuously evergreening model of software. We have done a lot
to componentize our software, to make Application Programming
Interface (API) and platform-based decisions so that we can
continuously modernize without doing big bang waterfall-based
projects.
You can see this in our approach to VA.gov, to our flagship
mobile app, to our benefits platform, where we are able to
break things into small pieces and update them without breaking
the entire system so that components seamlessly update
throughout its lifecycle. That is a mindset and skill set shift
we have undertaken in the Office of Information and Technology.
We are committed to continuing that in perpetuity because that
is just the way modern IT systems are delivered. Again, the
modernization workforce outside of OI&T, I cannot speak to how
they are applying the similar principles.
Mr. Parrish. Ma'am, we will--Dr. Miller, go ahead.
Mr. Miller. Ma'am, I will speak to the supply chain
modernization effort. Currently, as I spoke to Congressman
Self, the VALOR program is sufficiently staffed for its current
activities. The personnel that are there are adequately
certified and credentialed for project management and as well
as program management, acquisition management at higher level.
We are appropriately staffed at the current time.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What barriers are you facing in
recruiting talents when it comes to implementation and hiring
and keeping employees?
Mr. Miller. I think we face the same barriers as the rest
of the Federal Government when it comes to certain certified
positions. It is--because program manager requires certain
certifications, and not having those--and finding the qualified
staff with those certifications is a challenge for all of us.
What we do is we bring in staff, we train our staff internally
to get those certifications to build them up.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Go ahead.
Mr. Miller. No, that was it, ma'am.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Do you have any recommendations
that you would like to bring forth on how we can help you
overcome those barriers to acquiring talent?
Mr. Miller. Not at this time, ma'am. I owe you a response
for that.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mr. Parrish.
Mr. Parrish. Well, ma'am, I think that--to Dr. Miller's
point, I think that the challenge of the Federal Government is
the way the entire Federal Government acquisition--or hiring
process is. It takes significant time. You know, when we find
qualified candidates, taking 3 or 4 months to vet them and get
them on board, by then they will already have found another job
and they will not wait for us, and that is an observed and
acknowledged problem across all of government.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Now, the DMLSS project faced
several setbacks, as identified by the committee and the VA's
Office of Inspector General. We had a number of hearings last
Congress and sent numerous letters expressing the flawed
approach that VA was taking. What steps has the VA taken to
reinforce its acquisition framework requirements and rectify
the mistakes of the past to ensure it will be investing in a
solution that meets the requirements of its workers?
Mr. Parrish. I think the biggest thing, Congresswoman
Cherfilus-McCormick, is I was the one who kind of initiated the
effort with our OIT and VHA teams to identify that it was above
budget, behind schedule, and not delivering what was promised.
We took--we have taken those challenges and applied it to this
process here. This is why it is a services-based contract, not
buying a single technology that otherwise will be obsolete.
The evergreening idea is sort of like--is the idea where
technology can renew and refresh over time. Once the technology
becomes obsolete, the obligation on the services winning bidder
or vendor is going to have to apply any new technology. That is
why we are technology agnostic more than we are buying a piece
of hardware or buying a piece of equipment or software that we
are going to be locked into for 10 or 20 years.
We are focusing on taking those steps methodically and with
the field upfront to ensure that we are getting what we want
and we are buying and we are not going to commit to moving
forward unless we know for sure, testing it, that it is
working. We are not going to rely on a contractor to tell us
what it is we want. We have got standardized service-level
agreements, part of another best practice we took out of EHR
effort, if you recall from last year, was those service-level
agreements have become the standard across all of these major
programs. They are incorporated here inside the supply chain
modernization effort as well.
The vendor has the obligation to pick the technology. We
have the obligation and we have the oversight and the checks
and balances to make sure that we are not going to buy
something that is going to be obsolete or buy that service, and
that is exactly why we are having these tollgates, these small,
methodical, slow tollgates, so we are not committing these
billions of dollars on what you see on that piece of paper
there.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much.
Representative Self.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have talked a lot about this services contract. This is
an IDIQ contract, sir. That scares me to death, because this is
what gets out of hand. We are $34 trillion in debt. My
colleague, Mr. Crane, is not here today but always makes the
point that dollars are going to be really scarce in the future.
I think we just need to realize that. An IDIQ, even if you have
got all of your validation down and you are confident going
forward, IDIQ scares me to death going forward.
I do not understand the chain of command. Would you just--
for just three organizations. VHA is the SCM executive agency.
Then you have got VALOR underneath the VHA, I believe, and then
you have got the Enterprise Supply Chain Board.
Is the Enterprise Supply Chain Board the senior
organization in this chain of command?
Mr. Parrish. No, sir. If I can go back to your comment
about IDIQs, I think the greatness of the IDIQ is we do the
actual obligation of funds based on task orders. We are not
committing billions of dollars upfront. We are only committing
a little bit upfront.
Mr. Self. Yes, but this is where it gets out of hand
because you nickel and dime Congress to death. That is what I
have--that is the problem I have with an IDIQ.
Mr. Parrish. Sure, understand.
Mr. Self. Because long history with IDIQ, that is what
happens is, once you establish the program and you start these
task orders, they just start rolling. I am very concerned about
that.
I think Congress needs to take a hard look at the IDIQ
nature of this contract because I want to know how you are
going to cap this thing. I do not care if it is 12 billion or 1
billion. How are you going to cap this IDIQ?
Mr. Parrish. Exactly through that governance structure you
were asking about. I will start from there, sir, is we
designated the VALOR office as part of VHA as the executive
agent. Then the Enterprise Supply Chain Board is an enterprise
across the entity with all stakeholders involved, and that is
co-chaired by my deputy, along with Dr. Miller. That reports up
to--the operational aspect of supply chain is on that VHA side.
I am the program decision authority from the acquisition
decisions, if you will, for getting through the milestones.
The next level up above ESCB, not as a senior authority, is
our VAOB, which is our VA Operating Board, which is chaired by
the deputy secretary. From there it goes to the VA Executive
Board (VAEB), which is chaired by our secretary.
Mr. Self. You are the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO)?
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. I did not understand that. You are the actual CAO
that you reference here?
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. Go through the chain of command again. I have got
a couple of minutes. We have got time to do this, because I
want to understand.
Mr. Parrish. Sure. At the operational level is--it is the
VALOR office. That is the day-to-day cost schedule performance
effort.
From a supply chain management, beyond just the contract,
the management structure, it is the ESCB, which is the
Enterprise Supply Chain Board. That board consists of the
functional champions, functional members from each of the
different organizations.
Mr. Self. Including cemeteries?
Mr. Parrish. Including cemeteries, yes, sir.
Mr. Self. Okay. Which I----
Mr. Parrish. Which includes hospitals and everyone else.
Mr. Self [continuing]. I questioned. Okay, go ahead.
Mr. Parrish. They are at the table, along with OIT and the
lawyers and otherwise.
Mr. Self. Right.
Mr. Parrish. From an acquisition standpoint, this is where
I am the decision authority from an acquisition component.
ESCB also then goes up to--both of us then go to the VAOB,
which is led by our deputy secretary, Bradsher.
Then above VAOB is the secretary, who is the ultimate
decision authority, the VAEB, the executive board. Operating
board, executive board. That is how it flows up.
Day-to-day operations is with Dr. Miller.
Mr. Self. Okay. That helps my understanding.
You may be about to address this, Mr. Chairman, but I think
we need to be looking at H.R. 2499. I just do. If you do not
address it, I will.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative Self.
Dr. Miller, I want to dig into what you are requiring the
contractor to do so that we can establish this work. You have
10 big requirements, each of which would cost hundreds of
millions of dollars. Let us start with the high-tech medical
equipment. X-rays, MRI machines are a lot different than
bandages and gloves.
Roughly, how much high-tech medical equipment does the VHA
have now, and how many machines do you buy in a typical year?
Mr. Miller. Congressman, I am not able to answer that
question. I owe you a response on that.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Have you estimated the cost of the
systems to manage the high-tech medical equipment supply chain?
Mr. Miller. The current system we have or the new system?
Mr. Rosendale. Going forward, have you estimated the cost
of the systems to manage the high-tech medical equipment supply
chain, that segment?
Mr. Miller. The process is the functionality. We inventory
for all, all equipment and supplies across the enterprise. In
the validation phase, which I have not seen the proposal, we
will get the proposal, and we will validate what the awardee
states that they can do and what that cost will be.
Mr. Rosendale. You have not estimated the cost of the
system to manage that high tech segment of the supplies that
you----
Mr. Miller. In an independent government cost estimate,
that is laid out, Congressman, and I do not have that in front
of me because it is acquisition sensitive. I did not bring it
with me.
Mr. Parrish. Congressman, if I could add to that. What we
do not know is, for us here on this panel, is we do not know
what was in the proposals because we have not awarded the
contract yet. In the proposals there is a number somewhere that
we are not privy to because it is still sole source selection
sensitive. There is an estimate in there for each one of those
components, because that was one of the deliverables out of the
sole source.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. See, this is the kind of information,
again, that we need to have, and without having the proper
people here to provide it for us, we are not able to do our
jobs.
Mr. Parrish. Correct. I do not think any of us could
provide that to you just yet because we do not know it.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Beard, VA's request for proposal also
includes the IT hardware and software supply chain. According
to OIT's budget, you support more than 1.95 million pieces of
IT equipment, including 600,000 computers and 120,000
smartphones.
How many systems do you have now to order, receive,
inventory, and dispose of all that hardware? How many systems
do you have now to take care of that?
Mr. Beard. Ordering, we use a standard ordering process. We
use a couple of different systems in VA to receive the
equipment. We have Maximo at some facilities, and we have our
old Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology
Architecture/Integrated Funds Distribution Control Point
Activity Accounting and Procurement (VistA/IFCAP) system that
we use, or Automated Engineering Management System/ Medical
Equipment Reporting System (AEMS/MERS), to bring supplies in
through the warehouses.
Mr. Rosendale. To inventory and dispose of the hardware as
well?
Mr. Beard. Correct.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Mr. Beard, are you expecting to
consolidate all those functions into one system, and how do you
envision that working as we move forward?
Mr. Beard. Again, I would love to have one system, but I do
not know what the proposals have come back as. I cannot speak
to what our ultimate product would be. It is too early for me
to say that there would be a product.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Again, what this demonstrates is that
the people that are here to provide us information do not have
the information that we need in order for us to do our job.
Mr. Parrish, another one of your requirements is facilities
management. Roughly, how many buildings does the VA have,
including owned and leased, and how many VA employees maintain
those buildings?
Mr. Parrish. I will take that for action, Congressman. I am
not aware.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Mr. Parrish, how does facilities
management relate to medical supplies or high-tech medical
equipment or IT hardware? What benefit do you expect to realize
from integrating all of those functions together to justify the
cost?
Mr. Parrish. Again, Congressman, it is a separate
component, subcomponent of this overall idea. It is not going
to integrate necessarily from a technology solution to the
medical/surgical prime vendor.
I will add that, for example, part of the challenge is not
having this visibility, and that is what the technology
solution is going to get us. Like, what is the status of a
certain facility?
For example, pharmaceuticals. Some of the Consolidated Mail
Outpatient Pharmacies (CMOP), you know, some of the pharmacy
efforts are inside some of the facilities that we have. To
understand that and to understand how those systems are
operating and understanding what the maintenance status is or
what the preventive maintenance is, all that is the kind of
information that we look to get out of this effort, which we--
--
Mr. Rosendale. I understand that, but here is what I will
tell you. Having an extensive real estate background myself,
okay, the guy who is managing the grounds and the building for
the pharmacy does not know how much penicillin is going out
that week. Okay? They are two different things.
Mr. Parrish. Yes, sir. That is right.
Mr. Rosendale. To try and integrate all of that information
together does not sound like a really good idea to me.
I yield to Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Parrish, both GAO and OIG have voiced continual
concerns regarding the acquisition design and implementation
plans for the supply chain modernization project. GAO
specifically included five leading practices for effective
pilot design, to include establishing clear and measurable
objectives, data collection strategies, implementation plans,
and stakeholder communication pathways.
Do you feel that the VA's approach to the supply chain
modernization efforts have followed these practices thus far?
If so----
Mr. Parrish. Yes, ma'am. When we get to the pilot phase, we
absolutely do that.
To go back to Chairman Rosendale's comment, we are not
integrating between pharmacy supplies and facilities. Each one
of those components, when they do the pilot phase, will be
separate and distinct to their specialty and to their area.
We are working with GAO, and we have those best practices,
along with OIG, to make sure that we are incorporating those
into that phase when we get to there.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. I believe you mentioned that you
have defined successful matrix for the validation phase of this
modernization effort. Did I hear you correctly?
Mr. Parrish. Repeat the question again, ma'am.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. That you have identified
successful matrix for the validation process.
Mr. Parrish. We have identified success measures of this
program, which is enterprise visibility of, as I mentioned,
asset management, order management. Asset management applies to
the facilities. Order management applies to ordering those
systems widgets or whatever.
Inventory management applies to knowing how many cotton
swabs we have across the enterprise and in each VAMC, which as
you rightly mentioned, ma'am, we identified that gap during
COVID when we had to go out and count, you know, manually what
all these items are.
Then the last one is supply chain risk management, to
understand multiple levels down where the material is coming
from, China or otherwise. That is the kind of visibility that
we are looking for the definition of success.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Did you define these matrices or
did the vendor define these matrices?
Mr. Parrish. Oh, definitely not the vendor, ma'am. This
came from the field. I am not a vendor person, so I do not--I
do government-only meetings.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. How will you ensure that these
matrix that come out of this actually measures the success of
the product?
Mr. Parrish. That is exactly where the pilot phase comes
in. Also, once something is deployed, there is, just like we
have in those, established now, service-level agreements from
EHR, is there is continuous, on a monthly, quarterly basis,
whatever gets established, the reporting structures.
The other part we are including and looking at including is
independent validation and verification, and not just
independent from a vendor doing it, but independence so there
is no dependency of whoever is doing that validation to have
that separate. That is kind of a big, you know, operational
thing that we need to incorporate into this going forward. That
is years down the road, but we are looking at incorporating
that in other projects right now as well.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. As these matrices and requirements
are addressed during the validation phase of the supply chain
project, will you commit to sharing these documents with the
committee?
Mr. Parrish. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick.
I recognize Representative Self.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
How much independent authority do your--and I will call
them senior directors--across all of your enterprise have? For
instance, VISN directors, because you are going to establish a
services contract, and, from my limited experience, they are so
individual in their authorities, in each of the major medical
centers.
For instance, are you sure that what you provide, what you
determine will be the project, is going to be accepted by your
senior directors? What independent authority are they going to
have to do something different? There is where the nickel-and-
diming comes in.
If your VISN directors, for instance, and there are many,
many other across the enterprise, but just taking those, for
instance, there is where your IDIQ could get out of control.
How in the world are you going to limit their authority to run
their medical center in the way that they see fit? One size
does not fit all.
Mr. Parrish. Congressman Self, thank you for that question.
I will say that we have spent a lot of time, and this is why we
have not committed billions of taxpayer dollars on this, to
make sure that we have got jointness across the enterprise and
we have worked with the field, the VISN directors and the VAMC
directors, to make sure that they are buying into this. We do
not want the challenge that when something gets deployed that
nobody accepts. That is the qualitative aspect. That is why the
concept of human center design and change management is done at
the very beginning, before we even start spending a dime. That
is where a lot of the processes have been done to improve this.
Today, separate from this--or a part of this is the idea of
category management. We are working on standardizing some
contracts to make their life easier. That is the real intent of
this is to make our VA teammates out in the field, make their
lives easier to order equipment and make sure it is delivered
there on time when they need it.
I do not know if you want to add anything to that, Dr.
Miller.
Mr. Miller. No.
Mr. Self. Okay. I go back to the 5-month project for
validation. Five-month projects probably do not scale to a 10
or 20, depending on which you read here, project. I am very
concerned about the way you have structured this.
I think to protect the American taxpayer, Mr. Chairman, I
am recommending that we take a look at the 2499 in full
committee, and I recommend we take that to the full committee
and examine it based on the information that we are just now
getting out of the VA.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much.
Mr. Parrish, you have told us that the VA is buying
functionality, not software, but you have been describing a
process where the VA pays a contractor to tell you what
software provides the functionality that you need. How are you
going to know whether their advice is biased or not before we
start obligating ourselves to big dollars?
Mr. Parrish. I think a key component of that is that
Independent Verification and Validation (IVV) process that I
talked about. The other comment I would make, Congressman
Rosendale, is the fact that we are not relying on the
contractors to tell us what we need. We have specific
objectives that we expect them to deliver.
For example, I will use just the cliche of scrambled eggs
when you go to a diner. We are not going to dictate. We are not
going to over-engineer something to a vendor to tell us we want
the size of the spatula or the temperature of the oven. We just
want our scrambled eggs on time and on budget, and that is what
we are expecting them to deliver. How they do it is up to them.
We do not want to be locked in to a single vendor. You
know, just for example, I grew up under Jack Welch in my GE
days, and if we have to rely on a vendor to tell us how to do
our job, we do not need ourselves.
Mr. Rosendale. I mean, that sounds like a great answer. The
problem is, when we bring the honeycomb up and we show you all
the different components that you need to address, and you
cannot really answer any questions about how much of that is
going to be removed, how much of that is going to be connected.
You are relying, you are relying on the contractors.
The contract structure, scope of work, and technology
challenges for the Supply Chain Modernization project all sound
very familiar and similar to what we have been dealing with in
the EHR Modernization. Quite frankly, we have paid $9 billion
out for Oracle to use taxpayers' money and veterans as guinea
pigs so they can develop a new system. That is what it has been
used as. The veterans are being used as guinea pigs, and the
taxpayers are footing the bill for this grand experiment.
This project sounds very similar to it. How is it going to
be different?
Mr. Parrish. I think the big thing is, and we have said
here multiple times, Congressman Rosendale, is we are not
committing billions of dollars upfront on day one. We are
making sure they prove it to us that the system works. We are
making sure that the field is the one that is accepting this at
that pilot phase.
Once we know that, once we are able to mitigate that
uncertainty, having imperfect information, understanding what
it is that we are actually going to get, then we can make that
informed decision. We cannot make that informed decision
upfront saying we are going to commit billions of dollars today
when we do not even know what the offer is, to your point,
Congressman.
Mr. Rosendale. Again, but if we are going to be phasing
this in and we are making financial obligations and we have not
had any kind of commitment or information, dialog back and
forth from VA about this process, we do not know, quite
frankly, what you are up to. We do not know what these
agreements are going to look like, if they are going to be
obligating the taxpayers later on for additional work and for
improvements. We have not seen so far from the VA their
judgment being very sound about investments in software
programs based on future promises of how they are going to
perform.
With that, I would yield to Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Fiscal Year 2025 budget request proposes major cuts in
OIT's IT modernization fund. How will you ensure that the
supply chain modernization efforts get the resources it needs
to be successful?
Mr. Beard. Thank you for the question. We understand that
the 2025 budget really has no development and modernization
funds in it, very, very minimal. We do have 2-year funds. Our
development and modernization funds are 2-year funds.
We are planning to use in Fiscal Year 2024 our 2023-'24
funds, and then in 2025 to use our 2024-'25 funds to carry this
through at a very modest level just to get us through the
pilot. We would submit anything that we learn from this.
Additional budget requirements would go into the 2026 budget
and beyond.
Again, understanding Federal caps on spending, there would
be severe tradeoffs within VA to establish any additional funds
above these very modest levels based, again, as Mr. Parrish
said, on the functionality that we think could be accomplished
with the resources available to do anything meaningful.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Ranking Member
Cherfilus-McCormick.
I now yield to Representative Self from Texas.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
How many primes bid on your--or responded to your RFP?
Mr. Parrish. The way we did this process is--again, a
methodical process from the very beginning. We had a multiphase
effort. First phase, we looked at the past performance and the
fiscal ability of said bidders to be able to meet the goals
that we were looking for. That whittled it down to, I believe,
four or five bidders.
Then we have the traditional multiple layers of volumes of
paper, if you will, for the different offerings, and we were
able to get it down to some finalists.
The other unique thing we added into this process was we
had that final test-drive of a--based upon some use cases. We
had the field again, the guys actually--you know, the ones in
the field actually doing the logistics, coming in and test-
driving those finalists, and that is where they picked that
final potential winner that we do not know about yet because we
are still trying to, you know, establish our final checks and
balances, if you will, before we commit to actually going
forward.
Mr. Self. You may not be able to answer my next question.
Is Microsoft in the final tranche?
Mr. Parrish. I do not know that. I am pretty sure, from
what little I know, is they were not one of the actual bidders
as a prime.
Mr. Self. Okay. It is a real problem in the defense
industrial base the limited number of primes that we have, and
I think it probably is the case in the IT world as well,
especially with the size of this.
Do you have any security concerns about cloud-based
enterprise systems?
Mr. Parrish. Very much so, absolutely. We make sure that we
are, you know, we are complying with all the laws and all the
cyber rules of zero trust. Also, the Federal Risk and
Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) rules and
requirements, those have been baked into some of those--in the
proposals.
I do not know if you want to add anything to that or----
Mr. Beard. Nothing is safe, Congressman, on-prem, in cloud,
unless it is buried in the ground and unplugged from anything.
It really--some great benefits come from cloud-based solutions
where vendors really have dedicated teams focused on hardening
those, especially our FedRAMP and high requirements for those
cloud providers. We really would insist on those same things
for any of our cloud providers.
Again, nothing is safe. That is why zero trust is a very
important framework for us and where we are looking at
everything we buy to make sure that we limit risk.
Mr. Self. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative.
I now recognize Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick for her
closing remarks.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the testimony and answers from our witnesses
this afternoon.
Our last oversight hearing on this topic was November 2021,
which predated my time in Congress. I believe this hearing has
been a necessary and helpful step in the committee's oversight
over the supply chain modernization efforts.
From what I have heard here today, I believe we are all--we
can all agree on one point: providing a modernization
enterprisewide supply chain solution is an incredibly complex
process.
How VA steps forward in these next phases will be
incredibly formulative for the pilot program and a potential
deployment of a new supply chain process. It is absolutely
imperative that the VA works toward directing and implementing
a matrix of success through all phases of this modernization
rollout.
If VA wants to reach a fully efficient and effective model,
it must put in the work to ensure that these outcomes actually
exist. VA cannot idly sit by as its vendors develop, modify,
and implement these systems. The road to an effective and
enterprisewide solution is before us.
While I maintain my concern, I look forward to working with
everyone, both in the VA and with the chairman, to ensure that
the VA is prepared to implement a solution that supports all of
VA's supply chain needs.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative
Cherfilus-McCormick.
I want to thank the witnesses for joining us this
afternoon. I will be following up to make sure the subcommittee
gets the information we need from the witness who did not
appear.
This project does not seem to have the confidence of VA
senior leaders, and unless I see some radical improvements in
transparency, it will not have my confidence or support either.
The only fact that we have established here today is the VA's
obligation to report and request funding for this proposed
project instead of keeping this committee in the dark.
I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous
material.
Without objection, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witness

----------

Prepared Statement of Michael Parrish

Good afternoon, Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am pleased to appear
before you today to discuss VA's Supply Chain Modernization (SCM)
achievements thus far, and next steps for this critical initiative.
Joining me today are my colleagues, Dr. Ronald Miller, Deputy Assistant
Under Secretary for Health for Support for the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA), and Mr. Dewaine Beard, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for the Office of Information and Technology (OIT).
VA's supply chain mission is to ensure cost-effective, clinically
focused delivery of the highest quality care and benefits with the
greatest value and customer experience for Veterans, caregivers,
survivors and families, and VA's workforce. The success of this mission
depends on the input and support of VA's many stakeholders, and we are
committed to engaging them throughout this process. This includes
Congress, and I welcome today's discussion with you to provide you a
long overdue update of this critical project as we mark a key
milestone.
Modernizing VA's supply chain is much more than just mechanically
deploying a new information technology (IT) system or software
implementation. It also supports the effort to enable fundamental
change in how business and health care work processes are performed
within VA. It presents us with opportunities to transform the way we do
business and deliver health care, as well as to standardize that
delivery using an integrated approach to achieve improvements in
patient safety and efficiency in health care all while focusing on
human centered design to ensure user adaptability across the
enterprise. It is also important to note that there is no singular
technology solution that will modernize VA's supply chain because VA's
supply chain is not a singular system, but a combination of multiple
component supply chains including, but not limited to, facilities, high
tech medical equipment, IT, medical supplies, the National Cemetery
Administration, pharmaceuticals, prosthetics, and the Veterans Benefits
Administration.
Through this SCM effort, VA is changing how complex systems are
acquired in VA by incorporating lessons learned from previous programs,
the Government Accountability Office, Office of Inspector General, and
industry recommendations to ensure success. Additionally, we are using
this SCM program as our initial pilot for the deployment of our new
Acquisition Lifecycle Framework (ALF) process. ALF aligns acquisition
and program and project management practices with laws, regulations,
and policies; includes leading industry acquisition standards such as
the Capability Maturity Model Integration Acquisition; and is
customized to the VA environment. To date, VA has followed this
enterprise-wide methodical process to begin to modernize our supply
chain utilizing these acquisition best practices and incorporating
appropriate governance and oversight that previous efforts could have
benefited from. This has been and will continue to be a deliberate,
field-driven, iterative process in that the project has to complete
multiple milestones before we fully commit to deploying the expected
enterprise solution. Because the initial tasks of the contract are
designed to assess the feasibility, approach, and scope of the supply
chain effort, the SCM effort has not yet been assessed as a major IT
project as defined in the Joseph Maxwell Cleland and Robert Joseph Dole
Memorial Veterans Benefits and Health Care Improvement Act of 2022.
VA's overarching business objectives of the SCM program are to:

Provide enterprise visibility of inventory management,
asset management, order management, and supply chain risk management;

Enhance the accessibility and availability of vital
medical supplies, equipment, and pharmaceuticals to better meet the
needs of our Veterans;

Streamline procurement processes, minimizing delays and
ensuring timely delivery of critical resources;

Embrace advanced data analytics and forecasting
capabilities to optimize inventory management and reduce waste;

Improve transparency and accountability across the supply
chain, promoting efficiency and cost-effectiveness; and

Foster collaboration with industry partners and leverage
their expertise to drive innovation and maximize value for Veterans and
VA employees.

SCM: Program Management and VA Governance

In September 2023, VA appointed VHA as the SCM Executive Agency and
chartered the VA Logistics Redesign (VALOR) Program Management Office
to oversee the SCM program. VALOR plays a pivotal role in overseeing
the comprehensive transformation of VA's existing enterprise supply
chain infrastructure. VHA was selected as the Executive Agency through
VA's governance process to lead the enterprise supply chain effort as
they had the already established VALOR office with trained acquisition
personnel in place.
By leveraging cutting-edge technology, advanced analytics, and
industry best practices, VALOR, working with OIT, will drive innovation
and implement state-of-the-art supply chain capabilities that optimize
efficiency, minimize costs, and ensure timely availability of critical
resources across the Department.
VA also chartered an Enterprise Supply Chain Board (ESCB) to
integrate VA's supply chain efforts under a single governing body to
bring together the goals, governance structure, and roles and
responsibilities of the Enterprise Supply Chain program. The ESCB also
governs the overall enterprise SCM effort by framing issues,
establishing and addressing priorities, approving recommendations, and
driving leadership approval. During its first meeting in October 2023,
the ESCB established three supply chain committees that will ensure
alignment of VA supply chain operations. The Supply Chain Policy,
Business Operations, and Systems and Data Management committees will
support current operations by fostering integrated planning and
collaboration on approved objectives, initiatives, processes, and
performance indicators. The ESCB may continue to develop committees, as
needed, and is in the process of establishing a change management and
communications strategy. Furthermore, the structure has checks and
balances in place to ensure enterprise involvement to include OALC as
the Co-Chair of the ESCB, as well as manages any contract actions and
program management and logistics reviews that may occur, and the CAO as
the Program Decision Authority.

SCM and Contract Award

Any SCM acquisition will be an Indefinite Delivery, Indefinite
Quantity (IDIQ) Services contract. It is important to note that only
Task Order 1 - Validation Phase, has been approved through the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) review led by
VA's Chief Information Officer (CIO). This initial task will last no
longer than 5 months and is designed to define the pilot and
incremental deployment strategy. This strategy will become the
framework for an implementation schedule.
Upon completion of this initial phase, VA will accomplish a
milestone review, including FITARA compliance, to determine whether to
proceed with the Pilot phase. Upon completion of the Validation and
Pilot phases, a go/no-go milestone review will be held to determine if
this effort should proceed to the next two phases: Deployment and
Sustainment. The implementation strategy for deployment will inform the
assessment and determination by the CIO of this program being
designated as a major IT project, pursuant to the VA IT Reform Act of
2021.
Through the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 and the
President's Budget for Fiscal Year 2025, VA will have the necessary
resources to begin the outlined activities. VA remains committed to
getting SCM right for Veterans. We aim to serve as a model for
innovation, applying industry best standards with an eye toward
adapting for the future as Veterans' needs evolve. To that end, we are
committed to working with VA's stakeholders, including this
Subcommittee, to accomplish this important initiative.

Conclusion

Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick, and Members
of the Subcommittee, this concludes my testimony. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak about VA SCM. My colleagues and I are pleased to
answer any questions that you may have.

[all]
