- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 491; H.R. 3874; H.R. 3848; H.R. 3933; H.R. 3898; H.R. 3981; H.R. 3943; AND H.R. 3900

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON
H.R. 491; H.R. 3874; H.R. 3848; H.R. 3933;.
H.R. 3898; H.R. 3981; H.R. 3943; AND H.R. 3900

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-20

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-079                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California Ranking
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Member
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 14, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Derrick Van Orden, Chairman........................     1
The Honorable Mike Levin, Ranking Member.........................     2
The Honorable Mark Takano, Ranking Member, Full Committee........     3

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Mr. Joseph Garcia, Executive Director of Education Service,
Department of Veterans Affairs (See Prepared Statement Under
Appendix)

Accompanied by:

Ms. Melissa Cohen, Deputy Executive Director of Outreach,
Transition, and Economic Development, Department of
Veterans Affairs

Ms. Monica Diaz, Executive Director, Office of Homeless
Programs, Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. James Rodriguez, Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment
and Training Service, Department of Labor (See Prepared
Statement Under Appendix)

Accompanied by:

Mr. Paul Marone, USERRA Policy Chief for Veterans' Employment
and Training Service, Department of Labor

Panel 2

Mr. Patrick Murray, Director, National Legislative Service,
Veterans of Foreign Wars (See Prepared Statement Under
Appendix)

Mr. Ricardo Gomez, Employment & Education Policy Associate, The
American Legion (See Prepared Statement Under Appendix)

Mr. Matthew Schwartzman, Director, Legislation and Military
Policy, Reserve Organization of America (See Prepared
Statement Under Appendix)

Ms. Meredith M. Smith, Government Relations Deputy Director,
National Military Family Association (See Prepared Statement
Under Appendix)

Mr. Kevin Hollinger, Legislative Director, Enlisted Association
of the National Guard of the United States (See Prepared
Statement Under Appendix)

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Joseph Garcia Prepared Statement.............................    21
Mr. James Rodriguez Prepared Statement...........................    30
Mr. Patrick Murray Prepared Statement............................    36
Mr. Ricardo Gomez Prepared Statement.............................    41
Mr. Matthew Schwartzman Prepared Statement.......................    52

APPENDIX--continued

Ms. Meredith M. Smith Prepared Statement.........................    61
Mr. Kevin Hollinger Prepared Statement...........................    70

Statements For The Record

New England Center and Home for Veterans.........................    75
Operation Dignity................................................    79
U.S. Vets Inglewood..............................................    80
U.S. Vets Inland Empire..........................................    81
U.S. Vets Long Beach.............................................    82
U.S. Vets Prescott...............................................    83
Veterans Education Success.......................................    84
Veterans Integration Centers.....................................    93
Volunteers of America............................................    94
Alston Wilkes Society............................................    95
The American Legion..............................................    96
Disabled American Veterans, Department of California.............    98
Family & Community Services, Inc.................................   103
Helping Veterans and Families of Indiana, Inc....................   104
The Honorable Morgan McGarvey (KY-3).............................   106
Nation's Finest..................................................   108

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON
H.R. 491; H.R. 3874; H.R. 3848; H.R. 3933;
H.R. 3898; H.R. 3981; H.R. 3943; AND H.R. 3900

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 14, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 4:28 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Derrick Van Orden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Van Orden, Crane, and Levin.
Also present: Representatives Takano, and Rosendale.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DERRICK VAN ORDEN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Van Orden. The subcommittee will come to order. Our
Nation made a promise--what? Oh, I am sorry. Please be seated.
The worst chairman ever. Our Nation made a promise to our
veterans long ago that if they were to protect and defend our
freedoms, we would do our best to honor their efforts and their
sacrifice recognizing that this is a debt that we can truly
never repay.
The Committee on Veterans Affairs was established to ensure
that the government is held accountable to that promise. As I
have said before, and I am going to say this every time I chair
one of these meetings, this is not a bipartisan committee. This
is a nonpartisan committee. I do truly appreciate all the
members, my colleagues from both sides of the aisle for
honoring that. It is remarkable, and I appreciate it greatly.
Congress must be diligent in our efforts to continuously
explore ways to improve the lives of veterans. Through our
oversight of the Federal agencies that were established to
benefit veterans and their families and developing legislation
that improves these benefits, we seek to honor the commitment
we have made to those who have served our country.
Today, we are meeting to listen to the perspective of the
Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Labor. We
will also hear the views of numerous organizations that exist
to assist veterans, service members, and military families. We
are interested in their perspective on legislative proposals
that have been introduced to improve their experiences with the
Federal Government programs that were designed to benefit them.
I have introduced a bill that will help service members
connect with veteran service organizations as they move through
the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) at the Department of
Defense. The TAP program is a well intended program that is
supposed to ensure that service members have resources as they
transition out of military life. However, as the hearing we had
just a month ago revealed, there are many missing links in the
TAP process, and it often misses the mark.
TAP needs to be much more focused on ensuring that a
service member leaves the military with a plan in place for
work, housing, and for social engagement. We continue to
explore ways to improve this TAP program in Congress, but my
bill will take a step in the right direction by connecting
service members with a community that is there to assist them
after transition.
As we work to improve the transition program, we also
recognize that many veterans do not have a sufficient safety
net after their transition to civilian life and may fall into
homelessness. While the number of homeless veterans has
decreased over the last few years, it is still essential that
we provide services to support these veterans in a fiscally
responsible way. Today, we will hear testimony on legislation
that seeks to improve the housing and support services offered
to veterans. We will also hear testimony on bills that are
intended to provide employment protections for reservists and
members of the National Guard that are called upon to deploy
and their families. One bill seeks to make service members
whole if they need to take their cases to court. We will also
hear comments on a few bills that were introduced to improve
the education benefits that are available to veterans.
While all of these bills are well intended, as always, the
devil is in the detail, and I look forward to hearing the
thoughtful perspectives of the witnesses on these proposals
here today. I now yield to the ranking member for his opening
comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE LEVIN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Chairman Van Orden, for
holding this legislative hearing, and thank you for your
leadership of this subcommittee. Thank you to everybody for
being here, and I appreciate your working with us. As we have
the congressional baseball game this evening, I hope many of
you will be out there. I was asked in the elevator, am I on
team red or team blue? I said I am on team red, white, and
blue. This is a great event tonight.
The best way we can show veterans that we take our work
seriously in Congress is by advancing policy that provides them
with the benefits and the services they have earned. I would
like to highlight a few of the bills on the agenda that deliver
on that promise. First, I would like to thank Representative
McGarvey for introducing the Veterans Education Oversight
Expansion Act. I proudly sponsor the Isakson-Roe Healthcare and
Benefits Improvement Act. While it has been a great boon for
veteran education oversight and quality, there is always more
work to do. Representative McGarvey's legislation, which I
serve as a co-lead on, makes some commonsense improvements to
the law, including benefit restoration, school oversight, and
implementation of the law.
Next, Representative Deluzio, another baseball player.
These are all by baseball players. Has offered the Job Security
for Military Families Act. The very first hearing this
subcommittee held this year was on Uniformed Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) protections. We
heard repeatedly about the need to strengthen employment
protections for service members and their families. Our
military is in a recruitment crisis, and we need to remove
barriers for individuals who choose military service.
Military spouse unemployment is three times the civilian
rate. That is a stunning statistic. The number one reason
individuals leave the military is because of how it impacts
their family. Representative Deluzio's bill provides new job
protections for military spouses, making it easier for service
members to stay part of the world's greatest military.
Finally, as we have discussed on multiple occasions in this
subcommittee, I remain deeply concerned about the effects of
last month's expiration of pandemic era flexibilities and
funding on our ability to end and prevent veteran homelessness.
On May 11, the maximum rate at which a grant and per diem, or
GPD provider, can be reimbursed for providing transitional
housing and services to veterans experiencing homelessness
decreased from 300 percent of the state home domiciliary rate
to 115 percent overnight. That is huge.
These percentages can get confusing, so I am going to talk
about these numbers in dollars and cents for just a second. The
maximum per diem rate went from over $150 to just $64 a day.
That happened literally overnight. I am pleased that we are
considering H.R. 491 today, which I am proud to cosponsor,
which would raise the maximum per diem rate to 200 percent of
the State home rate, which is $112. We are also considering a
Republican proposal that would raise the maximum per diem rate
to 133 percent of the state home rate, or $74, with potential
waivers for 10 percent of providers, up to that $112 a day
level.
There is clearly a significant difference between these two
proposals that needs to be addressed. I hope the chairman
shares my commitment to continuing to work together to find a
per diem rate that we can all agree meets the needs of
providers and the veterans in their care. Thank you again to my
friend, Chairman Van Orden, for considering these bills, and I
hope we can find a way to advance them all to the full
committee as quickly as possible. And I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you very much Ranking Member Levin. I
now recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Takano.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, RANKING MEMBER, FULL
COMMITTEE

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairman Van Orden. Today, this
subcommittee is considering two bills, Congresswoman Nikema
Williams' H.R. 491, the Return Home to Housing Act, and
Congresswoman Chavez-DeRemer's, H.R. 3848, the HOME Act of
2023.
I am bothered by the delay in getting here today, as it is
now been over a month since the emergency authorities for
homeless veterans expired. We have lost time and ground in our
fight to end homelessness, for me, the key consideration of any
bill is going to be this, does the bill do the maximum amount
to help homeless veterans get off the street and into permanent
housing?
On May 11, the maximum rate at which VA GPD providers can
be reimbursed for the cost of caring for homeless veterans
dropped from over $150 a day to a mere $64 a day. We are
already hearing about the stress this is putting on providers.
Many are faced with choosing between paying for security or
staff and reducing the number of beds they can keep open for
homeless veterans. Now, some providers are leaving the grant
and per diem program entirely due to this financial strain.
Congresswoman Nikema Williams' bill would raise the maximum per
diem rate to $112 a day. Congresswoman Chavez-DeRemer's bill
raises the maximum per diem rate to $74 a day. There is a large
delta between these two numbers, $38 a day per veteran served.
That $38 matters to providers and veterans.
With that additional funding, providers can afford to keep
clinical staff that can provide the treatment and services
these veterans need. They can continue to operate training
programs so that unhoused veterans can gain skills and
opportunities to get back on their feet.
We received a number of statements for the record from
grant and per diem providers. One indicated that failure to
raise the per diem rate will result in over $1 million budget
shortfall for their facility this year. Another reported that
they will have a $60,000 a month shortfall. That is a month
shortfall at the current per diem rate. I believe this is
unacceptable, considering the tremendous responsibility we
place on these providers to care for our most vulnerable. The
chairman, ranking member, and our staffs should work together
with our Senate counterparts to quickly find a solution that
adequately supports transitional housing providers and gives
them more predictability with their funding.
Now, I want to turn to another provision in H.R. 3848. I am
deeply concerned about the language that amends the West Los
Angeles Leasing Act of 2016. It is unclear to me why this is
being considered alongside provisions related to ending veteran
homelessness. The language proposed here is counter to what we
intended in passing the law in 2016. I was there. I know.
Everything done at the West LA must be focused on benefiting
veterans. Veterans need more housing, they need more services,
and we must not impede the oversight necessary to continue the
process of getting West LA away from its long and difficult
history and continue it on the right path in service to
veterans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back. Thank you
for the courtesy.
Mr. Van Orden. Absolutely. I will now introduce our witness
panel. Our first witness, Mr. Joseph Garcia, the Executive
Director of Education Services at the Department of Veterans
Affairs. Mr. Garcia is accompanied by Ms. Melissa Cohen, Deputy
Executive Director of Outreach, Transition, and Economic
Development, and Ms. Monica Diaz, the Executive Director,
Office of Homeless Programs at the Department of Veterans
Affairs.
Our second witness is the former Marine, Mr. James
Rodriguez, the Assistant Secretary for Veterans Employment and
Training Services at the Department of Labor. Mr. Rodriguez is
accompanied by Mr. Paul Marone, the USERRA Policy Chief for
Veterans Employment and Training Services at the Department of
Labor.
I ask the witnesses to please stand and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn]
Thank you very much. Let the record reflect that the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative. Please sit down.
Hey, before we get rolling here, this is really painful for
me to say this, but I would like to wish the Army happy
birthday today. Happy birthday, guys. I am going to say this
one time, okay? One time only. Hooah. There you go.
Mr. Takano. Preface that?
Mr. Van Orden. Yes, we could. Hey, in the interest of time,
and because I know that there are several members that have
some previous commitments, I ask unanimous consent to waive the
taking of oral testimony and proceed directly to questioning
the witnesses. All witnesses' written statements will, of
course, be included in the record. Without objection, so
ordered. We are now going to proceed with questioning. I am not
going to ask members to please respect the 5-minute rule, I am
going to tell you that is how much time you got to talk, me
included. The clock is running. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
I want you to know that I read your testimony in detail. I
read every single line of every word when it comes to these
panels. I do not want you to think that I have not taken this
incredibly seriously. I take detailed, ask my staff, it is
detailed notes then I get with this staff, which is excellent.
This is an incredibly important thing what we are dealing with
here, I want you to understand that.
Ms. Diaz, the VA expects to increase the grant and per diem
rate. They estimate it would cost $1.56 billion over 5 years
and $3.31 billion over 10 years. This would be an increase of
38 million for Fiscal Year 2024, and approximately 272 million
over 5 years, and approximately 737 million over 10 years.
The VA also indicates that it is awarding fewer beds based
on needs expressed by the community. Can you please explain to
me why the VA needs more money for the program if the number of
beds needed has decreased?
Ms. Diaz. Thank you for the question. When we did the
estimations for budget when it comes to the numbers that you
mentioned, we actually averaged those not on bed capacity, but
on the average occupancy rate, which is 77 percent of what we
are seeing. For any increase in per diem rate, we would need an
increase based on our budget because there is an increase. The
tabulation of the numbers that you got was based on the 200
percent number, based on that 77 average occupancy rate. We are
not using capacity, right, in terms of all the beds that we
have, and the total amount for that it ended up being those
totals.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Let us maybe figure out a better way
to express that, because it seems like we are given more money
and getting less bang for the buck. Obviously, this is my
ranking member's number one priority is veterans' homelessness.
The end state is every veteran that would like to be housed
should be housed.
Mr. Rodriguez, thank you very much for bringing your staff
by my office. I appreciated that meeting. It was fantastic. In
your previous testimony before the committee, you have
indicated that you expect 1 million spouses to be eligible for
USERRA if the law were expanded to include military spouses. A
couple of things. How do you collect the data on military
spouse employment? We are going to keep this staccato answers,
please. How do you, first of all, collect the data, and how did
you arrive on that estimate of 1 million persons?
Mr. Rodriguez. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank you again for
meeting with us. I thought we had a great conversation about
the protection for military spouses. We have various sources of
data. One of the things is we know that the data, though, I
would admit, is not 100 percent accurate. One of the reasons
being is because a lot of military spouses do not self
identify. Through a few of the surveys that----
Mr. Van Orden. Again, for brevity's sake, because I want--
--
Mr. Rodriguez. Sure.
Mr. Van Orden.--two answers, not one. You use a bunch of
different variables. What is your figure of merit, meaning how
accurate do you think that 1 million is?
Mr. Rodriguez. I think it is pretty accurate.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. All right. Now, do you because we
talked about this, do you see the potential of abuse of this
program? Let us remember, I have been married to a Navy wife
for 30 years, so my respect for our Navy spouses is more than I
can express in this period of time. I want to make sure we do
them right. I just want you to be able to articulate whether or
not you believe that there is potential for waste, fraud, and
abuse in this program if we extend USERRA protections to
spouses?
Mr. Rodriguez. If I could say one more thing. Out of those
1 million right now, we anticipate only 568,000 who are
actually in the labor force would even be eligible for USERRA
protections.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Rodriguez. Based off of the 1 million veterans who
are--1 million service members who are Guard Reserve active
duty, we only get about 1,000 cases a year.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Rodriguez. If you take that number.
Mr. Van Orden. I got you.
Mr. Rodriguez. Right.
Mr. Van Orden. What about the potential for waste, fraud,
and abuse in this program?
Mr. Rodriguez. I do not believe military spouses would take
advantage of a system that is there to support them.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Rodriguez. Wholeheartedly, I believe that they actually
want to work. I think they are looking for opportunities to
work. I think they are looking for opportunities to keep their
job so they can support their families. I think that is a
misrepresentation of the military spouse honestly.
Mr. Van Orden. I am asking you. Do you think that the U.S.
Government should be reaching into private industry when it
comes to a spouse and not a direct service member who has
signed a contract with the United States Government?
Mr. Rodriguez. I would be the first one to say I think
military spouses serve alongside their----
Mr. Van Orden. Hey, dude----
Mr. Rodriguez [continuing]. their boots, right, so.
Mr. Van Orden.--listen, 30 years, pal.
Mr. Rodriguez. I got that.
Mr. Van Orden. You do not have to tell me anything. I am
asking you a real specific question.
Mr. Rodriguez. I think it is important for us at the
Federal Government to help work with our private industries to
get them to understand why spouse's retention and employment is
so valuable to the service of the individual.
Mr. Van Orden. All right. With that, my time has expired.
In accordance with the Committee Rule 5(e), I ask unanimous
consent that Representative Rosendale be permitted to
participate in today's subcommittee hearing. Without objection,
so ordered. I now yield to my Ranking Member, Mr. Levin, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you my friend, the chairman, and I thank
all of you for all the work you are doing for our veterans. Ms.
Diaz, when we think about the GPD program, we often equate it
solely with transitional housing. In reality, GPD providers do
much more than just give veterans a safe place to sleep. Can
you please speak to the treatment and services that GPD
providers deliver to veterans in transitional housing?
Ms. Diaz. Thank you for that question. Definitely GPD
providers provide that transitional housing as you mention, but
besides that, we provide the comprehensive supportive services
which cost and funding, right, to provide that includes case
management. The frequency of that case management sometimes is
geared to substance use disorders, treatment, to mental health
treatment. We also provide housing navigation services to help
the veteran find housing placement. That includes as well,
services such as job training, financial management, and
training, and much more. There is very intentional, supportive
services to make sure that a program is successful and the
services that the veteran is receiving as well provide the
sustainability of the housing.
Mr. Levin. As I said in my opening, I am very interested in
coming to an agreement on a per diem rate that adequately
reimburses providers for the cost of shelter and care for those
veterans who are most vulnerable. How long has VA been hearing
from providers that the per diem rate is too low?
Ms. Diaz. We have been hearing this for a while, years, I
would say, but more recently, within the last decade. I have
been on the program myself for 5 years, and I have been hearing
this myself directly for 5 years.
Mr. Levin. Did any providers drop out of the GPD program in
anticipation of the public health emergency ending and the rate
reverting to $64 a day?
Ms. Diaz. We have heard of some providers letting us know
that they decided to not reapply because of the GPD rate being
low to meet the operational costs and services. Granted, I
would like to add that they are not required to tell us so
there might be other stories that we have not heard about it.
Mr. Levin. How does the lower per diem rate affect a
provider's ability to adequately staff and secure their
facility?
Ms. Diaz. It impacts them significantly because based on
having reliable funding, then you can plan, right? You can plan
all the staffing that you need, the services that you can
provide, and provide the needs that that community and that
veteran needs. Without having that, then you have to compromise
those services. When you compromise the services, then you
compromise the care and the outcomes.
Mr. Levin. Very good. Mr. Rodriguez, I will turn to you.
Good to see you again. This is not related to a bill before us,
but I want to take just a quick opportunity to ask you while
you are here, the budget agreement recently passed into law,
which was a result of brinkmanship, I think you could say,
regarding our Nation's ability to pay its bills and protected
VA from many cuts. However, other agencies that provide
services for veterans, like, for example, Department of Labor-
Veterans Employment and Training Services (DOL-VETS), were not
spared from these cuts. Can you briefly describe some of the
cuts to veteran services you are expecting because of the debt
limit agreement?
Mr. Rodriguez. Congressman, it is always great to see you
and thank you for that question. One of the most important
challenges we are going to have is cuts to our personnel. The
reduction of our personnel is one of the most important things
to me because of the fact I need personnel to execute programs,
to have oversight of programs, to ensure we are eliminating
risk in the execution of our programs. That is the first and
foremost the most important thing that is going to be affected
by cuts.
Also, the ability to not fund specific grants like the
Homeless Veteran Reintegration Program. Not having the ability
to fund grantees who can actually be providing those services
to our veterans who are experiencing homelessness. The ability
to not have oversight of our USERRA programs, for example, we
look to expand that program. We need additional investigators
to go out and be able to support someone who is submitting a
claim. Being able to not have up-to-date administrative systems
to capture all the data to capture all the information we need
to make a well-founded decision in the claims process. I could
go on and on, but those are some of the highlights.
Mr. Levin. I think it is important that as we talk about
the ongoing appropriations and getting to an agreement, as we
have said, you know, through the whole debt limit situation,
that we were not going to have any cuts to veterans. I was
really pleased to see that we did not have any cuts to VA.
However, the other whether it is DOL-VETS, whether it is
Department of Housing and Urban Development-Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH), the other programs that veterans
rely on, veterans who are at risk rely on, are very much at
risk of being cut if we do not stand up as the House Veterans
Affairs Committee, across the aisle as well, and say no cuts to
veterans really means no cuts to veterans, whether that is
directly VA programs, or whether it is HUD programs, or whether
it is DOL programs. I hope we all can get with our respective
sides and make sure that happens in the coming months. With
that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. I now
recognize Mr. Crane from Arizona, my friend, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you all for coming. At this time, I have
no questions.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Crane. I now recognize
Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Takano, for 5 minutes
after he sits down. Just wait a minute. All right. You got it?
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have
a few questions for Ms. Diaz. Ms. Diaz, the VA's testimony
states that Representative Williams' bill H.R. 491 is more cost
effective--is a more cost-effective approach to grant and per
diem. Why is that?
Ms. Diaz. When we were looking--thank you for the question.
When we were looking at the 200 percent and looking at cost
effectiveness, the reason why we stated that was that a lot of
our veteran--a lot of our providers did not request it. We saw
this through the last 3 years, did not request at the higher
per diem rate during that time. What we foresee is that if we
go to a lower per diem rate, a lot of the providers would go to
the cap of that lower per diem rate because they need more of
that resource.
When we are looking at the 200 percent in itself, and we
look at the utilization of those and how many grantees utilize
that, it was an average, you know, depending on the time of the
data obtained. It was an average of 70 grantees programs
requesting that. We foresee that looking into a rate that
really meets the needs of those grantees will actually be more
cost effective because not all of them will go into the cap of
that per diem rate.
The other piece that we found that to be cost effective is
the fact that it meets the needs of our veterans. It allows us
the flexibility to be able to utilize the per diem rate to meet
all veterans' need, not some, by having the flexibility to
utilize, you know, onto that cap in itself.
Mr. Takano. Does the provision in H.R. 3848, amending the
West LA Leasing Act do anything to end veteran homelessness in
the West LA region?
Ms. Diaz. In that particular section of the bill, we did
recognize a position in favor for that, but we also recognize
that it does not have a big impact when it comes to homeless
programs and operations. Our position as well is that
regardless that there is a favorable position to move forward,
we do not see a big impact when it comes to the homeless
programs at this immediate moment for operations.
Mr. Takano. Do veterans in the Los Angeles area support
this proposal?
Ms. Diaz. Thank you for that question. There have been
veterans in the area that had voiced that they are not in favor
necessarily with that position. We also acknowledge that we
have not heard all veterans' voices, and we honor all veterans'
voices, right? There might be veterans that are in support or
others that maybe are in a neutral state of that approach.
That said, I do want to affirm again that even though our
position is to support it and we are grateful for that, we also
recognize that this does not have a bigger impact when it comes
to homeless programs and services. We are happy to look at this
separate from the bill if that is necessary.
Mr. Takano. All right, well, thank you.
Ms. Diaz. You are welcome.
Mr. Takano. Appreciate it. I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Takano. I now
recognize Mr. Rosendale for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Chairman Van Orden, for holding
this hearing and allowing me to participate in it today. I do
appreciate that. My bill, the Veterans Education Assistance
Improvement Act, H.R. 3877, cuts red tape for student veterans
when receiving their benefits. My bill will make the VA's
decisions that could be harmful to student veterans less likely
to occur going forward. My bill would also allow Congress to be
proactive instead of reactive by being able to solve potential
problems before veterans are negatively impacted.
Under the current law, veterans are required to take a full
course load to receive their military housing allowance,
regardless of how many classes are actually needed to graduate.
This places an unnecessary burden on the veterans by requiring
them to take on additional classes that are not necessary for
their degree. It also costs the taxpayers more money. My
legislation would remove this provision and provide veterans
the choice of how many classes they wish to take in their last
semesters. Veterans should be able to make the best decisions
for themselves and for their families.
Moreover, my legislation would require the VA to notify
Congress, educational institutions, and students of any rule
changes not subject to the Congressional Review Act that would
impact the student veterans 180 days in advance. For example,
in 2021, VA officials updated a series of definitions
surrounding the 85/15 rule. Many schools expressed alarm how
the new guidance would make it more difficult to accept student
veterans and their beneficiaries. I heard from schools across
the Nation about this 85/15 rule and had to make many, many
personal calls to the Veterans Administration and to the
educational institutions to help try and sort these things out.
Without a fix, there was a fear that these educational
institutions would shut down and student veterans would be left
without any good options to continue their education, or they
were just being told that they were not going to be able to
resume those classes again.
I worked in a bipartisan fashion to fix this problem. My
legislation would stop future problems before they become full
blown crisis for the student veterans by requiring sufficient
notice to allow stakeholders adequate time to weigh in. Section
1015 of the Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act
of 2020 requires an institution receiving VA funding to either
be approved and participate in at least one program under Title
IX or receive a waiver from this requirement each year. This
disproportionately impacted religious institutions by making
them apply for a waiver each year without a guarantee for more
than 1 year, reducing administrative burdens for religious
institutions. It should not be more difficult for religious
educational institutions than secular ones to serve veterans
and their families.
First established in 1944, the GI bill has resulted in
millions qualifying veterans and their families receiving money
to cover some or all cost of school training. We owe it to our
veterans to have an education system that is easy to use and
understand and works for them. My legislation cuts red tape and
moves our country closer toward showing veterans the compassion
and respect that they deserve. I hope that the administration
and all of my colleagues can support this legislation. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale. Before I dismiss
the panel, I would like to remind all persons present that
Congress sets a top line budget and then the departments
dictate policy. If DOL-VETS, meaning you, Mr. Rodriguez, decide
to put bureaucrats and fund them over homeless veterans, that
would be your choice. I will be pulling you up here to this
committee and you will explain to the American public, why you
made the intentional choice to fund bureaucrats as opposed to
homeless veterans. Is that crystal clear, Mr. Rodriguez?
Mr. Rodriguez. Mr. Chairman, I will tell you, they are not
bureaucrats, they are actually government employees who are
working to support----
Mr. Van Orden. Is that crystal clear, Mr. Rodriguez? I
asked you----
Mr. Rodriguez [continuing]. the veterans, so.
Mr. Van Orden. I asked you yesterday.
Mr. Rodriguez. That is clear.
Mr. Van Orden. Very well. Thank you very much. The
witnesses are now excused. I hope you will stick around for the
second panel.
On our second panel we will hear from the following
witnesses: Mr. Patrick Murray, Director of National Legislative
Service for Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW). Sorry. Okay. Mr.
Ricardo Gomez, Employment and Education Policy Advocate for the
American Legion. Sorry about that. Mr. Matthew Schwartzman, the
Director of Legislation and Military Policy at the Reserve
Organization of America (ROA), and Ms. Meredith M. Smith, the
Government Relations Deputy Director for the National Military
Family Association, and Mr. Kevin Hollinger, Legislative
Director for the Enlisted Association of the National Guard of
the United States. Happy birthday by the way.
I would like to welcome you guys here at the witness table.
Please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn]
Thank you very much. Let the record reflect that the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative. We will now proceed
directly to questions, and I will recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Ms. Smith, you stated in your testimony that expanding
USERRA. to military spouses would have unexpected consequences
to the workforce. What do you think these unexpected
consequences would be?
Ms. Smith. Thank you for the question. One of the questions
that we have about the version of the legislation that we have
seen is what is defined as military necessity or a reason to
take time away from work. Without understanding kind of the
details of that particular provision, we have questions about
what the impact to the workforce would be.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Honestly, I do have deep reservations
about this because I really do not think it is the United
States Government's place to exercise these mandates on
companies when the person that is involved did not sign the
contract. I mean, we all sign contracts with the government,
and the USERRA protections have got to be ironclad. We can
never muck about with that. I know we have been, and Mr.
Takano's been working really hard to make sure that these
USERRA protections, and I agree with him completely need to be
ironclad. I do have reservations about this.
Do you think that there is a chance that this proposed
legislation could backfire and remove years of progress that we
have made in Congress that we have talked about in reducing
military spouse unemployment?
Ms. Smith. I do not know if backfire is exactly what I
would----
Mr. Van Orden. Unintended consequences.
Ms. Smith. We are concerned about unintended consequences.
I mean, we think that the spirit of the legislation is good----
Mr. Van Orden. Yes.
Ms. Smith [continuing]. to ensure that military spouses are
able to find and maintain employment. We have questions about
whether or not USERRA is the appropriate tool to ensure that
that is a reality for military families.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I used to be on the board of directors
for a thing called the Rosie Network. It was started by
Stephanie Brown. She is the widow of a retired Navy Seal named
Tom Brown. Admiral Brown he was a friend of mine.
Unfortunately, he is dead now but. Now, what she does, is she
helps military spouses, both men and women, start their own
companies that they can travel with, essentially. That is a
really good solution, but it is not for everybody. Let us see
if we can get this right to make sure that we have--they are
the most highly educated and highly unemployed demographic in
the country. If we can do something, I am more than happy to do
that. I just want to make sure that we get it correct. Thank
you, ma'am.
Mr. Murray from the VFW, under TAP Promotion Act, what
would VFW talk about during their 1-hour TAP curriculum? How
would the VFW ensure that there would be no recruiting of
transitioning service members from those teaching the class?
Mr. Murray. What we really see the role of accredited
representatives, veteran service officers as a key tool in the
whole TAP toolbox. What we want to be is a complementary asset
for the VA benefits briefings. Accredited representatives can
sign you up for your benefits right there on the spot. VA
briefers are just not allowed to. That is what we can bring to
the table and actually get the care and benefits process
started right there in TAP. The last time they drive out the
gate, they have got their healthcare, they have got their
mental healthcare, they have got their prescriptions, and
potential economic opportunity benefits ready to go that very
first day.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. That is why I want this to happen. I
also want to make sure that there is the appropriate oversight
from your organizations because there has been a history of
this not going well.
Mr. Murray. I can tell you that the VFW in our Memorandum
of Understandings (MoUs) with every single base that we are
operating on, it is close to maybe two dozen, that is part of
our agreement. We do not recruit on Federal property while
doing benefits assistance. We have no problem ensuring that
that is even further reinforced. We know that our services are
done correctly. They are valuable. If membership comes from
that, we will be happy. We are not there to recruit. We are
there to help people set up claims and benefits.
Mr. Van Orden. I get it. I want a friendly face in front of
our veterans before they are out of the military. I want an
active-duty serviceman or woman who has still got shiny shoes
on to look at you guys because you are hometown folks. I do
eventually want them to join your organizations and other
various organizations because when we sit together as brothers
and sisters, we look each other in the eye, and we know when
someone is having a problem and that is critical to prevent
veteran suicide.
I support you guys. You know, I mean, I did not borrow
these hats, dude. They are mine. My time is expiring here.
Thank you very much for coming out here. I appreciate it
greatly. With that, I yield back. The chair now recognizes Mr.
Takano for 5 minutes. Ranking member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Takano, for 5 minutes. That is a long title.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a short
title. Ms. Smith, your testimony pointed to the need for
additional data on military spouse employment, and I could not
agree more with you. While the Department of Defense conducts a
survey every 2 years, it is only a snapshot, and it is not
really useful for comparing unemployment over time.
Understanding the scope of military spousal employment is
important for us to effectively tackle it, which is why I have
worked with the Appropriations Committee to push the Department
of Defense and Bureau of Labor Statistics to collaborate on
better capturing this data. Can you discuss the limitations of
the existing data on military spouse employment?
Ms. Smith. Thank you for the question. Right now, as you
stated, the Department of Defense does survey military spouses
every 2 years on unemployment rates. That is point in time
data. That is not data that reflects changes in regions or
changes in, you know, the time of year, monthly fluctuations,
things like that. That would be incredibly helpful information
to target solutions for military spouse unemployment.
As an example, we do not know if military spouse
unemployment is worse in some regions of the country compared
to others. We do not know where we may be able to find
solutions that are working from one region or one installation
of the country that could be scaled out to another installation
or region. Without that kind of data, it makes it really hard
to target solutions in an effective, efficient manner.
Mr. Takano. Well, great. How do these limitations hinder
the development of targeted solutions, would you say?
Ms. Smith. We know, for example, that, you know, there are
supportive community members in every defense community around
the country. When they come to support military spouse
employment needs, one of the things we see is an inability to
communicate exactly what those needs are in certain localized
areas. If we were able to more specifically talk about the
talent that existed in the community, with community support
that wanted to help leverage or support it, we would be able to
have, I think, a much more productive conversation about
solving our unemployment problem.
Mr. Takano. I see. Can you tell us what kind of authorities
the Department of Labor would need to reliably measure military
spouse unemployment?
Ms. Smith. Some of the things that we have studied or kind
of gathered information around really more as an appropriate
way of phrasing it, is that we do think that there would have
to be data sharing agreements between and among different
departments in the Federal Government in order to ensure that,
for example, Department of Labor could measure military spouse
unemployment. It could not be measured the same way that other
subpopulations are measured simply because Department of
Defense is the one that holds that data.
There could be other Federal agencies that would need to be
engaged to ensure that kind of the number is accurate and able
to be reported out in a way that is sensitive to Personal
Identifiable Information (PII) information. We do think that
there would probably have to be some sort of information
sharing or data sharing authorization to make that happen.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you. That concludes my questioning,
and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. With the consent of my ranking member,
we will do a second round of questionings because we did not
get to get everybody. The chair now recognizes myself for 5
minutes. Mr. Gomez. I have got this other hat here. Okay. I am
getting old. I just want to ask all of you individually, I know
that you looked at this legislation. There is a whole bunch of
it out there. I want to know if there is any part of any one of
these bills that you are concerned about, that goes too far, or
it does not go far enough. I am just going to start with you,
Mr. Gomez.
Mr. Gomez. Yes, and thank you for the question. The only
thing that I would add is for grant and per diem, one bill
suggested 200 percent increase. Another bill, 140, and I
believe 133 is the difference. I think something needs to be
done fast, because veterans are in need of services. Whatever
that percentage is, I would just urge Congress to make a
decision.
Mr. Van Orden. Well, we are working on it, Mr. Gomez.
Unfortunately, one word I would not associate with Congress is
nimble. I will just throw that out there. Mr. Schwartzman?
Mr. Schwartzman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. ROA is
a strong supporter of H.R. 3943. This is the USERRA legislation
on the docket today that does not have to do directly with
military spouses. ROA supports the legislation as currently
written, but also would support some minor amendments to ensure
its enforceability. Specifically, with Section 2, Subsection
(B), which has to do with the awarding of prejudgment interest
rates and then also liquidated damages, as well.
As a general rule of thumb, although it is subject to a
case-by-case basis, ROA would prefer that legislation has
strong language, such as shall, as opposed to may, to ensure
its enforceability and to ensure that those enforceability
standards are pretty close to universal across the board.
Again, it is subject to a case-by-case basis.
Regarding the awarding of prejudgment interest rates, under
the current construct of our Federalist system of government,
states actually have the capacity to set a mandated prejudgment
interest rate. The way that the legislation is currently
written is that it would provide courts with the ability to
award a prejudgment interest rate that is lower than what is
currently afforded at the state level.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay, Mr. Schwartzman, I saw that. I want to
parse that. I want you to parse that out and give it to our
staff.
Mr. Schwartzman. Okay, absolutely.
Mr. Van Orden. I tell you here is how I work. If it makes
sense, we will do it. I do not care what. I do not attach any
political calculation to any of the decisions made on this
subcommittee. None. If it makes sense, we will do it.
Mr. Schwartzman. Absolutely.
Mr. Van Orden. Very well. Ma'am, I am going to skip right
over to Mr. Hollinger because he has been sitting here very
patiently.
Mr. Hollinger. Thank you, sir. The Enlisted Association is
here predominantly to support USERRA for spouses. We believe
that there was a contract that was signed with the U.S.
Government. It was called IDO. Our spouses, we know that as
Reserve service members, especially on the enlisted side, that
there is three avenues that have to be in place for us to be
successful. We have to have strong employment, we have to have
strong service members, and we have to have strong spouses.
Without the combination of those three things and all three of
them being protected equally, we will not be successful.
The National Guard is coming off unprecedented use. Over
380,000 service members have been activated since March 2020,
for everything underneath the sun. We have absolutely become
the Nation's 911, and we are very proud of that. To have that
ability for us to be the push button answer, we have to be able
to support our spouses at home. They support me. My spouse has
always supported me. Unfortunately, could not be here today.
She is supported me 100 percent and I am only as good as she
allowed me to be.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Hollinger, I want you to know I
appreciate your comments and your sentiment. I do. As I said, I
have had a Navy wife for 30 years now. We just got to find the
right way to do it. We have to balance fiscal responsibility
with also making sure the civil liberties of individual
companies are not violated because they are entities and they
are people too. We got to make sure that we do not upset the
apple cart with the workforce by creating unintended
consequences, by trying to do something that is good.
My intent, obviously, is to have a robust military. I had
50 Pennsylvania National Guard guys work for me in Iraq. I
would take those mugs right now. They were awesome. I have a
tremendous amount of respect for what you guys are doing. I
just want to figure out how to do it the right way. That is
all. With that, my time has expired. I now yield to Ranking
Member Takano for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. My question is for Mr. Hollinger.
Mr. Hollinger, do you know of any of your members or know of
Guard or Reserve who wanted to exercise their USERRA rights
when they return back from their deployments to return to their
employment? My understanding under USERRA, a Guardsman or
Guardswoman or Reservist, when they are called up for duty,
they have a right to return back to employment. Their employer
is supposed to keep their job open. Do you know what I am
talking about?
Mr. Hollinger. Yes, sir. I believe you are asking me have
we seen problems with Guardsmen returning home and having
problems with their job or getting their jobs back?
Mr. Takano. Yes.
Mr. Hollinger. Absolutely. I think Mr. Diaz spoke about
that earlier where he, you know, resolved over 1,000 cases and
I think there is even more through State and Federal
Governments. I think we hear about USERRA problems more than I
hear about any other problem on my legislative portfolio.
Mr. Takano. USERRA with respect to gaining access, getting
employment back when they return?
Mr. Hollinger. Right. Right.
Mr. Takano. It is their right under the law, right, under
USERRA.
Mr. Hollinger. Yes, sir.
Mr. Takano. Can you tell me what we need to do in order to
make sure that our service members come back and they get the
jobs that they should have the right to under law?
Mr. Hollinger. I think education. I think, you know, all of
us that are sitting here on the panel are just as responsible
for that as anybody else. We need to educate our employers,
educate our employees, and our service members so that they do
not make small mistakes that cause big issues. I think almost
every single time that I have been involved in a USERRA case,
it is somebody that had a misinterpretation of the law and
believed that they were doing the right thing. I think
employers tend to violate due to just fatigue, I think.
Mr. Takano. Have you ever run into situations where a
forced arbitration clause in an employment contract hindered an
ability of a service member to be able to exercise their USERRA
rights? Is that an issue?
Mr. Hollinger. Well, yes, sir, that happens constantly. You
know, we have, I can share many, many cases. I prefer not to
put names out in public.
Mr. Takano. You do not need to put names out, but I think
it is important for this committee and for members to know and
the public to know that this is a real problem.
Mr. Hollinger. Sir, I agree that it is absolutely a real
problem. We recognized that problem when it came to sexual
assault and sexual harassment cases, and we got rid of the
forced arbitration in there. Forced arbitration, you are asking
somebody that gets paid by a company to rule against who is
feeding them dinner. I know I am smart enough not to do that
very often.
Mr. Takano. It does not seem right to me that somebody who
has been deployed maybe many times, and I have seen what our
Guard and our Reserve do, and the chairman has, you know, has
his own testimony here about what they have done on deployment.
They come back and they try to get their job back, but they
cannot go to court because in order to enforce their right,
they should be able to go to court and get a judge to say,
well, you know, USERRA says you have a right to your job back.
Your company should have held that job open for you.
I actually did that as the chairman, when I was chairman of
this committee, when my staff director went off to Syria for
several months, we all knew, we should have known, and we did
know that we had to keep that position open. We had two people
go off, right?
Mr. Hollinger. I think I know their names.
Mr. Takano. Right. There are companies that, there are
companies instead of like welcoming that service member back,
they use their legal right in an employment contract, because
that employment contract has a forced arbitration clause and it
goes to arbitration instead of the court, and as you said, the
arbitrator is often slanted toward the employer. I think it is
high time that Congress address this issue because I think it
is a travesty that we treat our service members this way.
Mr. Hollinger. I have one more thing to point out on that.
I think that forced arbitration is one of the very few spots in
law that allows you to waive your rights. That and the 517
Waiver, that is a totally different topic. There are very few
instances as an employee that you are allowed to waive your
employment rights, and this just happens to be one of them, and
I think we are always going to see negative impact from it.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Takano. I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you. Thank you all for attending this
meeting, this hearing rather. I appreciate the discussion today
and your written testimony again, I have read it in its
totality about how to improve several of the bills. We have got
to continue to work together to solve these issues for the
veterans and service members, the issues that they face today.
However, we have to do this in a fiscally responsible way.
As my colleagues on both sides of the aisle understand, we have
very limited offsets because we are under the PAYGO system, and
we have got to find ways to reduce the cost of bills while
delivering the original intent of the bill. I want that to be
exceptionally clear with everyone. We are here to serve you. I
look forward to working with Ranking Members both Levin and
Takano and the rest of the folks on this committee to get that
done serving you. With that, I yield to the Ranking Member
Takano for any concluding remarks you may have, sir.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairman Van Orden. I do not have
any further comments, and I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Takano. Again,
thank you very much for your participation in today's hearing.
I have received a number of statements for the record which
will be submitted into the record as long as they meet
submission requirements.
I ask for unanimous consent that all members may have 5
legislative days to revise and extend the remarks and include
extraneous materials. Without objection, so ordered. This
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Joseph Garcia

Good afternoon, Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss several bills that would affect the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) programs and services. Accompanying
me today is Melissa Cohen, Deputy Executive Director, Outreach,
Transition, and Economic Development and Monica Diaz, Executive
Director, Homeless Program Office.

H.R. 491 Return Home to Housing Act

H.R. 491 would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  2012(a)(2)(B) to clarify that
VA can adjust per diem rates under the Homeless Grant and Per Diem
(GPD) program as the Secretary considers appropriate, including in
response to an emergency. It would also increase the maximum cap on per
diem rates to 200 percent of the rate authorized for State homes for
domiciliary care (an increase from the current limit of 115 percent for
Veterans experiencing homelessness and 150 percent for a Veterans
experiencing homelessness who are placed in housing that will become
permanent).
VA supports this bill, if amended. Specifically, VA recommends
amending 38 U.S.C. Sec.  2016 to increase the authorization of
appropriations for the GPD program from $257.7 million to $ 400million
for FY 2024 and such sums as may be necessary in each subsequent fiscal
year. This amendment would provide VA the clear authority to provide
necessary resources to assist Veterans experiencing homelessness
through the GPD program and would align with VA's FY 2024 legislative
proposal.
VA estimates the bill, as amended, would cost a total of
approximately $296.0 million in FY 2024, $304.0 million in FY 2025,
$1.56 billion over 5 years, and $3.31 billion over 10 years. Compared
to the authorized level of $257.7 million, this would be an increase of
$38 million for FY 2024, approximately $272 million for the 5-year
period from FY 2024 through FY 2028 and approximately $737 million for
the 10-year period from FY 2024 through FY 2033.
The projected costs estimated here are lower than the projected
costs estimated in VA's FY 2024 legislative proposal because
adjustments are made to align with the new transitional housing grants
scheduled to start on October 1, 2023, when VA will be awarding fewer
beds compared to previous projections. The decrease reflects actual
needs in communities as expressed by applicants. This information was
not available before now. Additionally, VA anticipates a modest
decrease in authorized beds over time consistent with recent
utilization trends. The costs projected here also have been updated to
include the most recent State Home rate for domiciliary care, effective
April 2023.
VA appreciates the goals of the legislation and is grateful for the
attention that is being given to ensure that Veterans have access to
the highest standard of transitional supportive housing and services.
As written, VA expects to be able to fully implement this bill, as
amended, immediately upon enactment.

H.R. XXX HOME Act of 2023

Section 2 of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
2012 to clarify that VA can adjust per diem rates under the Homeless
GPD program in certain situations; it would establish the maximum per
diem rate for all Veterans experiencing homelessness at 140 percent;
this would represent an increase from 115 percent for some Veterans
experiencing homelessness, but a decrease from 150 percent for others.
The HOME Act of 2023 also would allow VA to waive the maximum per diem
rates and provide such payments at a rate that does not exceed 200
percent of the rate authorized for State homes for domiciliary care
under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  1741(a)(1)(A) if VA notified Congress and
determined the grant recipient or eligible entity furnished services to
Veterans experiencing homelessness in a rural or highly rural area, an
area with a high rate of suicide among Veterans, or an area with a high
rate of homelessness among Veterans. VA could not waive the maximum
rate for more than 10 percent of all grant recipients and eligible
entities in a fiscal year, and VA could not provide more than 10,500
payments under this section in a fiscal year.
Section 2 would also add a new subsection (f) to 38 U.S.C. Sec.
2012 requiring VA to submit to Congress a report within 90 days of
enactment and not less frequently than twice each year thereafter on
the rate for per diem payments under this section for each Veterans
Integrated Service Network (VISN). VA would have to report the average
rate for such a payment, a list of locations where the rate for such a
payment is within 10 percent of the maximum rate for such a payment,
and the average length of stay by a participating Veteran.
VA does not support section 2 of the bill. The provisions of this
bill are not aligned with current implementation structures and VA
projects, and as such, they risk disrupting progress toward our shared
goal of removing barriers to housing stability for the Nation's
vulnerable Veterans. Moreover, placing this level of prescriptive
detail in statute imposes unnecessary restrictions on VA's resources
and limits VA's ability to adapt to changes in circumstances quickly
and effectively.
To implement the level of detail included in section 2, VA would
likely need to promulgate regulations, which could significantly delay
VA's ability to implement this rate increase efficiently and fully if
enacted by Congress. Community providers of transitional supportive
housing and services, as well as the Veterans they serve, urgently need
the increased support as quickly as possible. Additionally, reducing
the maximum rate of payments from what VA requested recently (200
percent) to what is proposed in the bill (140 percent) is insufficient
to meet the needs of many grantees in communities that experience a
high cost of care, grantees who provide decongregated housing, and
grantees who have limited ability to secure alternate sources of
funding to support their operations.
Because VA increasingly expects grantees to provide more and better
staffing and services, the President's FY 2024 Budget request included
a VA proposal to raise the maximum rate of per diem for the GPD program
to 200 percent. Reducing the maximum rate of payments from 150 percent
to 140 percent under clause (ii) for approximately 600 authorized
transitional housing beds that become the Veteran's permanent housing
could result in grantees withdrawing from the program due to
insufficient funding. This housing model provides the most
individualized accommodations (private apartments) for Veterans of any
of the housing models offered by VA. Private facilities like these
protect Veterans' safety, health and dignity better than congregate
facilities. They are well-suited to serve distinct populations, such as
women, families and those with minor dependents. Private accommodations
are precisely what VA, Congress and communities have been requesting
and supporting. In section 711 of the Jeff Miller and Richard
Blumenthal Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2016
(Public Law 114-315), Congress incentivized this housing model by
establishing a higher reimbursement rate than for other transitional
housing. By cutting this established rate, the bill would risk a
further decrease in supportive housing resources needed for Veterans
and communities.
VA does not support the limited waiver authority for rates this
bill would establish. Specifically, the stated criteria (rurality,
suicide rates and homelessness rates) do not necessarily relate
directly to a particular community's need for transitional supportive
housing or the cost of that housing. To the extent that they cause or
are correlated with higher costs, the existing requirements for
calculating a per diem rate already allow adjustments for the actual
cost of care and for locality. VA recommends allowing for such criteria
to influence its per diem rate decisions but not requiring that they be
the only and necessary factors for waiver requests. Criteria such as
performance results, cost-effectiveness and local demand continue to be
foundational criteria when making decisions about limited resources. We
note that grantees are not automatically eligible to request the
maximum per diem rate--they are only eligible to request the actual
cost of care up to the maximum rate.
Moreover, the criteria in the bill are not defined by readily
available tools, are continuously fluctuating targets, and would not
necessarily parallel with the geographic boundaries of a VISN, VA
medical center catchment area or grantee service area. The natural
occupancy and vacancy levels in transitional supportive housing
projects ebb and flow from day to day and month to month during any
given year as Veterans enter and discharge from the program. Some
localities experience seasonal variations in bed demand. Establishing a
limit in statute would not allow VA to be agile in responding to
fluctuating community needs over time. Implementing these criteria
would be unduly burdensome and detract from resources needed for
veteran care.
Limiting per diem to 140 percent instead of 200 percent is not
expected to result in proportional cost savings because a higher
percentage of grantees are expected to request at or near the maximum
per diem rate (to meet their costs needs). Comparatively, if the rate
limit were set at 200 percent a lesser percentage of grantees are
expected to be at the maximum rate. Historically, GPD grantees have not
requested the maximum available per diem rate; they request the rate
needed to support their actual costs of care. For example, at the
beginning of this fiscal year when the maximum per diem rate was
approximately $157, the average GPD rate was closer to $84, with rates
ranging from $34.11 to $156.71. During this time more than 150 grantees
had rates above $78.54, which is what the maximum per diem rate would
be if per diem was limited to 140 percent. Experience shows that
grantee funding needs are variable depending on a variety of factors.
For some grantees, providing insufficient funding can negatively impact
the scope of services, quality of care, or even their ability to
continue operations. Therefore, a higher rate of 200 percent is cost-
effective and necessary to ensuring that Veterans have options
available nationwide when they find themselves in a housing crisis.
Other provisions of concern are only authorizing rate waivers to 10
percent of grant recipients per year and limiting VA to providing not
more than 10,500 payments per fiscal year, as these limits could
negatively impact resources for Veterans; the latter limit (not more
than 10,500 payments) also is unclear, as we think this is intended to
refer to 10,500 beds. Including a bed limit in statute is not necessary
as the numbers of Veterans experiencing homelessness naturally limits
the appropriate number of beds. VA adjusts bed capacity in an
intentional and strategic way to support the demand. The flexibility to
respond to an increased demand for bed capacity within the limits of
funding availability is an essential authority to avoid the risk of
Veterans being unhoused.
VA has announced funding opportunities for Per Diem Only (PDO) and
Transition in Place (TIP) grants that will begin in FY 2024 and expects
to award approximately 10,500 PDO beds and 600 TIP beds. These
anticipated awards are expected to exceed the bed limits proposed in
section 2. Regarding the limits on rate waivers, we are concerned these
could create implementation barriers that would make operation of the
program more difficult without achieving any clear or apparent goal. As
written, grantees may require a waiver for a portion of a year, but if
they do not require a waiver until later in the year, the 10 percent
cap may have already been reached, leaving VA no flexibility and
Veterans experiencing homelessness at risk. VA is also concerned about
the requirement to notify Congress of the need for a waiver, as this
would create undue delay in operating the programs and serving
Veterans. It is unclear from the bill language if congressional
approval is required prior to approving the waiver. Codifying this
level of specificity regarding bed limits would hinder VA's ability to
respond to community needs.
VA identified several technical issues with section 2 and
appreciates the opportunity to further discuss how to best support this
initiative with the Committee.
Section 3 of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would amend section 2 of
the West Los Angeles Leasing Act of 2016, as amended, as it relates to
VA's ability to enter into or renew any lease or land-sharing agreement
at the West Los Angeles Campus. Specifically, if VA's Office of
Inspector General (OIG) determined, as part of an audit report or
evaluation, that VA was not in compliance with Federal laws relating to
leases and land use at the Campus, or that significant mismanagement
has occurred with respect to leases or land use at the Campus, VA could
not enter into any new lease or land-sharing agreement, or renew any
such lease or land sharing agreement, until VA submits to Congress
notice in writing of whether VA concurred or not with each
recommendation included in the audit report or evaluation and, in the
case of a non-concurrence, the reason for such non-concurrence.
Further, section 3 of the draft HOME Act would add a new subsection (n)
to section 2 of the West Los Angeles Leasing Act of 2016 that would
provide that notwithstanding 40 U.S.C. 1302, 38 U.S.C. 8122, or any
other provision of law, consideration for a lease made pursuant to the
West Los Angeles Leasing Act of 2016 may include consideration other
than money.
VA supports this section 3 of this bill. Since enactment of the
West Los Angeles Leasing Act of 2016 (West LA Leasing Act; Public Law
114-226), VA has made significant strides in the multi-year plan to
redevelop the West LA Campus into a thriving community for homeless and
at-risk Veterans and their families, consistent with VA's West Los
Angeles Campus Master Plan. VA continues to work to restore the trust
of Veterans and local stakeholders and ensure that all activities on
the West LA Campus benefit Veterans. As a natural extension of that
progress, VA believes the ability to make final determinations to renew
or enter into new land use agreements and leases on the West LA Campus
should be within the Secretary's authority.
VA and VA OIG have differed in their interpretation of several
provisions of the West LA Leasing Act. As a result, there are currently
five land use agreements that are at an impasse due to outstanding VA
OIG recommendations with which VA cannot concur because we do not agree
with the underlying legal analysis. Without a statutory amendment,
these recommendations will remain open until the agreements expire.
This section would grant VA the autonomy to interpret and implement its
authorities and make land use decisions consistent with those
authorities. While VA will continue to make those determinations in
consultation with VA OIG and remain accountable to Congress, this
section would allow VA a greater degree of control in the future
development of the West LA Campus.
VA also supports the addition of the proposed subsection (n) that
would explicitly permit in-kind consideration for land use agreements
on the West LA Campus. While VA has not interpreted the West LA Leasing
Act or other authorities as prohibiting the use of in-kind
consideration for land use agreements on the West LA Campus, the VA OIG
has. This amendment would clarify that in-kind contributions are
permissible and help VA derive the greatest benefit for Veterans from
all land use agreements on the West LA Campus.
This section does not directly impact VA homeless program
operations, and is not urgently needed to support VA homeless services.
This stands in stark contrast to some other sections in this package,
which share broad support, and which are urgently needed if VA is to
continue its progress in reducing Veteran homelessness. While VA
supports this section, VA would support de-coupling this section from
the other sections in this package to expedite progress on this bill.
Section 4(a) of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would authorize VA to
use amounts appropriated or otherwise made available to VA to carry out
38 U.S.C. 2011, 2012, 2031, or 2061 to provide to covered Veterans: (1)
assistance required for the safety and survival of the Veteran (such as
food, shelter, clothing, blankets, and hygiene items); (2)
transportation required to support the stability and health of the
Veteran (such as transportation for appointments with service
providers, the conduct of housing searches, and the obtainment of food
and supplies); (3) communications equipment and services (such as
tablets, smartphones, disposable phones, and related service plans)
required to support the stability and health of the Veteran (such as
through the maintenance of contact with service providers, prospective
landlords, and family members); and (4) such other assistance as VA
determines necessary. Covered Veterans would be defined in section 4(e)
to mean Veterans experiencing homelessness and Veterans participating
in the Department of Housing and Urban Development-VA Supportive
Housing (HUD-VASH) Program under section 8(o)(19) of the United States
Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)(19)).
VA supports section 4(a), if amended. This subsection is very
similar to a VA FY 2024 legislative proposal #75 (Flexibility in the
provision of assistance to Homeless Veterans). VA recommends,
consistent with its legislative proposal, this authority be codified in
title 38, for example in a new section 2069, to ensure that it is
easily referenced and clearly identifiable for the public in the
future. This proposal would continue the authority VA was able to use
during the COVID-19 public health emergency to provide additional
assistance and support to homeless Veterans experiencing homelessness
and Veterans participating in HUD-VASH to great effect.
Section 4(b) of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would authorize VA to
collaborate, to the extent practicable, with one or more organizations
to manage the use of VA land for Veterans experiencing homelessness for
living and sleeping. Collaboration that would be authorized by this
provision could include the provision of food services and security, by
either VA or the head of the organization concerned, for VA property,
buildings, and other facilities.
VA supports section 4(b) of this bill. VA recommends codifying this
authority in title 38. VA's FY 2024 legislative proposal proposed by
sections 4(a) and (b) of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would be codified
at 38 U.S.C. Sec.  2069(a) and (b), respectively.
Section 4(c) of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would require VA, not
later than one year from the date of enactment of this Act, to submit
to Congress a report that includes a statement, disaggregated by each
VA medical center (VAMC), of the amount of funds under this section
each VAMC requested and the amount provided to each VAMC, data
(disaggregated by VAMC) relating to how each such VAMC used amounts
provided by VA, the total amount of assistance VA provided to covered
Veterans for ridesharing, the number of covered Veterans who received
such assistance, and a description, for each rideshare used by a
covered Veteran with such assistance, of the reasons such covered
Veteran used such rideshare.
VA supports section 4(c) of this bill, with amendments. VA
recommends changing the reporting requirements of this provision to
include aggregated data only to avoid unnecessary administrative
burdens.
Section 4(d) of the draft HOME Act of 2023 would provide that the
authority under this section would terminate on September 30, 2024.
VA does not support section 4(d) of this bill. We do not believe a
statutory time limit would provide stability and assurance to Veterans
experiencing homelessness and Veterans participating in HUD-VASH. VA
suggests a permanent authority instead, since this would provide
assurances for Veterans and likely would result in lower per capita
costs to the Department, as VA could negotiate contracts that could
cover multiple years (provided appropriations are available for such
purposes). Operating with a shorter statutory authority would prevent
VA from such long-term arrangements and would likely result in higher
costs. VA already has several years of experience exercising the
authority that would be granted by section 4(a) and (b) and does not
believe another short-term extension is necessary.

HR XXX Authorizing representatives of VSOs to promote membership in
such organizations during TAP counseling.

The proposed legislation would amend title 10, United States Code,
to authorize representatives of Veterans Service Organizations to
promote membership in such organizations during pre-separation
counseling under the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) of the
Department of Defense (DoD), and for other purposes.
Section 2(a) would add an additional paragraph under 10 U.S.C.
Sec.  1142(b) for a presentation during TAP on promoting the benefits
of joining a Veterans Service Organization (VSO). This presentation
would be offered by a national representative of a VSO recognized under
38 U.S.C. Sec.  5902 and will include information on assistance in
filing claims for benefits under laws administered by the Secretaries
of Defense and Veterans Affairs. Section 2(a) would prohibit the VSOs
from encouraging a transitioning Service member to join a particular
VSO and limits the presentation to no more than one hour in length.
Section 2(b) would require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, not less
than once each year after enactment, to submit a report that identifies
each VSO that presented under section 2(a); contains the number of
transitioning Service members that attended the presentation; and
presents any recommendations regarding changes to the presentation.
VA does not object to this bill but offers several amendments for
consideration. The inclusion of VSOs in TAP recognizes the importance
of providing access to information on community resources for a
successful transition to civilian life. VSO partnership is critical in
assisting transitioning Service members and Veterans in navigating VA
benefits and services. Utilizing a trained VSO to advocate on a Veteran
or Service member's behalf is vital to our success as a department.
VA strives to provide valuable information to transitioning Service
members during the ``one day of instruction regarding benefits under
laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs'' per P.L. 115-
232, Section 552. Specifically, the one-day VA Benefits and Services
course provides Service members and their families the skills,
resources and tools needed to support emotional and physical health,
career readiness, and economic stability in civilian life. In order to
continue providing a standardized, measurable, and high-quality
experience for all transitioning Service members participating in the
VA Benefits and Services course, VA recommends the following amendments
to this bill and welcomes the opportunity to provide further assistance
to the Committee, if requested.

Recommended amendments:

Sec. 2(a) ``(20)'' Line 8: Strike ``joining'' insert
``utilizing/using''

Sec. 2(a) ``(20)(B)'' Lines 11-12: Strike ``shall be
previously reviewed and approved by the Secretary of Affairs;'' and
insert ``shall be reviewed by an appropriate program office for
accuracy and approved through the Transition Assistance Interagency
Working Group;''

Sec. 2(a) ``(20)(G)'': Strike ``length.''.'' and insert
``length;''

Sec. 2(a) ``(20)'' INSERT: ``(H) Such presentations will
be provided at no monetary cost to the Government;

Sec. 2(a) ``(20)'' INSERT: ``(I) is subject to Veteran
Service Organization staffing, availability, and access to DOD
installations; and''

Sec. 2(a) ``(20)'' INSERT: ``(J) will be scheduled for
times and dates as determined by the Department of Affairs.''.

VA recommends Department of Defense (DoD) review and respond on
proposed legislation, as this changed Title 10 legislation and TAP is
owned by DoD, and DoD is responsible for granting access to
installations and bases.

General Operating Expenses (GOE) for this bill are estimated at
$1.2 million for FY 2024 (estimate includes salary, benefits, rent,
travel, supplies, other services, and equipment), $3.5 million over 5-
years and $3.5 million over 10-years.

H.R. XXX Making digital transcripts available to eligible persons at
educational institutions

The proposed legislation would amend section 3675(b) of title 38,
United States Code, by adding a new paragraph that would require
educational institutions to make available to each eligible person or
Veteran a copy of their official transcript in a digital format.
VA supports this bill, if amended. While the proposed legislation
would make it easier for certain and eligible persons to obtain their
transcripts, VA notes that the placement of this requirement, solely in
38 U.S.C. Sec.  3675, means it will not be applicable to accredited
public institutions of higher learning (IHLs), accredited private (not-
for-profit) IHLs, or non-accredited programs because the approval
requirements for these institutions and programs are located in 38
U.S.C. Sec. Sec.  3672 and 3675. Therefore, many eligible beneficiaries
would not benefit from this change. All GI Bill students enrolled in
standard college degree programs should benefit from this change.
``Transcripts'' are only applicable to standard college degree
programs. While having records of training, non-college degree programs
(including certificate programs) do not produce documents considered
``transcripts;'' therefore, this provision is inapplicable to courses
other than standard college degree programs. VA recommends the
following amendments for consideration:

Amend section 3672(b)(2)(A) by striking ``3675(b)(1) and
(b)(2),'' and replace it with ``3675(b)(1), (b)(2), and (b)(5),'' and;

Amend section 3676(c) by adding, at the end, a new
paragraph (17) to read as follows: ``In the case of a course that leads
to a standard college degree, the course satisfies the requirements of
section 3675(b)(5) of this title.''

VA also notes that the proposed legislation would be effective the
date of enactment. VA recommends Congress consider a transition period
for schools to comply with the new requirement. VA welcomes the
opportunity to work with the Committee to provide technical assistance
to ensure the legislation meets its intended goal.

H.R. XXX Making certain improvements in the administration of the
educational assistance programs

The proposed bill would amend title 38 of the United States Code,
to make certain improvements in the administration of VA educational
assistance programs, and for other purposes.
Section 2 of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3680(a)(3) by
striking language that referenced the monthly housing stipend in 38 USC
Sec.  3313(c) and VA educational assistance under Chapters 30, 31, 32,
33, 34, or 35 of title 38 or under Chapter 1606 of title 10. This
section would also add a new subparagraph (B) to 38 U.S.C. Sec.
3680(a)(3) that would require VA to treat an eligible Veteran or
eligible person as enrolled on more than a half-time basis for purposes
of providing the monthly housing stipend during a period that is the
last semester, term, or academic period.
VA does not support section 2 of this bill. The monthly housing
allowance (MHA) provided by the Post-9/11 GI Bill is a critical
advancement in our Nation's commitment to providing Veterans with the
necessary support to succeed in obtaining their educational goals after
completing their honored service to our Nation. Congress recognized
that full-time students need an MHA as a means of subsistence to
alleviate a full-time student's stress - a student can concentrate on
studying without having to worry about how they can afford to keep a
roof over their head. VA has always been and remains committed to the
importance of the MHA and is supportive of any initiatives from
Congress to improve the MHA benefit.
Unfortunately, this bill may decrease the MHA for many Veterans
during their final semester, quarter, or term. The monthly housing
allowance under the Post-9/11 GI Bill is based on a student's actual
rate of pursuit - the number of credit hours a student takes during the
term divided by the number of credit hours needed to be considered
full-time. Therefore, a student taking 9 credit hours as an
undergraduate will have a rate of pursuit of 80 percent (9/12 = 0.75;
VA rounds up to the nearest 10 percent). VA will pay the student 80
percent of the full-time MHA. This bill, however, would have VA replace
80 percent with ``more than half-time.'' There is no payment rate for
``more than half-time'' and the bill's intent is unclear where the
language directs VA to ``treat the veteran or person as pursuing a
program of education on more than a half-time basis.'' VA suggests
clarifying language on how this instruction would translate into a
percentage of the MHA and therefore a dollar amount. As written, it is
unclear if the intent of proposed 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3680(a)(3)(B) is to
authorize students the minimum housing rate in their final term. If
this is the intent, this section would be detrimental to all students
with a rate of pursuit greater than 54 percent as this section would
reduce their MHA payments down to 50 percent of the full-time MHA (VA
rounds rate of pursuit to the nearest 10 percent; a student with a rate
of pursuit ``more than half-time'' may be presumed to have a rate of
pursuit of 51 percent which would then be rounded to 50 percent). The
above example student would only be paid 60 percent of the MHA instead
of the 80 percent they are currently entitled to receive.
Additionally, the provisions of this bill could create inequity
between participants in the Chapter 31 program and participants in
other VA education programs. The proposed bill allows for participants
in Chapter 31 to be treated as attending the last term or semester as
full-time students; however, it does not provide Chapter 31 the
authority to pay a monthly subsistence allowance under 38 U.S.C. Sec.
3108. VA would propose to remove Chapter 31 from the statutory
authority as VA already has the authority to provide what is necessary
for a Veteran to achieve a successful rehabilitation program.
Mandatory costs would be associated with section 2 of this bill,
but VA is unable to estimate costs due to the ambiguity of the
legislative text. This section states that VA, ``shall treat the
Veteran or person as pursuing a program of education on more than a
half-time basis.'' VA does not have a payment rate for ``more than
half-time.'' It is therefore unclear what rate of pursuit these
individuals should be categorized as.
Section 3 would add a new 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3699C, which would
prohibit VA from implementing a rule that relates to any VA educational
assistance program that is not subject to notice requirements under
section 553(b)(A) of title 5, prior to the date that is 180 days from
that date of notifying and providing justification to students,
educational institutions, and the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of
the Senate and House of Representatives on the rulemaking.
VA does not support section 3 of this bill. Our stakeholders,
including students, educational institutions, and Members of Congress,
are critical partners in the development of sound, practical policies
that achieve our goals in the most efficient ways possible. VA is
committed to transparency and active engagement and communication with
our partners. We will continue to communicate when it comes to changes,
including the development and implementation of new policies. This bill
would decrease VA's ability to make changes efficiently to improve the
administration of VA educational assistance programs as it would add
unnecessary delays in VA's implementation of necessary rule changes and
improvements that provide more immediate support to students in their
educational pursuits.
No mandatory costs are associated with section 3. This would not
change entitlement to benefits, and VA cannot predict what regulatory
changes would be delayed by this change.
Section 4 would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3673A(d) to require the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or a State-approving agency to provide
not more than two business days of notice to an educational institution
before conducting a targeted, risk-based survey of the institution.
VA supports section 4 of this bill.
There are no mandatory costs associated with section 4 of this
bill. This would not change entitlement to benefits.
Section 5 would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3679(f)(1) to remove
subparagraph (A), which requires the State-approving agency or the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, when acting in the role of State-
approving agency to take certain adverse actions if an educational
institution did not provide information about the costs to attend the
institution, financial aid available and student debt upon graduation,
rates of graduation and job placement, ability to transfer credits, and
other relevant information that students may consider when selecting a
course of education at an institution.
Section 5 would also make two technical corrections in subsection
(e) of 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3679 by removing ``chapter 31 33'' both places
it appears and inserting ``chapter 31, 33'' and in 38 U.S.C. Sec.
3679(f)(4)(A)(iii) by adding a period at the end.
VA does not support section 5 of this bill. This provision would
remove valuable consumer protections for Veterans and their dependents.
Per Sec.  3676(f)(1)(A), schools are required to provide information
(essentially data points) to students which allow them to be well-
informed consumers on how to make the best choice on how to build their
future. Importantly, the data points contained in subparagraph (A) are
ones that can only be provided by the school (e.g., cost of the
program, graduation rates, job placement rates for graduates, transfer
policies). If the school does not provide this information, the Veteran
student is unaware of potential drawbacks in selecting their choice of
school until after it is too late. Though portions of this information
may be available from other sources, VA does not support placing any
burden and cost associated with gathering this information on the
Veteran. It is far more efficient and less costly to require schools to
gather and package that information and provide it directly to the
Veteran as is currently required by subparagraph (A). Therefore, VA
values retaining subparagraph (A) and does not support its removal as
proposed in section 5 of this bill.
There are no mandatory costs are associated with section 5 of this
bill. This would not change entitlement to benefits.
Section 6 would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3675(b) to authorize the
State-approving agency, or the Secretary of Veterans Affairs when
acting in the role of a State-approving agency the right to waive the
requirement that an educational institution be approved and participate
in a program under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 for
multiple years.
VA supports section 6 of this bill. However, VA does not anticipate
any substantive change due to this amendment; the Secretary's current
waiver authority is not limited to 1 year, and thus VA currently has
the statutory authority to issue waivers for multiple years.
There are no mandatory costs associated with section 6 of this
bill. VA already has statutory authority to issue multi-year waivers.

H.R. XXX The Native American Direct Loan Improvement Act of 2023

This proposed bill would amend title 38 of the United States Code
to improve the program for direct housing loans made to Native American
veterans and to authorize the Secretary to make loans to Native
community development institutions to relend those funds to qualified
Native American Veterans, and for other purposes.
Section 2(a) would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3762(a) and (b) by giving
VA more flexibility when working with Tribal organizations that want to
participate in the Native American Direct Loan (NADL) program. Where
current law requires VA to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) with the Tribal organization having jurisdiction over a Veteran
before VA can make a NADL program loan, discretion the bill would
authorize the Secretary to make a NADL program loan under a variety of
agreements, including an MOU, which would essentially make the MOU
discretionary.
VA supports section 2(a) of this bill, subject to cost offsets and
appropriations. The change would help VA overcome current statutory
barriers to NADL program loans in Alaska, where a Regional Corporation
or Village Corporation does not have legal jurisdiction over the
Veteran. It would also decrease the amount of time and frustration
Tribal organizations, Veterans, and VA personnel encounter during the
MOU process, which can take months or sometimes even years due to the
administrative burdens associated with MOUs.
Section 2(b) would amend section 3762(h) by giving Native American
Veterans on trust land more opportunity to refinance their home loans.
Current law restricts refinances under the NADL program, such that
Native American Veterans on trust land are only allowed to refinance
other NADL program loans.
VA supports section 2(b) of this bill, subject to cost offsets and
appropriations. Section 2(b) would allow VA to offer a range of
refinance options to Native American Veterans living on trust land,
including certain cash-out and construction refinances of loans that
were not originated by VA. The change would provide more parity with
Veterans who benefit from a variety of refinances in the guaranteed
loan program and would help Native Americans on trust land move from
less advantageous loan products into NADL program loans that better fit
their financial needs, often with a lower-than-market interest rate.
(For example, the current interest rate for a NADL program loan is 2.5
percent, including refinances, compared to non-NADL interest rates,
which are currently around 7 percent.)
Section 2(c) would amend section 3762(i) by improving VA's ability
to help Native American Veterans on trust land qualify for NADL program
loans.
VA supports section 2(c) of this bill. This provision would allow
VA to draw from the expertise of Tribal organizations, Tribally
designated housing entities, Native community development financial
institutions, nonprofit organizations, and other local service
providers to help Native American Veterans with financial counseling,
homebuyer education, and post-purchase education. VA could also rely on
the organizations for technical assistance and attend conferences
sponsored by Native community development financial institutions and
other Native American homeownership organizations to provide
information and training.
Section 2(d) would add new section 3762(k) to ensure that VA
assigns adequate personnel to the NADL program. The new subsection
would specifically address the need for assigning construction and
valuation specialists to assist with issues unique to new construction
and renovations on trust land.
VA supports section 2(d) of this bill, subject to cost offsets and
appropriations. VA estimates that the provision would require VA to
assign at least six new personnel to fulfill anticipated increases in
workload and outreach associated with section 2 of this bill. Six of
the new personnel would be to fulfill anticipated increases in workload
and outreach associated with section 2 of this bill. The cost estimate
for section 2 of this bill also incorporates three additional NADL
personnel requested in the FY 2024 President's Budget needed to ensure
adequate personnel are assigned to the NADL program.
Section 2(e) would amend section 3765 by adding new definitions and
revising current definitions, for the purpose of carrying out the
various provisions of the bill.
VA supports section 2(e) of this bill. The new definition of trust
land would help eliminate some of the statutory restrictions that have
prevented Native American Veterans in places like Alaska from obtaining
NADL program loans.
Section 2(f) would make a conforming amendment to section 3729, the
section that directs the Secretary to charge a statutory loan fee for
VA home loans.
VA supports section 2(f) of this bill. This provision would be
necessary to ensure the proper statutory loan fee is charged, based on
the type of refinance the Native American Veteran would obtain under
subsection (b) of this bill.
Section 2(g) would require VA to prescribe regulations to carry out
the NADL program authority under subchapter 37, title 38 of the United
States Code.
VA supports section 2(g) of this bill.
VA estimates section 2 would result in $0.2 million in benefits
savings in the first year, $1.2 million over 5 years, and $2.3 over 10
years. VA also estimates $1.6 million in new administrative costs in
the first year, $8.0 million over 5 years, and $17.2 million over 10
years.
Section 3(a) would create a new 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3762A to authorize
a new relending program and outline the program's purpose, standards,
relending requirements, repayment terms, and oversight requirements.
Section 3762A(b) would require VA to establish standards to
evaluate whether to make a loan to a Native community development
financial institution. The standards would, at a minimum, include VA's
determination that the Native community development financial
institution (NCDFI) is able to originate loans that align with the
purpose of the NADL program and will operate the relending program in a
manner consistent with VA's mission. The provision would also limit the
NCDFI's use of VA's loan funds to relending to Native American
Veterans.
Section 3762A(c) and (e) would establish minimum requirements on
the relending activities of the NCDFI and provide an oversight
component. The requirements would ensure the NCDFIs' relending is
consistent with the NADL program.
The requirements would also mandate that VA carry out VA's
oversight responsibilities in a manner similar to its oversight of
lenders in the guaranteed loan program. VA agrees that participant
oversight is a necessary function of any Government agency entrusted
with the administering government funds and that the responsibility is
even more heightened when carrying out the mission of serving Veterans,
their families, and their caregivers. Nevertheless, VA views NCDFIs as
valued potential lending partners and looks forward to solidifying
strong relationships with NCDFIs if the relending program is enacted.
Section 3762A(d) would require that the NCDFI repay the loan upon
such terms and conditions as the Secretary prescribes in regulations.
The provision would also set the interest rate on VA loans to NCDFIs at
1 percent.
VA supports section 3(a) of this bill, subject to cost offsets and
appropriations. VA appreciates the proposed language of new section
3762A(b), which aims to balance expanded access to NADL program funds
with appropriate protections. VA also welcomes the minimum requirements
and oversight components in proposed sections 3762A(c) and (e). These
requirements would ensure the NCDFIs' relending is consistent with the
NADL program. The requirements would also mandate that VA carry out
VA's oversight responsibilities in a manner similar to its oversight of
lenders in the guaranteed loan program. VA agrees that participant
oversight is a necessary function of any Government agency entrusted
with the administering government funds and that the responsibility is
even more heightened when carrying out the mission of serving Veterans,
their families, and their caregivers. Nevertheless, VA views NCDFIs as
valued potential lending partners and looks forward to solidifying
strong relationships with NCDFIs if the relending program is enacted.
As for proposed section 3762A(d), As for proposed section 3762(d), VA
believes that a dynamic interest rate could help mitigate costs of the
new relending program, especially if the cost to the Government of
borrowing funds increases, VA does not object to the 1 percent cap.
Section 3(b) of the bill would direct that a clerical amendment be
made to the table at the beginning of chapter 37, title 38 of the
United States Code.
VA supports section 3(b) of this bill. The change would be
necessary to insert the reference to the new section 3762A.
Section 3(b) would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3763 to authorize the use
of the Native American Veteran Housing Loan Program Account to carry
out the relending program. In FY 2024, VA would be authorized to use
not more than $5,000,000 for relending to NCDFIs, and in any year after
FY 2024, an amount determined necessary by the Secretary to meet loan
demand.
VA supports section 3(c) of this bill subject to cost offsets and
appropriations. Section 3(c) would authorize the funding to help carry
out the program. VA estimates that section 3 of the bill would result
in $4.2 million in benefits costs in the first year, $20.2 million over
5 years, and $41.9 million over 10 years. VA also estimates $.9 million
in new administrative costs in the first year, $4.6 million over 5
years, and $9.8 million over 10 years.

H.R. XXX Establishing Certain Employment and Reemployment Rights for
Spouses of Members of the Uniformed Services

This proposed bill would amend certain sections of title 38 of the
United States Code to establish certain employment and reemployment
rights for spouses of members of the uniformed services. VA defers to
the Department of Defense and the Department of Labor regarding this
bill.

H.R. XXX Improvements to Reemployment Rights of Members of the Armed
Forces

This proposed bill would amend certain sections of title 38 of the
United States Code to improve the reemployment rights of members of the
Armed Forces, and for other purposes. VA defers to the Department of
Defense and the Department of Labor regarding this bill.

Conclusion

This concludes my statement. We appreciate the committee's
continued support of programs that serve the Nation's Veterans and look
forward to working together to further enhance delivery of benefits and
services.
______

Prepared Statement of James Rodriguez

Introduction

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify today.
Accompanying me today is Paul Marone, Senior Compliance Policy Advisor
for the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
(USERRA) program. I again commend the Subcommittee for its continued
efforts to promote economic opportunities for America's veterans and
for exploring enhancements to workforce protections for service members
and their spouses. As I previously testified in March, USERRA has
protected the employment and reemployment rights of our Nation's
uniformed service members for over 25 years and has played an important
role in the recruitment, retention, and readiness of the All-Volunteer
Force. I also appreciate meeting with you and your staff, Chairman Van
Orden, to further discuss how USERRA could affect military spouses in
the workplace. I look forward to future conversations with you and
continuing the amicable relationship between the Chair and Ranking
Member of this Subcommittee and the Department of Labor's (DOL)
Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS). VETS proudly
administers USERRA, with the support of our interagency partners at the
Department of Defense (DoD), Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve
(ESGR), the Department of Justice (DOJ), and the Office of Special
Counsel (OSC). I welcome the opportunity to offer technical assistance
on two draft bills seeking to amend USERRA to enhance and expand its
protections: the first, to provide additional enforcement and
remediation tools not currently available under the existing statute,
and the second, to expand USERRA's employment and reemployment
protections to military spouses. These draft bills contain a workable
framework to increase USERRA's ability to protect those who serve our
Nation.
It has been an honor to lead DOL VETS for the last two years. My
wife Vanessa and I both served on active duty in the Marine Corps, and
we have two wonderful daughters who in many ways grew up having to
serve with us. So, this isn't just a job for me, it's my life's
mission. Enhancing USERRA's employment and reemployment protections for
service members and military spouses is a top priority at DOL VETS, and
one that is informed by my own military family's lived experience and
stories that I have heard from military spouses while traveling in my
current role.
I have been truly impressed by the talent, dedication, and
commitment of our DOL VETS team, as well as by the high level of
cooperation and collaboration with our interagency partners. The vision
of VETS is to enable all veterans, service members, and military
spouses to reach their full potential in the workplace. Living up to
full potential does not just mean getting a job; it means maximizing
the value of one's unique capabilities. By improving access to the
employment and reemployment rights under USERRA and harnessing
America's collective support for our military and their families, we
help our veterans, transitioning service members, and military spouses
reach their full potential. Achieving this vision not only helps
veterans, service members, their families, and the organizations they
serve, but it is also good for America's prosperity and security.
Veterans, service members, and military spouses comprise some of the
most capable, committed, and resilient talent pools in the Nation, and
they have much to contribute to the national labor force and economy as
we continue to emerge from the pandemic.

The Importance of USERRA to National Security and Maintaining the All-
Volunteer Force

When Congress enacted USERRA in 1994, it did so with three purposes
in mind. First, to encourage service in the all-volunteer uniformed
services by eliminating or minimizing the disadvantages to civilian
careers and employment which can result from such service. Second, to
minimize the disruption to the lives of persons performing such
service, as well as to their employers, their fellow employees, and
their communities, by providing for prompt reemployment of such persons
upon completion of such service. Third, to prohibit discrimination
against persons because of their service in the uniformed service.
Congress has also stated its sense that the Federal Government should
be a model employer in carrying out the provisions of USERRA.
USERRA prohibits discrimination in employment based on an
individual's prior service in the uniformed services; current service
in the uniformed services; or intent to join the uniformed services. An
employer is also prohibited from retaliating against a person because
of such person's attempt to enforce their rights, or the rights of
others, under the Act. In addition, an employer may not retaliate
against an individual for filing a USERRA claim, testifying, or
otherwise aiding in any proceeding under the Act. USERRA also provides
reemployment rights with the pre-service employer following qualifying
service in the uniformed services. In general, the protected person is
entitled to be re-employed with the seniority, status, and rate of pay
as if they had been continuously employed during the period of service.
USERRA applies to private employers, the Federal Government, and State
and local governments. It also applies to United States employers
operating overseas and foreign employers operating within the United
States.
There were more than 1 million service members eligible for USERRA
protections at the end of March 2023.\1\ This sum included 264,237
members of the Reserve Components (RC) that are comprised of Reserve
and National Guard troops and 862,921 members of the Active Components
of the U.S. Armed Forces.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Total number of U.S. Armed Forces and Selected Reserves for
March 31, 2023, reported by Department of Defense, Defense Manpower
Data Center, in Armed Forces Strength Figures for March 31, 2023, and
Selected Reserves by Rank/Grade for March 31, 2023, accessible at
https://dwp.dmdc.osd.mil/dwp/app/dod-data-reports/workforce-reports.
Note that the Army did not submit Personnel data as of March 2023, so
these statistics are not all of DoD.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
USERRA provides fundamental support to our All-Volunteer Force.
USERRA's reemployment protections ensure that our service members will
not be penalized for temporarily leaving their civilian careers and
employment when activated to defend our Nation. USERRA's anti-
discrimination provisions protect our veterans and service members from
adverse employment actions motivated, at least in part, by their
protected status as a past, present, or future member of the uniformed
services. USERRA's anti-retaliation provisions ensure that anyone,
regardless of their status in the uniformed services, can assert their
own rights or defend the rights of others under USERRA, and be
protected against retaliatory employment actions. The existence of
these important rights, as well as Federal authority to investigate,
resolve, and enforce violations of those rights, removes barriers to,
relieves stress from, and recognizes service in, the uniformed
services. By doing so, USERRA's employment and reemployment protections
encourage and facilitate the recruitment, retention, and readiness of
the All-Volunteer Force.

H.R. XXXX, to amend Title 38, United States Code, to Establish Certain
Employment and Reemployment Rights for Spouses of Members of the
Uniformed Services

This bill would amend multiple sections of USERRA to expand
employment and reemployment protections under the statute to eligible
military spouses. The President also proposed this policy in his Fiscal
Year (FY) 2024 Budget \2\, and DOL VETS whole-heartedly supports the
expansion of USERRA employment protections to eligible military
spouses, and welcomes the opportunity to provide detailed technical
assistance on the many nuanced and complex aspects of the bill where
employment and reemployment protections for military spouses are
derived from their service members qualifying service in the uniformed
services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/general/budget/2024/CBJ-
2024-V1-10.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Barriers to military spouse employment negatively impact national
security. Support for military spouse employment is important to the
retention and readiness of the All-Volunteer Force. Maintaining
traditional employment and advancing in careers while relocating every
few years has historically been a hardship that military spouses have
found extremely difficult, if not impossible, to overcome. Extending
USERRA's anti-discrimination and reemployment protections to eligible
military spouses would limit barriers to military spouse employment.
When a military spouse can build a successful career, it can also
bolster a family's financial stability during the time when a service
member transitions out of the military into civilian employment.
Similarly, spouses' inability to find employment or their own job
dissatisfaction can also increase family and relationship stress, lower
overall satisfaction with the military, and affect retention decisions
for service members. Military spouses also face economic challenges in
qualifying for job-related benefits like career development
opportunities and vesting of employer contributions to retirement
funds. This can lead to lower lifetime earnings and inhibit the long-
term financial stability of the family.
Service members' spouses' ability to obtain and retain appropriate
employment is often integral to service members' decisions to reenlist
in the uniformed services, and the Federal Government should be seeking
additional ways to minimize disruptions to that ability and ensure
readiness of the All-Volunteer Force. The impact of military spouses on
retention and readiness of the all-volunteer force should not be
minimized.
Removing barriers to military spouse employment by extending anti-
discrimination and reemployment protections under USERRA to eligible
military spouses would alleviate a significant stressor on military
families and recognize the vital role of military spouses in the
retention and readiness of the All-Volunteer Force. USERRA protections
would also help military spouses build successful careers without
frequent interruption and re-starts; bolster the financial stability of
their families, especially during their service member's transition
from military service to civilian life; and promote long-term financial
stability for military families. Service members' spouses are critical
to ensure military members' readiness, and this should not be
forgotten.

H.R. XXXX, to Amend Title 38, United States Code, to Improve the
Reemployment Rights of Members of the Armed Forces, and for Other
Purposes

This bill would amend multiple sections of USERRA to enhance and
expand employment and reemployment protections under the statute, as
well as various enforcement and remediation provisions directed toward
States (as employers), private employers, and Federal executive
agencies. As of the time that we reviewed the draft bill prior to the
hearing, it would:

Section 1(a) of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
4323(e) to enhance USERRA's provision authorizing injunctive relief
available under the statute;

Section 1(b) of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
4323(d) to expand USERRA's provisions authorizing liquidated damages
against States (as employers) and private employers by adding a new
minimum amount for such damages;

Section 1(b) of this bill would also add a new 38 U.S.C.
Sec.  4323(f) and amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.  4324(c) to establish that the
failure of States (as employers) and private employers, and Federal
executive agencies, respectively, to provide notice of USERRA's rights
and benefits to their employees as prima facie evidence of willfulness;

Section 1(c) of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec.  4324(c) and 4323(h) to make the award of reasonable attorney
fees, expert witness fees, and other litigation expenses mandatory to
the person prevailing on their USERRA complaint before the Merit
Systems Protection Board or the court, respectively;

Section 1(d) of this bill would repeal 38 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec.  4315 and 4325 to provide the same substantive and procedural
rights and benefits to reemployment under USERRA, and enforcement of
those rights and benefits, to employees employed by certain Federal
agencies of the intelligence community referred to in 5 U.S.C. Sec.
2302(a)(2)(C)(ii) as other eligible employees under the statute;

Section 1(e) of this bill would amend 5 U.S.C. Sec.
2302(b)(11)(A) to identify violations of USERRA as prohibited personnel
practices by Federal employees who are authorized to take, direct
others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action;

Section 1(f) of this bill would add a new 38 U.S.C. Sec.
4312(g) to provide employment protections in performance reviews for
employees absent from civilian employment for the performance of
service in the uniformed services;

Section 1(g) of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
4303(13) to expand the definition of ``service in the uniformed
service'' to include periods of absence from civilian employment for
medical or dental treatment for a condition, illness, or injury
incurred or aggravated during the performance of uniformed service; and

Section 1(h) of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
4301(a)(1) to clarify that a purpose of USERRA is ``to encourage
service in the uniformed services,'' without the limitation that the
service be ``noncareer.''

DOL VETS supports many of the goals of the draft bill, especially
those provisions that expand USERRA protections by removing limitations
on types of employees protected under the statute and eligible for
assistance from DOL VETS. Additionally, the bill seeks to expand the
types of remedies available through litigation under USERRA before the
courts or the Merit Systems Protection Board when DOL VETS is no longer
involved in the matter, including injunctive relief, liquidated
damages, reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and other
litigation costs. We welcome the opportunity to provide detailed
technical assistance on the many aspects of this bill and would like
the opportunity to consult and collaborate with our interagency
partners at DOJ and OSC, specifically relating to the bill's
enforcement and remediation provisions relating to States (as
employers) and private employers, and Federal executive agencies,
respectively.
Additionally, in its FY 2021 DOL USERRA Annual Report to Congress,
DOL VETS identified the following further areas of potential
improvement to USERRA to empower service members to exercise their
USERRA rights which the Committee may wish to consider:

Currently, the statute governing USERRA does not
explicitly supersede mandatory arbitration agreements in employment in
the same way that it supersedes any other agreement that reduces,
limits, or eliminates any right or benefit under USERRA. Also, USERRA
does not State specifically that it protects both substantive and
procedural rights and benefits in employment, such as the procedural
right of adjudication of USERRA rights. The absence of statutory
language in USERRA that agreements to arbitrate are unenforceable
unless all parties consent to arbitration after a complaint on the
specific claim has been filed in court or with the Merit Systems
Protection Board, and all parties knowingly and voluntarily consent to
have that claim subjected to arbitration, has resulted in contrary
court decisions and confusion for employees and employers.

Because USERRA does not authorize the Attorney General
independently to investigate and file suit to challenge employment
policies or practices that establish a pattern or practice of violating
USERRA, it also does not preserve the right of the aggrieved service
member to intervene in pattern or practice suits, or to bring their own
suit where the Attorney General has declined to file suit.

USERRA does not yet codify the U.S. Supreme Court's
decision in Torres v. Texas Department of Public Safety, 597 U.S._(June
29, 2022), which held that States may not invoke sovereign immunity to
avoid liability under USERRA. The Torres decision stands to improve the
enforcement of reemployment rights under USERRA with respect to a state
employer by allowing aggrieved service members and veterans to file
suits against State employers in state and federal courts.

Finally, in its FY 2021 DOL USERRA Annual Report to Congress, DOL
VETS also identified the following areas of potential improvement to
USERRA to strengthen the United States' ability to enforce USERRA and
ensure that the statute is consistent with other civil rights laws:

Although USERRA is applicable to Federal, State, and
private employers, the Attorney General, acting on behalf of the United
States, is not currently authorized to serve as a plaintiff in all
USERRA suits, only in those suits filed against State employers.

Currently, USERRA does not authorize the Attorney General
independently to investigate and file suit to challenge employment
policies or practices that establish a pattern or practice of violating
USERRA. Such independent authority would significantly strengthen DOJ's
ability to enforce USERRA to address a systemic violation (such as a
policy prohibiting extended absences, including absences for uniformed
service) that could adversely affect the employment rights of multiple
service members.

Similarly, USERRA does not empower the Attorney General
with civil investigative demand authority to compel the production of
existing documents and unsworn answers to written questions from the
custodian of such documents. While DOL VETS has subpoena power in its
investigations under USERRA, the Attorney General currently has no pre-
suit investigatory authority.

H.R. XXXX--TAP Promotion Act

This bill would allow Veteran Service Organizations (VSOs) to
promote participation in VSOs during time reserved for the Transition
Assistance Program (TAP) curriculum. VETS recognizes the utility of the
military community affiliating with VSOs. It helps rebuild the
community that is lost during transition from military service, it
allows the Federal Government to disseminate information to the overall
veteran community with greater ease, and VSOs support veterans to
connect with federal, state, and local resources that they have earned
through their service. However, VETS defers to the Department of
Defense on how the TAP program would be impacted by this bill.

Other Bills Considered by the Subcommittee

It is our understanding that this Subcommittee may consider a
number of other bills during this hearing, including:

H.R. 491--Return Home to Housing Act.

H.R. XXXX--Isakson-Roe Education Oversight Expansion Act.

H.R. XXXX--Native American Direct Loan Improvement Act of
2023.

H.R. XXXX--Housing our Military Veterans Effectively
(HOME) Act of 2023.

H.R. XXXX--To amend title 38, United States Code, to
require, as a condition of approval under the educational assistance
programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs, that educational
institutions make available to eligible persons and veterans digital
copies of official transcripts.

H.R. XXXX--To amend title 38, United States Code, to make
certain improvements in the administration of the educational
assistance programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs, and for
other purposes.

As of the time that we reviewed these bills prior to the hearing,
DOL defers to the Department of Veterans Affairs, and other respective
Departments where their equities are impacted. If they are amended in a
way that impacts DOL, we would be happy to further review them and
provide technical assistance upon request.

Delivering Positive USERRA Outcomes for Both Employees and Employers

Under USERRA, Congress authorized the Secretary of Labor, through
DOL VETS, to assist any person or entity with the employment and
reemployment rights and benefits provided under the statute. Congress
also authorized DOL VETS to take such outreach actions as deemed
appropriate to inform both persons entitled to rights and benefits
under USERRA and employers of the rights, benefits, and obligations of
such persons and such employers under USERRA. DOL VETS conducts a
robust public outreach campaign to educate service members, employers,
and others on their rights and responsibilities under USERRA. Since the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, which resulted in the single
greatest mobilization of the Reserve and National Guard, DOL VETS has
briefed more than one million individuals on USERRA.
When DOL VETS is unable to resolve a USERRA issue through
compliance assistance, a servicemember or veteran can submit a claim to
DOL VETS for investigation. When this occurs, DOL VETS assigns the case
to a trained USERRA investigator. On average over the past three years,
DOL VETS has closed 943 cases for investigation per year. When DOL VETS
investigators find a violation of USERRA, the investigator works
diligently with both the claimant and the employer to resolve the case
to the satisfaction of both parties. Of cases in which DOL VETS found a
violation of USERRA in FY 2021, DOL VETS resolved 87 percent of those,
which is the highest resolution rate in the history of the program.
Upon completion of the investigation, if DOL VETS does not resolve
the case to the claimant's satisfaction, DOL VETS advises the claimant
in a closing letter of their right to have the case referred to either
DOJ or to OSC, as appropriate, for consideration of legal
representation at no cost to the claimant. If a claimant requests that
their case be referred, DOL VETS must refer the claim regardless of
whether VETS has determined that the submitted complaint was
substantiated by the facts and evidence obtained during the
investigation. Each DOL VETS' case referral contains a memorandum
analyzing the USERRA claim and providing an assessment of whether the
complaint was substantiated.
Since my testimony in March, DOL VETS has undertaken the following
steps to answer questions and address concerns raised by the
Subcommittee regarding USERRA:

On March 21, 2023, DOL VETS established a recurring
USERRA Outreach Event to bring USERRA stakeholders together on a
regular basis. The first meeting was held on May 4, 2023, with the
following Federal partners and Veteran Service Organizations in
attendance: DOL VETS, DOL Office of the Solicitor, DOJ, OSC, DoD ESGR,
Reserve Organization of America (ROA), National Guard Association of
the United States (NGAUS), and Enlisted Association of the National
Guard of the United States (EANGUS). The next meeting will be scheduled
in September 2023.

On March 24, 2023, DOL VETS provided a copy of the USERRA
VEOA VP Investigations Manual (the Manual), with limited redactions, to
the Subcommittee. Limited redactions were made to the Manual provided
to the Subcommittee on the advice of counsel to avoid inadvertent
disclosures of DOL VETS' investigative techniques and procedures.
Pursuant to a follow-up request from Subcommittee majority staff, on
April 5, 2023, the Department's Office of Congressional and
Intergovernmental Affairs also provided an in camera review of the
unredacted Manual to Subcommittee staff. On May 23, 2023, I provided a
copy of the Manual, with limited redactions, and provided an in camera
review of the unredacted Manual to the Chairman.

On April 13, DOL VETS convened an intra-agency meeting
with representatives from DOL partners to develop the mechanisms
necessary to collect the data points required by 38 U.S.C. Sec.
4212(a)(2)(B). This development requires a joint effort with the
Employment and Training Administration (ETA) and the various State
Workforce Agencies throughout the country, as well as a change in how
employment data required to be reported is collected and shared among
the responsible agencies. My staff is required to provide me with
monthly reports on our progress in implementing this requirement.

On May10, 2023, DOL VETS provided responses to Questions
for the Record from the Subcommittee that arose from the hearing held
on March 9, 2023. They included substantive answers to questions from
the Subcommittee on USERRA, USERRA case statistics, employer trend data
with charts, and projected caseload and costs if USERRA was expanded to
protect military spouses.

On May 11, 2023, in honor of Military Spouse Appreciation
Day, DOL VETS hosted an in-person and live-streamed event with a panel
of four military spouses called Military Spouses in the Workplace to
discuss their experiences and how DOL VETS is striving to increase
employment protections for military spouses, including to update USERRA
to expand employment protections to military spouses.

USERRA Funding via the DOL VETS' Federal Administration Appropriation

As I have previously testified, the USERRA program is funded
through the DOL VETS' Federal Administration/USERRA appropriations
account. In addition to funding all of our enforcement activities, it
also provides funding for our performance accountability systems,
outreach, employer engagement, research, and all DOL VETS staff. In FY
2022, the President's Budget request for the DOL VETS' Federal
Administration/USERRA appropriations account was just over $52 million,
but Congress only appropriated $46 million. In FY 2023, the President's
Budget request for Federal Administration/USERRA appropriations account
was nearly $54 million, but Congress only appropriated $47 million.
Appropriated funding below the Budget requests have negatively impacted
DOL VETS' ability to hire and train enough investigators to conduct
USERRA investigations and other agency staff which support veterans and
provide or connect them to the services they need.
Notably, appropriated funding below the Budget request levels have
also negatively impacted DOL VETS' efforts to digitally modernize our
paperless VETS' Case Management system, otherwise known as the VCMS,
that will enhance the customer service experience of our veterans,
service members, their families, and their employers. The VCMS allows
DOL VETS to collect, organize, and analyze investigative material for
USERRA investigations. VETS investigators rely on VCMS to: timely
collect, organize, and follow up on documentary evidence and witness
interviews; correctly analyze investigative material; and to make
accurate, consistent, and equitable determinations.
USERRA investigations involve both domestic and sometimes
international employers and claimants and are investigated using DOL
VETS staff that are located in each state and territory in the United
States, making the electronic case management system like the VCMS
important.
Lack of funding also endangers DOL VETS' ability to provide ongoing
support for the VCMS, such as meeting the Section 508 requirements of
the Rehabilitation Act, which requires the equitable filing and
processing of claims from claimants who have protected status,
including claimants with service-connected disabilities. Specifically,
claimants who have a service-connected disability make up a significant
portion of the cases filed with DOL VETS. In FY 2021, of the 1,117
investigations conducted under USERRA, 33 percent of claims filed came
from persons who self-identified as a veteran or service member with a
service-connected disability.

Conclusion

DOL VETS welcomes the opportunity to provide detailed technical
assistance on the two bills seeking to enhance and expand employment
and reemployment protections under USERRA, as well as the enforcement
and remediation provisions of the statute. DOL VETS looks forward to
working with the Subcommittee to ensure that USERRA continues to
support our service members when they are called to serve our Nation,
which remains of fundamental importance to the recruitment, retention,
and readiness of the All-Volunteer Force. DOL VETS is committed to
continued collaboration with our interagency partners to provide
positive USERRA outcomes to employees and employers to minimize the
disruption to the lives of veterans, service members, their families,
their employers, their fellow employees, and their communities. DOL
VETS requests your support for the President's FY 2024 Budget request
for Federal Administration and USERRA, so that DOL VETS may continue to
provide the high level of customer service that our veterans, service
members, their families, and their employers deserve.
Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, distinguished members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to highlight the
important work DOL VETS is doing in support of our veterans, service
members, and military spouses who have served our country. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Patrick Murray

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars of the United States (VFW) and its Auxiliary, thank you for the
opportunity to provide our remarks on legislation pending before this
subcommittee.

H.R. 491, Return Home to Housing Act

The VFW supports this proposal to increase the rate of per diem
payments for furnishing services to homeless veterans. The purpose of
the transitional housing component of this program is to promote the
development and provision of supportive housing and services with the
goal of helping homeless veterans achieve residential stability,
increase their skill levels and/or income, and obtain greater self-
determination. We also believe amending the code to allow for usage in
response to an emergency is a strong addition to this program. This
change would allow programs to assist veterans whose needs may be
exacerbated by emergencies or natural disasters.

H.R. 3848, Housing our Military Veterans Effectively Act

The VFW understands the goal of this proposal, but does not fully
support it at this time and has suggestions for improvements. We
appreciate the rate increase for domiciliary care provided to State
Homes but are concerned the rate for placement into permanent housing
is reduced in this proposal. We recommend both portions be increased
due to the rising costs associated with housing homeless veterans. We
understand this proposal also provides a waiver of the maximum grant
rate, but VA has not effectively utilized waivers in the past so we do
not have confidence they would be applied correctly where needed. We
believe a simplified change in the rates instead of providing waiver
authority would be better for the program recipients who need
additional resources.
The VFW has questions about Section 3 of this proposal to modify
the authority of Public Law 114-226 by removing the requirement for the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to comply with all federal laws
relating to leases and land use on the West Los Angeles Campus. At this
time, we are unaware of a particular burden that prohibits VA or its
lessees from following the law, and we do not have any reason to
support overturning this requirement.
The VFW supports Section 4 of this proposal to authorize the use of
certain funds for improved flexibility in assisting homeless veterans.
However, we believe this authority should be permanent rather than just
temporarily extended into next year. At a hearing before this
subcommittee on March 30, 2023, representatives from VA described how
instrumental these authorities were for housing veterans in need. We
recommend amending this language to mirror that of H.R. 645, Healthy
Foundations for Homeless Veterans Act, which would provide the
flexibility VA needs to effectively provide services for homeless
veterans.

H.R. 3874, Veterans Education Assistance Improvement Act

The VFW supports this draft legislation that would provide
improvements to VA educational assistance programs. Section 2 of the
proposal would permit a student veteran to enroll in courses during the
final semester of a degree program for a less than half-time course
load- referred to as rounding out-and continue to receive full VA
housing benefits. Many student veterans register for nontraditional or
irregular course loads during a semester to balance their various
responsibilities. Others may begin a new course of study after military
service with some academic credit obtained during prior attendance.
Accordingly, some student veterans end up taking a less than half-time
course load during their final semester. This legislation would allow
student veterans to focus on the completion of their studies without
the burden of additional unnecessary requirements to continue receiving
full VA education benefits. Additionally, it could potentially save the
government money by not requiring student veterans to receive
additional credits in order to reach the threshold for full housing
stipends.
Section 3 of this proposal would provide schools with a six-month
period to implement any new VA educational assistance program
rulemaking. The VFW strongly supports this provision as it would allow
schools to implement program changes outside of peak times such as
enrollment and registration. Providing this flexibility may help ensure
continued participation in the programs by eliminating the perception
that implementing changes is too cumbersome and, therefore, not worth
the time and effort.
Additionally, the VFW suggests that VA adopts a ``Master Calendar''
similar to the calendar used by the Department of Education (20 U.S.
Code Sec.  1089) for standard regulation changes. This would set dates
for when certain changes would be implemented for education
regulations, for example by June 1, or the changes would fall to the
next year. We believe the relevant parts of the Master Calendar should
be adopted for VA education-related benefits in order to ease the
burden of regulation changes put upon schools.
Section 4 of this proposal would extend the time from one business
day to two business days that schools have to complete risk-based
surveys. Such surveys provide VA and State Approving Agencies (SAAs) a
way to review and mitigate potential fraud, waste, and abuse. A short
turnaround is meant to avoid giving time for schools to fabricate data.
School officials indicated that a timeframe of only one day is not
feasible, but extending the period of notice to two business days would
enable them to provide all the necessary information to VA.
The VFW supports Section 5 of this proposal that would repeal the
requirement for schools to provide students receiving VA education
benefits with a personalized ``shopping sheet.'' Within the language of
the Forever GI Bill, Section 1018 codified in the statute that schools
must provide students with a timely personalized Financial Aid Shopping
Sheet covering the total cost of an education program. The goal was to
inform students who are eligible to receive VA education benefits of
the potential eligibility for federal financial aid before turning to
private student loans or alternative financing. While this was a well-
intended initiative, unfortunately, school officials have told the VFW
that this requirement is too burdensome and often unrealistic. Schools
may not be able to provide accurate estimates in the timeframe needed
for veterans to make cost comparisons or to be in compliance with the
law.
In addition, financial estimates for students who receive Chapter
35 benefits, as in VA education benefits for dependents and survivors,
may not be accurate. Under Section 702 of the Veterans Choice Act (P.L
113-146), public schools must offer these students in-State tuition,
which is a requirement to receive GI Bill payments. For students
applying out of State, their in-State status would not begin until they
have moved to the school dormitory or other in-state housing. This is
another example of a financial estimate that can be inaccurate and
cause schools to be out of compliance, which is another reason to
remove this requirement.
Last, the VFW supports Section 6 of this legislation to provide
educational institutions with multi-year waivers to have accredited
courses and programs approved by VA. Yearly approvals are cumbersome
for schools and a multi-year waiver would provide them the necessary
flexibility to seek course approval periodically as courses change or
evolve.

Discussion Draft, Transcript Assurance for Heroes Act

The VFW supports the goal of this proposal to provide digital
official transcripts, but we would like clarification language added to
address what is considered a ``digital format.'' Student veterans could
definitely benefit from digital copies of official transcripts, but
depending on what is required, certain schools may not be able to
accommodate that requirement with their existing resources. Ensuring
students have access to records via a portable storage device such as a
thumb drive is a reasonable requirement. However, requiring schools to
enroll in online records management platforms such as the Parchment
education verification system could be expensive and burdensome for
smaller schools with a small number of VA beneficiaries in attendance.
Most large schools that have numerous VA beneficiaries may already have
certain digital records systems. However, smaller schools with fewer
resources may not be able to take on the burden of expensive electronic
platforms and may choose to withdraw from VA education programs instead
of spending more money to meet additional requirements. For this
reason, we would like clarification of congressional intent before
fully supporting this proposal.

Discussion Draft, TAP Promotion Act

The VFW supports this legislation to authorize accredited
representatives to promote the enrollment in VA benefit programs as
part of the military Transition Assistance Program (TAP). The VFW
believes this proposal to direct VA to develop a tailored pre-
separation benefits course in which accredited representatives actively
participate, and to incorporate representatives into its current TAP
presentation would be substantive improvements to the current
curriculum. We believe that VA must utilize accredited representatives
as tools in their TAP toolkit to the maximum practical extent, ensuring
veterans have access to competent, accountable, and free representation
in the VA benefits process.
One of the best resources at service members' disposal during
transition is the VA Benefits Delivery at Discharge (BDD) program
through which individuals can file expedited VA disability claims
before leaving active duty. Service members can use the BDD pre-
discharge claims program to submit their compensation claims and
complete associated medical evaluations before leaving service, thereby
enabling VA to provide disability ratings upon or shortly after
discharge. Individuals who participate in the BDD program are
subsequently better positioned to engage VA benefits and services after
leaving the military. This means transitioning service members can
minimize gaps in essential care like mental health counseling and
medication management upon discharge.
The VFW believes there is incalculable value in incorporating VA-
accredited representatives into the TAP curriculum. Specifically, we
would like to see these representatives utilized as complementary
course instruments that cover VA benefits and services where practical,
with a particular emphasis on those that can be applied for prior to
separation or retirement. This approach would mitigate instances of
service members missing critical benefits-related details while
enabling more to act on information without needing to find a
representative in their free time outside of TAP.
Currently, there is a lack of equitable access for service members
to utilize BDD services depending on which base they are stationed.
Unequal access leads to fewer service members being connected to their
benefits upon separation, thereby endangering connections to VA
services like mental health care and economic opportunity benefits. The
VFW proudly supports this proposal to enhance access to quality
benefits information as well as competent accredited representatives
across TAP, and we look forward to working with this subcommittee to
advance this legislation.

Discussion Draft, Servicemember Employment Protection Act of 2023

The VFW supports this draft legislation that offers several
solutions to improve reemployment rights, including under the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), for service
members who temporarily leave their employment when called to active
duty military service. USERRA shields National Guard and Reserve
members from job loss and missed promotions when they are called to
active duty or mobilized on federal orders for more than thirty
consecutive days. While USERRA was drafted to be comprehensive in
nature, that has not stopped bad actors from evading the protections it
offers service members.
The VFW appreciates that this draft bill includes removing the
immunity clause for certain federal agencies, so they would also be
required to comply with USERRA in the reemployment of any of their
staff who serve in the National Guard or Reserve. This bill would also
require a review of the Department of Labor's Veterans' Employment and
Training Service Investigations Manual: USERRA, VEOA, and VP, and to
report revisions to Congress. This would provide much-needed
transparency and a better understanding of the changes made to these
processes.
One related issue that the bill does not address but that concerns
the VFW is the continuing issue of forced arbitration clauses leveraged
against service members in employment contracts. Forced arbitration
clauses often require military personnel to preliminarily waive the
protections afforded to them under USERRA. Frequently included in the
fine print of contracts and electronic click-through agreements, these
clauses force service members to agree to binding arbitration before
any wrongdoing has occurred. As arbiters are generally hired and paid
for by the entities with which service members enter contracts, members
effectively submit blindly to proceedings that are biased in favor of
the other party. Non-disclosure agreements are also employed,
prohibiting those affected from seeking damages in civil court.
The widespread use of forced arbitration clauses in service
members' financial and employment contracts is alarming to the VFW as
these devious practices endanger the financial well-being of our force.
Financial security impacts service members' ability to satisfy their
basic needs and those of their families, and is imperative for those
working in sensitive positions that require security clearances. No
military member should have to blindly accept arbitration as a
condition of any contract. We urge Congress to pass legislation to make
the use of binding arbitration optional for military personnel.

Discussion Draft, To amend title 38, to establish certain employment
and reemployment rights for spouses of members of the uniformed
services

This legislation aims to provide a military spouse with certain
reemployment protections in the event of absence due to a change in the
permanent duty station of the service member. As a resolutions-based
organization, the VFW does not currently have a position on this issue.
However, we are concerned that this proposal may not be feasible and
could have the unintended effect of deterring employers from hiring
military spouses.

Discussion Draft, Isakson-Roe Education Oversight Expansion Act

The VFW understands the goal of this proposal is to require schools
to submit notifications of actions taken against them, but we feel this
is unnecessary. Schools that are placed in heightened cash monitoring
status by SAAs are already reported to VA by the SAAs themselves.
Schools that have punitive actions taken against them by State
Attorneys General are already reported by those entities. This proposal
is redundant and duplicative. This is an example of requiring schools
to agree to new requirements in order to receive GI Bill funds.
In recent years many schools have voluntarily withdrawn from VA
benefits programs because of the requirement to adhere to many
cumbersome regulations. It is time we closely examine these burdens we
have collectively placed schools that are already compliant. This
proposal is the latest example of unnecessary requirements without
consideration of the workload required to accomplish these tasks.
Chairman Van Orden, this concludes my testimony. Again, the VFW
thanks you and Ranking Member Levin for the opportunity to testify on
these important issues before this subcommittee. I am prepared to take
any questions you or the subcommittee members may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, the VFW
has not received any federal grants in Fiscal Year 2023, nor has it
received any Federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.

The VFW has not received payments or contracts from any foreign
governments in the current year or preceding two calendar years.
______

Prepared Statement of Ricardo Gomez
[[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Matthew Schwartzman

The Reserve Officers Association of the United States, now doing
business as the Reserve Organization of America, is a military service
organization incorporated under Internal Revenue Service Code section
501(c)(19), and comprising all ranks of servicemembers, veterans, and
family members of our nation's eight uniformed services separated under
honorable conditions. ROA is the only national military service
organization that solely and exclusively supports the reserve
components.
ROA was founded in 1922 by General of the Armies John ``Black
Jack'' Pershing, during the drastic reductions of the Army after World
War I. It was formed to support a strong national defense and focused
on the establishment of a corps of reserve officers who would be the
heart of a military expansion in the event of war. Under ROA's 1950
congressional charter, our purpose is unchanged: To promote the
development and execution of policies that will provide adequate
national defense. We do so by developing and offering expertise on the
use and resourcing of America's reserve components.

Executive Director:

Maj. Gen. Jeffrey E. Phillips, U.S. Army (Ret.)
202-646-7701

Director, Legislation and Military Policy:

Matthew L. Schwartzman
202-646-7713

=======================================================================

DISCLOSURE OF FEDERAL GRANTS OR CONTRACTS

The Reserve Officers Association of the United States, now doing
business as the Reserve Organization of America, has not received any
grants, contracts, or subcontracts from the federal government in the
past three years.

CURRICULUM VITAE

Matthew Schwartzman serves as the legislation and military policy
director for the Reserve Organization of America.
Responsible for the development, management, and execution of ROA's
government relations program and public policy portfolio, Matthew has
more than five years of experience in government and legislative
affairs, policy analysis, and membership services.
Matthew is also a co-chair for The Military Coalition's Guard and
Reserve Committee and Taxes and Social Security Committee,
representing, on select issues, a consortium of more than 30 military
and service organizations with approximately 5.5 million members
collectively.

STATEMENT

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and distinguished members
of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs Economic Opportunity
Subcommittee, on behalf of the congressionally chartered Reserve
Organization of America (ROA), thank you for the opportunity to testify
on legislation pending before the Subcommittee.
ROA also thanks the champions of these proposals for their genuine
desire to strengthen the education and training benefits provided by
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), reduce veteran homelessness,
and enhance workforce protections for servicemembers, veterans, and
military spouses.
ROA's focus today aligns with our resolutions, which are authored
and approved by our members, and congressional charter, ``... to
support and promote the development and execution of a strong military
policy for the United States that will provide adequate national
security.''
While I do not address each proposal provided for consideration in
this statement, ROA stands ready to engage on these measures following
this hearing.

H.R. 3943, the Servicemember Employment Protection Act of 2023.

ROA strongly supports Public Law No. 103-53, the Uniformed Services
Unemployment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) of 1994.
Since its enactment, USERRA has made a significant impact on
national security by protecting dual-career paths for members of the
Reserve and National Guard. Yet, USERRA can be improved.
ROA also recognizes the potential burden that USERRA places on
America's employers. ROA seeks to identify and support law and policy
that encourages companies to hire and retain members of the reserve
components.
Two examples are the RECRUIT Act \1\ and H.R. 3253, the Reservist
Pay Equity Act.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Introduced in the 117th Congress, this legislation allows
employers with less than 500 employees to claim a tax credit equal to
the sum of $1,000 plus an additional amount up to $10,000 depending on
the number of military duty days performed during the year.
\2\ H.R. 3253, the Reservist Pay Equity Act, increases the
differential wage payment tax credit from 20 to 50 percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With the reserve components constituting some 40 percent of the
total force, the integrity of USERRA is essential to our Nation's
military readiness.
Properly resourcing the U.S. Department of Labor Veterans'
Employment and Training Service (DOL-VETS) to effectively execute
USERRA is also of critical importance.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ President Biden's Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 budget requests $348
million in funding, an increase of $12 million above the FY 2023
enacted level, for the Veterans' Employment and Training Service's
(VETS) core programs, $347,627,000 and 265 full time equivalents (FTE),
an increase of $12,286,000 and 28 FTE over the FY 2023 revised enacted
level, and $1,500,000 and 3 FTE to support the enforcement of the
USERRA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over time, certain USERRA provisions have been circumvented and
inadequately enforced, leaving legal voids that weaken its protections
and must be corrected.
H.R. 3943, the Servicemember Employment Protection Act, fills many
of these voids.
ROA thanks Representative Scott Franklin for sponsoring H.R. 3943
and supports this legislation as currently written and with a few
proposed amendments.

SEC. 2. IMPROVEMENTS TO REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED
FORCES.

(a) EXPANSION OF INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
An injunction is a court order requiring the termination or
compulsion of a specific action. One of the most significant
protections afforded under USERRA is the right to be reemployed after
performing military service. Unfortunately, injunctions to prevent
firings or require reemployment are not normally available under
current law.
The conditions required for preliminary injunctive relief are a
likelihood of success on the merits when the case goes to trial and
existence of an irreparable injury if relief is denied.
However, the act of terminating one's employment is not currently
considered an irreparable injury. This is because providing
reemployment with back pay, which sometimes happens months after the
firing, is considered a repair. As a result, employees experience a
greater likelihood of being placed in difficult positions
professionally, legally, and financially.
USERRA currently reads: ``The court shall use, in any case in which
the court determines it is appropriate, its full equity powers,
including temporary or permanent injunctions, temporary restraining
orders, and contempt orders, to vindicate fully the rights or benefits
of persons under this chapter.''
Courts thus have broad latitude in determining whether to grant
injunctive relief. However, as stated previously, courts have not
widely recognized willful employment terminations under USERRA as an
irreparable injury.
H.R. 3943 SEC. 2. corrects this by amending USERRA to prohibit
courts from denying a motion for injunctive relief on the basis that an
employee may be awarded ``wages unearned'' following an unlawful
termination of employment.
This provides employees covered under USERRA with an additional
layer of legal protection by ensuring the act of providing back pay
does not diminish the likelihood of being granted injunctive relief.
This will also influence employees to provide their employers with
advanced notice of their military service, which is a requirement for
relief under USERRA.
H.R. 3943 SEC.2. (a) is a win for citizen-warriors and their
employers. ROA supports.

(b) EXPANSION OF LIQUIDATED DAMAGES

Under current law, if an employer (State, local, or private sector)
is established to have willfully violated USERRA, the court can award
liquidated damages equal to the actual damages, effectively ``doubling
the damages.''
In some USERRA cases, the actual damages may be small if the fired
or former employee denied reemployment has quickly found another job,
with another employer, earning just as much or more.
The incentive for employers to act within the tenets of USERRA may
therefore prove inadequate, resulting in willful violations.
Consider the following hypothetical case summary from ROA Law
Review 15089 \4\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.roa.org/resource/resmgr/LawReviews/
2015/15089-LR.pdf

Joe Smith works for Grapevine County as a deputy sheriff. After
giving proper notice to the Sheriff, Smith leaves his job for voluntary
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
or involuntary service in the uniformed services.

Smith serves on active duty and is released, without having
exceeded the five-year limit and without having received a
disqualifying bad discharge from the military. After release from
service, Smith makes a timely application for reemployment with the
Sheriff.

The Sheriff says, ``I don't care what federal law says. I am the
Sheriff of this county, and federal law does not apply to me. You can't
work here and play soldier at the same time. No, I will not reemploy
you.''

After just one week of unemployment, Smith finds another job as a
deputy sheriff in the neighboring country, which pays a little more
than his previous one.

Smith's damages, for 1 week of unemployment, are $600.

Under current law, Smith can collect $600 in actual damages and
$600 in liquidated damages.
H.R. 3493 strengthens this protection by enabling courts to award
employees with the greater of $50,000 or the amount of the actual
damages.
Smith could thus collect $600 in actual damages and $50,000 in
liquidated damages.
By providing courts with the flexibility to increase the liquidated
damages awarded, H.R. 3493 strengthens deterrence against willful
USERRA violations and enhances legal protections for wrongfully
terminated employees.
However, ROA respectfully requests amending the language of H.R.
3493 SEC. 2. (1)(C), which currently reads: ``The court may require the
employer to pay the person the amount referred to in subparagraph (B)
and interest on such amount, calculated at a rate of 3 percent per
year.''
USERRA currently authorizes awards for prejudgment interest under
Title 38 U.S.C. SEC. 4323 (D)(3). Prejudgment interest is an additional
form of compensation for the plaintiff and requires the defendant to
``relinquish any benefit that it has received by retaining the
plaintiff's money in the interim.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Brandywine Smyrna, Inc. v. Millennium Builders, LLC, 34 A.3d
482, 486 (Del. 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is currently no federal prejudgment interest rate. Instead,
different rules apply in different states, with 92 percent having laws
mandating prejudgment interest awards.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.iadclaw.org/assets/1/7/
50_State_Prejudgment_Interest_Reference_Guide.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By providing courts with the ability to award a prejudgment rate of
3 percent per year for USERRA cases, H.R. 3493 enables courts to award
a lower prejudgment interest rate than potentially afforded at the
state level.
To better recognize state law and provide courts with clearer
guidance for awarding prejudgment interest rates in USERRA cases, ROA
recommends amending H.R. 3493 SEC. 2. (b)(1)(c) to charge courts with
awarding plaintiffs with a prejudgment interest rate that is the
greater of the state's mandated rate or 3 percent.

SEC. 2 (A)

Title 38 U.S.C. SEC. 4334 requires employers to provide a
``notice'' of the rights, benefits, and obligations outlined in USERRA
for all parties involved. This notice is commonly displayed publicly on
a bulletin board at the employer's office location.
However, plaintiffs are not as likely to receive relief and
liquidated damages under Section 4334 (when compared to other USERRA
protections) given the difficulties in collecting and presenting
verifiable evidence of a wrongful and willful USERRA based offense.
If a federal executive agency or the Office of Personnel Management
has violated this USERRA protection, H.R. 3493 SEC. 2 (A) requires the
violation be constituted as prima facie evidence \7\, subject to the
awarding of liquidated damages.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Prima facie is Latin for ``at first sight.'' Prima facie
evidence establishes a legally required rebuttable presumption and may
be used as an adjective meaning ``sufficient to establish a fact or
raise a presumption unless disproved or rebutted.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ROA supports.
(2)(c) MANDATORY ATTORNEY FEES AWARD IN SUCCESSFUL ACTIONS FOR
REEMPLOYMENT
USERRA cases involving federal executive agencies as employers are
adjudicated by the U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), rather
than federal district court. If desired, the plaintiff can appeal an
unfavorable MSPB decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit.
USERRA currently authorizes MSPB to award attorney's fees to a
successful USERRA plaintiff in the MSPB, if the person proceeded with
private counsel and prevailed. However, under current law, this is not
mandatory, with discretion left to the Board.
As Abraham Lincoln said, ``A man who represents himself has a fool
for a client.''
Having legitimate legal representation provides USERRA claimants
with a greater likelihood of securing their rights. Title 38 U.S.C.
SEC. 4323(d)(1)(B) was included to give attorneys an incentive to
undertake USERRA cases.
However, the value of the incentive is considerably lessened if
there is no assurance in law or precedent that the MSPB will award
attorney fees, even if the claimant prevails with the attorney's
assistance.
H.R. 3493 SEC. (2)(c)(1) amends USERRA to make awarding a plaintiff
with ``reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and other
litigation expenses'' mandatory.
This issue also arises if a USERRA case involving federal executive
agencies as employers rises to the Federal Circuit.
In Erickson v. United States Postal Service \8\, the Federal
Circuit held that attorney fees cannot be awarded, by the MSPB or the
Federal Court itself, for the portion of representation that occurred
in the Federal Circuit, rather than the MSPB.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://casetext.com/case/erickson-v-us-postal-serv-4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response, ROA filed an amicus curiae brief urging the court to
grant a rehearing en banc \9\ and overturn the MSPB decision to not
award attorney fees for the cases heard before the Federal Circuit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ If a rehearing en banc had been granted, there would have been
new briefs and a new oral argument, and the case would have been
decided by all the active (not senior status) judges of the Federal
Circuit.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
An excerpt from the brief is as follows:

In the Panel's decision in Erickson v. U.S. Postal Service, the
Panel opined that on such appeal neither the Federal Circuit
nor the MSPB has the authority to award attorney fees for the
legal work done on two successful appeals before this Court...
Such a narrow construction of 38 U.S.C. 4324(c)(4) would make
it impossible for the service member to obtain counsel when
exercising his or her statutory right to appeal an MSPB
decision to the Federal Circuit (unless he or she is
independently wealthy or has a large claim, which is rarely the
case), effectively denying the right to appeal. This outcome
goes against the deeply entrenched precedent that ``this
legislation is to be liberally construed for the benefit of
those who left private life to serve their country in its hour
of need.'' Fishgold v. Sullivan Drydock & Repair Corp., 328
U.S. 275, 285 (1946). Depriving the service member of the right
to appeal, when bringing a claim against the Federal
Government, also goes against Congress' intent that ``the
Federal Government should be a model employer in carrying out
the provisions of this chapter.'' 38 U.S.C. 4301
Ensuring claimants can pursue all legal recourses necessary to
ensure their rights and be provided relief is an important condition of
USERRA's integrity.
Not permitting plaintiffs to be awarded attorney fees for USERRA
cases heard by the Federal Circuit could deter further legal action
that may have otherwise resulted in a positive outcome for the
plaintiff.
H.R. 3493 SEC. 2(c)(2) protects USERRA plaintiffs by ensuring they
are awarded with ``reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and
other litigation expenses'' if their case prevails and is not
represented by the Special Counsel in the proceeding. ROA supports this
provision.

SEC. 2(d) REPEAL OF IMMUNITY FOR CERTAIN FEDERAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES

Intelligence agencies are treated differently from all other
federal employment entities under USERRA.

The following excerpt from ROA LAW REVIEW 15089 describes the
situation in more detail:

In a July 1991 meeting at the New Executive Office Building, the
intelligence agencies asked for and were granted an exemption from the
USERRA enforcement mechanism, through the MSPB, but not from USERRA
itself. The agencies promised to establish their own internal
mechanisms for enforcement for USERRA rights within such agencies, and
sections 4315 and 4325 require the agencies to establish these
mechanisms. The agencies have failed to establish these mechanisms and
have flouted USERRA. It is necessary to repeal sections 4315 and 4325
in order to give intelligence agency employees, former employees, and
prospective employees effective USERRA rights.

USERRA Sec. 4315 prescribes that if an intelligence agency
determines that the act of reemployment is ``impossible or
unreasonable,'' the determination is not subject to judicial review and
OPM shall ``ensure the offer of employment to a person in a position in
a Federal executive agency . . .'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/
part3/chapter43&edition=prelim
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By eliminating the immunity shield currently provided to select
agencies in the intelligence community, H.R. 3493 SEC. 2(d) ensures the
full spectrum of federal employees are covered by USERRA.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ The Executive branch of the federal government is the nation's
leading employer of veterans. As of 2019, nearly 6,000 veterans worked
at the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). According to the 2021
Interagency Veterans Advisory Council annual State of Veterans in the
Federal Workforce report, there are over 500,000 federal civilian
employees who are veterans. The percentage of veterans in the federal
workforce hired with veterans' preference has increased from 84 percent
in FY 2014 to 86 percent in FY 2018. Because DoD limits many
mobilizations to 179 days or fewer, many reserve component members
complete their career without serving the 180 consecutive days needed
for veteran status under Title 5 U.S.C. 2108, even when potentially
aggregating several years of active service. ROA urges Congress to
bolster employment opportunities in the federal government for veterans
of reserve component service by conferring veteran status (to achieve
federal hiring preference) on reserve component members after 180
``cumulative'' days on active-duty, as opposed to 180 ``consecutive
days.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ROA supports.

SEC. 2(E) MAINTENANCE OF PERFORMANCE REVIEW RATINGS

Section 4313 of USERRA provides that an employee who returns from
uniformed service (whether for 5 hours or 5 years) and meets USERRA's
eligibility criteria must be reemployed in the position that would have
been attained if the employee had been continuously employed or
alternatively put in another position that provides like seniority,
status, and pay.
However, neither Section 4313 nor any other part of USERRA contains
an explicit provision ensuring employees are only evaluated for their
performance while at their civilian job.
This could potentially result in a willful termination of
employment in specific industries and occupations (such as sales) where
performance evaluations are weighed against an employee's sustained
ability to meet certain criteria. Employees who are away from work for
uniformed service should not suffer in their career progression because
of this.
Ensuring employees are only evaluated for their performance while
at their civilian position is not currently protected under USERRA.
From ROA's perspective, if an employee is away from work for
uniformed service, or for travel to and from uniformed service, for
part of the evaluation period, the employer must adjust the
expectation(s) upon which the performance evaluation is based.
H.R. 3493 SEC. 2(E) provides employees with additional legal
protection by ensuring the time spent away from work for military duty
is credited with the average of the efficiency or performance
evaluations which the employee received for the three-years before the
absence.

SEC. 2(F) EXPANSION OF ELIGIBLE TIME AWAY FROM CIVILIAN
EMPLOYMENT

Under USERRA, a person who leaves a civilian job to perform
``service in the uniformed services'' and who meets USERRA's
eligibility criteria is entitled to reemployment in the preservice
civilian job, after release from the period of service.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ USERRA defines ``service in the uniformed services'' as
follows: ``The term `service in the uniformed services' means the
performance of duty on a voluntary or involuntary basis in a uniformed
service under competent authority and includes active duty, active duty
for training, initial active duty for training, inactive duty training,
full-time National Guard duty, a period for which a person is absent
from a position of employment for the purpose of an examination to
determine the fitness of the person for any such duty, and a period for
which a person is absent from employment for the purpose of performing
funeral honors duty as authorized by section 12503 of title 10 or
section 115 of title 32.'' 38 U.S.C. 4303(13).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, this does not currently enable the provision of employer
sponsored leave to employees that may require a medical appointment
necessitated by a wound, injury, or illness sustained in the line of
duty.

Here is the scenario as described by ROA LAW REVIEW 15089 \13\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\  https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.roa.org/resource/resmgr/LawReviews/
2015/15089-LR.pdf

Joe Smith left his job at XYZ Corporation when mobilized. He
deployed to Afghanistan and was wounded. He has largely but not
fully recovered from his wounds. He has been released from
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
active duty and has returned to work at XYZ.

Twice per month, he needs to travel to a military or Department
of Veterans Affairs treatment facility for follow-up care.
Appointments are available only on regular workdays, not on
weekends. Smith has exhausted his sick leave entitlement at
XYZ.

He does not have rights under the Family Medical Leave Act
(FMLA), because XYZ is too small or because Smith has not
worked for the company long enough. Does Smith have the right
to time off without pay from his XYZ job for these medical
appointments?

Under current law, the answer is no.

H.R. 3493 SEC. 2(F) protects employees by covering any period for
which a person is ``absent from a position of employment for the
purpose of medical or dental treatment for a condition, illness, or
injury sustained or aggravated during any such duty.''

SEC. 3. REVIEW OF INVESTIGATIONS MANUAL OF VETERANS' EMPLOYMENT AND
TRAINING SERVICE.

DOL VETS' own internal USERRA Investigation Manual establishes
procedures for the conduct of closed-case reviews.
DOL's regulations (outlined under 20 CFR Sec. Sec.  1002.1 -
1002.314) for implementing USERRA are the primary basis for training
and providing references to DOL investigators, rather than the law
itself.
In testimony before this Subcommittee on March 9, 2023, ROA
expressed that ``DOL should be compelled to update its regulations on a
more regular basis to ensure investigators and staff are consistently
trained on up-to-date USERRA provisions to completely fulfill their
statutory responsibilities under USERRA.'' \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ https://docs.house.gov/meetings/VR/VR10/20230309/115444/HHRG-
118-VR10-Bio-PattonG-20230309.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 3493 SEC. 3 requires the Secretary of Labor to review DOL-
VETS' USERRA enforcement manual on a biennial basis and make such
revisions as deemed appropriate. ROA supports.

SEC. 2. (h). REVIEW AND REPORT.

At the aforementioned hearing on March 9, ROA also testified on the
need to ``amend Section 4332 of USERRA to require the Secretary of
Labor to additionally report the number of closed-case reviews
conducted in each reporting period, the number of disposed cases found
to have been originally closed by DOL VETS with substantive errors that
affected a veteran's right and relief under USERRA, and summaries of
every case that DOL VETS disposed of by deeming it without merit, and
for which a court or other federal agency subsequently affirmed the
merit of the veteran's complaint.''
H.R. 3493 SEC. 2. (h) requires the Comptroller General of the
United States to ``review the methods through which the Secretary of
Labor . . . processes actions for [USERRA] relief'' and submit a report
that includes the findings of the review, an identification of the
actions for relief under USERRA initiated during the covered period,
the number of actions for relief erroneously dismissed, the number of
actions for relief referred to the Department of Justice, and an
assessment of trends in such actions for relief.
Without objection to H.R. 3493 SEC. 2. (h), ROA respectfully
requests further consideration of and support for the reporting
requirements outlined in our March 9 testimony (stated above).

H.R. 3900, to amend title 38, United States Code, to establish certain
rights for spouses of members of the uniformed services.

Both the benefits and consequences of military service are
intensely felt by the servicemember and their family. ROA believes that
``you recruit a service member, but you retain a service family.''
Military spouses find themselves shouldering the burden that
accompanies service. This is especially the case if a military family
relies on two incomes.
For a spouse, maintaining employment and advancing professionally
while relocating every few years and caring for children - often done
solo while the ``other half'' is deployed - is a serious challenge for
these integral components of our military readiness.
There is no acceptable reason for military spouses to lose
opportunities for employment and career advancement because they are
serving alongside a member of our uniformed services.
Consistently, over the past decade, the military spouse
unemployment rate has remained over 20 percent. Spouse employment is
important to secure financial readiness for military families.
Unfortunately, military spouses face additional barriers to employment
and career advancement.

MILITARY SPOUSE UNEMPLOYMENT AND FINANCIAL READINESS: FAST
FACTS

According to the Blue Star Families 2023 Military Family
Lifestyle Survey, military families' financial well-being
``lags behind'' civilian peers, financial pressures are ``top-
of-mind'' for military families, and military spouse
unemployment remains the ``top concern'' for spouse respondents
for the sixth consecutive year.

Specific to families of the National Guard and Reserve, 19 and 26
percent of survey respondents said spouse employment was their ``top''
military family issue.

According to the 2021 Active-Duty Spouse Survey:

The military spouse unemployment rate is 21 percent.

A Permanent Change of Station (PCS) move increased the
odds of unemployment ``significantly.''

31 percent of spouses had to acquire a new professional
credential to work at or near the new duty location. Further, acquiring
new career credentials after moving increased the odds of low financial
well-being.

41 percent of spouses reported not seeking employment
after their last PCS move.

Being unemployed and contributing less than 50 percent to
household income increased the odds of low food security.

According to the Military Spouse Employment Partnership,
military spouses earn 25 percent less than their civilian counterparts
and move 14 percent more frequently than civilian families.

ROA thanks Representative Christopher Deluzio for introducing H.R.
3900.

Specifically, H.R. 3900 offers military spouses with rights and
legal relief under USERRA by:

Enabling entitlement to reemployment rights and benefits
up to a period that does not exceed 5 cumulative years and/or 2
consecutive years under Sections 4312, 4313, 4314, and 4315 of USERRA.

Affording entitlement to rights and benefits determined
by seniority (as are generally provided to employees having similar
seniority status) plus the additional rights and benefits that would
have been attained if continuously employed (as are generally provided
to employees having similar seniority status).

Extending access to employer sponsored healthcare for the
lesser of the two-year period beginning on the date the spouse's
military duty begins or the day after the date the employee fails to
apply for or return to their position of employment.

Providing continued and uninterrupted access to any plan,
other than the Thrift Savings Plan, that provides retirement income to
employees or defers payment of income to employees until after
employment has ended.

ROA believes this legislation is a commendable effort to reduce
military spouse unemployment and enhance workforce protections through
USERRA.
ROA is encouraged by the level of attention and support the Biden
Administration and DOL have given this proposal and looks forward to
working with mission partners across all levels of government and
industry to improve employment opportunities and outcomes for military
spouses.
However, ROA requires more information to determine whether USERRA
like protections can be effectively adapted to the environment
associated with military spouse education, employment, healthcare
enrollment, and PCS patterns. Such information includes but is not
limited to:

How often active and reserve component families move back
to a previous PCS location within 5 cumulative or 2 consecutive years.

How often active and reserve component families move
across state lines or to a different location within their current
state of residence for a PCS or temporary duty assignment.

The percentage of employed military spouses enrolled in
their employer's healthcare plan.

The percentage of military families that do not move
across state lines for a PCS or temporary duty assignment with the
servicemember.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ PCS moves are associated with a diverse set of disruptions
that impact all members of a military family and the decision-making
process for how to effectively manage a PCS. This may include a
military family not moving to the new permanent or temporary duty
location with their service member spouse. ROA's director of
operations, U.S. Navy CDR (Ret.) Trey Criner, in 2008, received orders
to move from Camp Pendleton, California to Newport, Rhode Island for
follow on duty (for five months) and Jacksonville, Florida thereafter.
Because of the 2008 housing crisis, strain from two moves in the
previous six years, and his son beginning high school, CDR (Ret.)
Criner's family did not move with him to Newport or Jacksonville. CDR
(Ret.) Criner was stationed away from his family for 2 years.

The percentage of employed military spouses that have
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
access to remote working.

ROA looks forward to collaborating with the members and staff of
this Subcommittee to obtain this information in a timely manner.
From ROA's perspective, this data can also be used to accurately
project the resource requirements for effective implementation of H.R.
3900.
In the meantime, ROA encourages the members of this Subcommittee to
prioritize support for hiring incentives that reduce barriers to
employment for military spouses (and reserve component servicemembers).
One example is H.R. 1277, the Military Spouse Hiring Act.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Authorized until December 31, 2025 (under Public Law No: 116-
120, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021), the Work Opportunity
Tax Credit (WOTC) is available to employers who hire job seekers that
have consistently faced systemic barriers to employment. Currently,
there are ten protected classes of job seekers under WOTC, including
veterans. But despite fitting the criteria to receive federal
protection under WOTC, military spouses are not currently included.
WOTC has proven highly effective in incentivizing employers to make
hiring decisions they may not otherwise seriously consider. Since FY
2018, more than 10 million job seekers in any one of the 10 WOTC
protected classes have secured employment. ROA strongly supports the
Military Spouse Hiring Act, which is also supported by The Military
Coalition, representing more than 5.5 million service members,
veterans, families, and survivors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ROA believes more information is required to determine whether DOL-
VETS is best equipped to manage its current requirements under USERRA
and able to absorb any increase(s) in demand for its investigative
services.
To better gauge DOL VETS' ability to effectively execute USERRA,
ROA requested Subcommittee support for a study performed by the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) to evaluate performance,
identify deficiencies, and propose recommendations for improvement.
The desired end State of this study is better measurement of the
capability and preparedness of DOL VETS to uphold its statutory
obligations to servicemembers under USERRA. ROA respectfully requests
further consideration of and Subcommittee support for this study prior
to moving forward with H.R. 3900.
On March 9, ROA also testified that ``you get what you inspect; you
get what you measure.''
Currently, the unemployment and labor market participation rates
for military spouses and reserve component servicemembers are not
included in the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) monthly
Employment Situation report.
ROA urges Congress to require BLS to track and publicly report on
the unemployment and labor market participation rates for military
spouses and members of the National Guard and Reserve \17\ as part of
the monthly Employment Situation report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\  Our nation's citizen-warriors are also experiencing obstacles
in obtaining and maintaining civilian employment. This burden on
service places an undue strain on reserve component members and their
families. According to the Commanders Strength Management Module
(https://reservenationalguard.com/civilian-employers/civilian-
employment-army-reserve-partnership/), the unemployment rate is around
23.8 percent in the Army Reserve.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 3898, the Transcript Assurance for Heroes Act

Both accredited and non-accredited institutions of education must
meet certain requirements to validate the quality of education they
provide. These requirements are generally focused on the institution's
ability to meet their obligations to students and the VA under the law.
H.R. 3898, the Transcript Assurance for Heroes Act, requires, as a
condition of approval for participation in the VA's education and
training programs, that educational institutions provide digital copies
of official transcripts to students.
Official transcripts are important to students and third parties
seeking to validate the accuracy and authenticity of academic records.
However, not all schools provide students with the ability to obtain a
digital copy.
Under certain circumstances, such as the abrupt closure of a
school, this can be problematic for students, who are likely to obtain
a copy of their official transcript through an alternatively arduous
process.
Since March 2020, at least 37 public or nonprofit colleges have
closed, merged, or announced closures or mergers.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://www.bestcolleges.com/research/closed-colleges-list-
statistics-major-closures/
#:8:text=At%20least%2037%20public%20or,2020%20were%20for%2Dprofit%20scho
ols.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to a study from the State Higher Education Executive
Office (SHEEO) and National Student Clearinghouse Research Center
(NSCRC), from a sample of 467 schools (that closed between July 2004
and June 2020) and 143,215 students, seven in 10 students were impacted
by an ``abrupt campus closure.'' \19\ The study also showed that
students who experienced an abrupt campus closure had lower re-
enrollment and completion rates than students who did not.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://sheeo.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/
SHEEO_NSCRC_CollegeClosures_Report1.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The integrity of VA's education and training program is a shared
responsibility between the institutions of education, accreditation and
oversight authorities, and students.
ROA believes that providing students with a digital copy of an
official transcript should be an industry best practice to ensure
access to the resources required for verifying course enrollment status
and/or VA benefit(s) restoration if a school or program has abruptly
closed or lost its accreditation.
ROA also believes that in the instances of an abrupt closure or
loss of accreditation, schools or programs providing access to a
digital copy of an official transcript put students in a better
position to secure positive education and employment outcomes.
ROA thanks Representatives Eli Crane, Nancy Mace, and Mary Miller
for sponsoring this well-intentioned measure.
Without objection to H.R. 3898, the Transcript Assurance for Heroes
Act, prior to further action, ROA respectfully requests Subcommittee
support for requiring the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to report on
the institutions of education that currently do and do not provide this
capability.
Further, in the continued absence of the proposed requirement under
H.R. 3898, ROA requests the report be conducted annually and posted
publicly (or its findings be included as part of the VA's GI Bill
Comparison Tool) to educate prospective enrollees prior to enrollment.

CONCLUSION

ROA appreciates the opportunity to offer our expertise and insight
on the proposals pending before this Subcommittee.
All too often military and veterans' law and policy are developed
without an understanding of or appreciation for the impact distinctions
between reserve and active duty service. The members of the Reserve and
National Guard invariably lose out. And so, too, their families. That
means America's military readiness loses out. We cannot afford that
loss.
ROA also extends its sincerest gratitude for this hearing and
stands ready to provide added support on the issues covered in this
statement and on other areas of mutual interest.
______

Prepared Statement of Meredith Smith
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Kevin Hollinger

The Enlisted Association of the National Guard of the United States
(EANGUS) was formally organized in 1972 to increase the voice of
enlisted persons in the National Guard. As such, EANGUS is a non-profit
organization dedicated to the principles of providing an adequate
national defense and promoting the status, welfare, and professionalism
of the men and women of the Army and Air National Guard by supporting
legislation that provides adequate staffing, pay, benefits,
entitlements, equipment, and installations for the National Guard.
Beginning with twenty-three states, EANGUS now represents all 50
states, Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the District of
Columbia, and has an association comprised of those who serve the
National Guard on a national tour, with a constituency base of over
450,000 Soldiers and Airmen, their families, and tens of thousands of
retired members.
EANGUS is a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the
status, welfare, and professionalism of Enlisted members of the
National Guard by supporting legislation that provides adequate
staffing, pay, benefits, entitlements, equipment, and installations for
the National Guard. The Legislative Goals of EANGUS are published
annually. The goals and objectives were established through the
resolution process, with resolutions passed by association delegates at
the annual conference. These resolutions include the issues that EANGUS
will pursue in Congress and the Department of Defense. Resolutions stay
in force for two years.

President:

Master Sgt. Daniel B. Reilly, Air Force National Guard (ret.)
203-509-4381

Executive Director:

Sgt. Maj. Robert Sweeney, Army National Guard (ret.)
253-686-7119

Director, Legislation and Military Policy:

Kevin C Hollinger
202-670-1826

DISCLOSURE OF FEDERAL GRANTS OR CONTRACTS

The Enlisted Association of the National Guard of the United States
(EANGUS) is a member-supported organization. EANGUS has not received
grants, contracts, or subcontracts from the federal government in the
past three years. All other activities and services of the associations
are accomplished free of any direct federal funding.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement

EANGUS was formally organized in 1972 to increase the voice of
enlisted persons in the National Guard. As such, EANGUS is a non-profit
organization dedicated to the principles of providing an adequate
national defense and promoting the status, welfare, and professionalism
of the men and women of the Army and Air National Guard by supporting
legislation that provides adequate staffing, pay, benefits,
entitlements, equipment, and installations for the National Guard.
Beginning with twenty-three states, EANGUS now represents all 50
states, Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the District of
Columbia, and has an association comprised of those who serve the
National Guard on a national tour, with a constituency base of over
450,000 Soldiers and Airmen, their families, and tens of thousands of
retired members.
EANGUS appreciates the opportunity to discuss the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA), VA Education,
Veteran Homelessness, and Minority benefits. While we will not address
every proposed act, this does not indicate EANGUS's support for or
opposition to these other bills. EANGUS's focus today aligns with our
By-laws, Articles of incorporation, and the resolutions brought by our
members.

USERRA Protection For Spouses

It is easy to see the sacrifice of the servicemember. Unless you
have lived under a rock for the last 20 + years, everyone knows the
gift of the Reservist and National Guard personnel. They know how they
are pulled from their everyday lives and thrust into service of our
country. The Reserves and National Guard have proven to be a critical
part of our Nation's defense. But imagine if you were removed from your
spouse at a moment's notice and if you still have or have small
children. How hard would it be for your spouse to make up for your
absents? Well, that's how being a National Guard spouse works. Civil
unrest, natural disasters, filling in for teachers in your local area,
or combatting these issues are only sometimes convenient for families.
When a National Guardsman deploys, family hardships increase
dramatically. Their lives are turned upside down, and the spouse must
take time away from their employment to figure out new daily routines
and schedules. At a moment's notice, they become the sole head of the
house. Handling time off is often the only way for the spouse to get
acclimated. Their dedication to our national defense is often
overlooked but is more critical and complex than their National Guard
Spouse.
Spouses often must take time away from their employment to figure
out new schedules. At a moment's notice, they become the sole head of
the house. Handling time off is often the only way for spouses to get
acclimated. Their dedication to our national defense is more critical
and complex than their National Guard spouse.
Army Gen. Raymond Odierno often said, ``Our country is great
because of our military, our military is great because of our
servicemembers, and our servicemembers are great because of our
families.'' Putting these things together is the correct answer.
EANGUS would urge the 118th Congress to legislate USERRA protection
to spouses of activated Reserve and National Guard servicemembers.

Amend title 38, United States Code, to improve the reemployment rights
of Armed Forces members.

This legislation would expand the powers of the USERRA law.
Expanding this law should allow for better and more predictable
outcomes for servicemembers. It also empowers the court to approach
USERRA cases aggressively by adding additional jurisdiction and
monetary powers. This would force private, state, and federal employers
to educate their management and ensure Service members are given their
proper protections without court intervention.
In Torres v. Texas Department of Public Safety, the Supreme Court
considered whether the states, by ratifying the Constitution, gave
Congress the power to authorize suits against states using its
constitutional war powers. In the opinion authored by Justice Stephen
Breyer, he stated, ``Congress's ability to build and maintain the Armed
Forces fits the test outlined in PennEast's test. Thus, in joining
together to form a Union, the States agreed to sacrifice their
sovereign immunity for the good of the common defense.'' With that
opinion, we now know it is something to be considered by the US
Congress.
This proposed legislation would be the first step to codifying the
Supreme Court's decision in Torres v. Texas Department of Public Safety
and allowing for Outcomes that are more advantageous to servicemembers
instead of relying on the opinion of judges at the state and federal
level along with board members. By assigning a monetary penalty, it
forces employers to become educated or pay the price for uniformed
adverse employment decisions. Assessing mandatory attorney fees takes
some of the burdens of servicemembers. They will now have the resources
necessary to find and hire proper legal counsel to help them navigate
the complex court systems. EANGUS would urge the 118th Congress to
introduce and passes this legislation furthering the authorities of
USERRA.

TAP Promotion Act

Allowing MSO/VSO organizations to assist in the transition program
will help our Servicemembers better understand not only their qualified
benefits at the time of exiting their service but would also help them
know that there are resources that will help them maneuver the
sometimes hard-to-understand bureaucracies of the VA system.
The government can implement this program effectively by ensuring
the proper certification. It would also help the VA use the funding to
further strengthen this program without developing it using all
government funding.
VSOs are predominantly run by veterans and understand what the
needs of veterans are. Most often, they have board members who are
veterans and actively serving the armed forces. This gives them the
direction to assess the TAP program's decision properly. Furthermore,
understanding the dynamic demographic of the military will help them
develop a program better suited for multiple demographics.
EANGUS supports using VSOs to help administrate the TAP program
after proper certification.

Veterans Education Assistance Improvement Act

Enlisted personnel do not attend college or secondary education
before service to their State and country. This forces them to
participate in secondary education once they are already serving and
improving their ability to gain an education which is crucial to
improving their well-being.
Servicemembers often use education to improve their employment
status. Employment status is often directly tied to continued service;
ensuring their benefits can be used at their maximum intent is critical
to positive outcomes.
EANGUS urges the 118th Congress to legislate and pass the Veterans
Education Assistance Improvement Act.

Amend title 38, United States Code, to require, as a condition of
approval under the educational assistance programs of the Department of
Veterans Affairs, that educational institutions make available to
eligible persons and veterans digital copies of official transcripts.

Access to electronic transcripts will aid veterans in navigating
the educational process. Servicemembers are often forced to use
multiple educational institutions while in service. This usually has to
do with deployments and activations. This legislation will give the
servicemember more access to their transcript, therein giving them more
access to education.
Unfortunately, enlisted Guard and Reserve servicemembers are tasked
with balancing their service in uniform, civilian employment, family
obligations, and education. Often education has to take a back seat,
which leads to our enlisted servicemembers attending multiple schools,
and electronic transcripts speed up the process and help the
servicemembers make the best educational decision for them and their
families.
EANGUS urges the 118th Congress to Legislate and pass mandatory VA
electronic digital Transcripts to eligible veterans.

Isakson-Roe Education Oversight Expansion Act

On January 5, 2021, the Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe Veterans
Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 was enacted. The law
will have a transformative effect on the mission of the Education
Service to provide ready access to and timely and accurate delivery of
education benefits to Veterans, Service members, and their families, as
well as further enable the VA to empower GI Bill beneficiaries to
achieve their vocational and career goals.
This new law features 32 provisions that impact the administration
and oversight of GI Bill benefits, including new requirements for
enrollment verification, expanded restoration of entitlement
opportunities, the sunsetting of the Montgomery GI Bill, substantial
changes to our oversight of GI Bill-approved schools, and other
education-related issues
In the past, we have seen educational institutions with bad
intentions that have harmed veterans pursuing their education. It is
often problematic for the VA to Identify and investigate all involved
institutions and organizations claiming to benefit the servicemember.
EANGUS believes allowing the VA to overwatch the programs and
institutions is a good step. We have often seen policy and rule changes
set to weed out the lousy actor, but what ends up happening is that
good institutions are complex. Therefore servicemembers' educational
goals are hindered. VA oversight allows the VA to identify issues, make
well-thought-out policy changes, and adequately guide veterans using VA
funds.
EANGUS supports legislation giving the VA Secretary oversight for
certain educational institutions as posed to creating new policy and
urges the 118th Congress to introduce and pass this legislation.

H.R. 491, Return Home to Housing Act; and Housing our Military Veterans
Effectively Act

Combating veteran homelessness has always been and will continue to
be a significant challenge due to the vast and changing reasons for the
veterans' circumstances. EANGUS understands there is not and cannot be
one answer to this problem, and we know there must be quite a few
programs to address this issue.
Ensuring all parties participating in the ongoing efforts are
appropriately compensated is critical to maintaining a healthy working
environment. Unfortunately, financial security is always a factor we
decide on employment; we all wish to do what we love for free, but that
is not reality. Giving all parties involved proper compensation and
reimbursement is critical in developing new and existing programs and
the key to continued success.
EANGUS supports and urges the 118th Congress to introduce and pass
these pieces of legislation, which we hope will further strengthen the
VA programs to eradicate veterans' homelessness.

CONCLUSION

EANGUS appreciates the opportunity to offer thoughts regarding
these critical legislative issues. Military and veterans' laws and
policies are often developed without an understanding of or
appreciation for the essential distinctions between the reserve and
active-duty service. The members of the National Guard invariably lose
out. And so do their families.
These past three years have shown America how important the
National Guard is to everyday life. The National Guard has activated
over 380,000 servicemembers since 2020 for missions including but not
limited to, Pandemic assistance, Civil unrest, overseas direct combat
assistance, and capitol security. These activations were often at a
moment's notice, and the National Guard did not hesitate; they
accomplished the mission.
Ensuring that our National Guard veterans are adequately cared for
after service is critical to the National Guard recruiting and
retention problem. As stated above, ``the National Guard does not
hesitate; they accomplish the mission.'' We are now asking the same
from Congress; please do not hesitate. Ensure our Nation's heroes are
adequately cared for during and after the service. Thank you for your
time.

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of New England Center and Home for Veterans
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Operation Dignity
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of U.S. Vets Inglewood
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of U.S. Vets Inland Empire
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of U.S. Vets Long Beach
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of U.S. Vets Prescott
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Veterans Education Success
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Veterans Integration Centers
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Volunteers of America Los Angeles
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Alston Wilkes Society
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of The American Legion
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Disabled American Veterans, Department of
California
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Family & Community Services, Inc.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Helping Veterans and Families of Indiana, Inc.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of The Honorable Morgan McGarvey (KY-3)
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Nation's Finest
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
