- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1753; H.R. 3790; H.R. 4016; H.R. 4190; H.R. 4306; H.R. 5559; H.R. 5891; H.R. 5870; H.R. 5870; H.R. 5890; AND H.R. 5938

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON

H.R. 1753; H.R. 3790; H.R. 4016; H.R. 4190;.
H.R. 4306; H.R. 5559; H.R. 5891; H.R. 5870;
H.R. 5870; H.R. 5890; AND H.R. 5938

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY
ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-349                      WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas, Chairman

C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida           CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire,
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona                  Ranking Member
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
KEITH SELF, Texas                        Pennsylvania
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Morgan Luttrell, Chairman..........................     1
The Honorable Chris Pappas, Ranking Member.......................     2
The Honorable Mike Bost, U.S. House of Representatives, (IL-12)..     3
The Honorable Keith Self, U.S. House of Representatives, (TX-03).     4
The Honorable Abigail Davis Spanberger, U.S. House of
Representatives, (VA-07).......................................     5
The Honorable Darrell Issa, U.S. House of Representatives, (CA-
48)............................................................     6
The Honorable Juan Ciscomani, U.S. House of Representatives, (AZ-
06)............................................................     7
The Honorable David J. Trone, U.S. House of Representatives, (MD-
06)............................................................    26

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Ms. Beth Murphy, Executive Director, Compensation Service,
Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     8

Accompanied by:

Mr. Kevin Friel, Deputy Director, Pension & Fiduciary
Service, Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Kenneth Arnold, Vice Chairman, Board of Veterans'
Appeals, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Panel 2

Mr. Shane Liermann, Deputy National Legislative Director,
Disabled American Veterans.....................................    27

Ms. Quandrea N. Patterson, Associate Director, Veterans of
Foreign Wars of the United States..............................    28

Mr. Zachary M. Stolz, Partner, Chisholm, Chisholm, & Kilpatrick
LTD............................................................    30

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Ms. Beth Murphy Prepared Statement...............................    41
Mr. Shane Liermann Prepared Statement............................    48
Ms. Quandrea N. Patterson Prepared Statement.....................    55
Mr. Zachary M. Stolz Prepared Statement..........................    58

Statements For The Record

American Veterans (AMVETS).......................................    63
National Organizations of Veterans' Advocates (NOVA).............    65
Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA)..............................    69
Quality.Timeliness.Customer Service (QTC)........................    71
Special Operations Association of America (SOAA).................    74

APPENDIX--continued

ALS Association..................................................    78
Service Woman's Action Network (SWAN)............................    80
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, U.S. House of Representatives,
(VA-11)........................................................    81
Military-Veterans Advocacy, Inc..................................    83

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON
H.R. 1753; H.R. 3790; H.R. 4016; H.R. 4190;
H.R. 4306; H.R. 5559; H.R. 5891; H.R. 5870;
H.R. 5870; H.R. 5890; AND H.R. 5938

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Disability Assistance & Memorial
Affairs,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 12:02 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Morgan Luttrell
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Luttrell, Ciscomani, Crane, Self,
Pappas, Deluzio, McGarvey, and Ramirez.
Also present: Representatives Bost, and Trone.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MORGAN LUTTRELL, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Luttrell. Good morning. Thank you everybody for coming
in today. Excuse, just so everyone knows, I am in another
committee that is in the middle of a markup right now. I will
be handing the chair off to Mr. Bost. Thank you, sir. The
Chairman for VA is here and he will be taking that as soon as I
finish my remarks.
The subcommittee will come to order.
Good afternoon. We are here to discuss the 10 bills that
would benefit veterans and their families. These bills would
increase accountability and transparency for both the VA Board
of Veterans Appeals and the VA Fiduciary Program, improve the
VA appeals process by building on the accomplishments of the
Veteran Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017,
recognize and increase access to disability compensation for
female service members who serve as members of the cultural
support teams (CST), increase access to benefits for military
firefighters and surviving spouses of veterans who suffered
from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) as well, and expand
access to disability exams for rural and underserved veterans.
I am proud to have introduced two bills on today's agenda.
H.R. 5890, the Review Every Veterans Claim Act, would prevent
VA from denying certain types of claims solely because a
veteran misses one VA exam. I believe it is ridiculous that
under the current law, when a veteran misses their VA
disability compensation and pension (C&P) exam without
providing good cause or rescheduling, VA automatically denies
the veteran's claims. That is not legitimate governing, in my
opinion. That is working against the veteran. There is no
reason why a veteran who has been pursuing their VA claim for
years, has had undergone multiple VA exams, should have to
start completely over because they missed one exam.
My bill would prevent VA from denying a claim solely
because a veteran failed to appear for one exam while having an
open VA benefit claim. The bill would ensure that veterans
receive an access to a comprehensive decision based on
considerations of all of the evidence in their VA claim file,
including every disability exam they have already appeared for.
My other bill, 5891, the Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity
Act, would build on Chairman Bost's and House Republicans' work
to modernize the VA appeals process. The bill would require the
VA Board of Veterans Appeals to notify veterans of the evidence
the Board did not consider when making a decision on a
veteran's claim. In return, veterans would have more
transparency from the Board and when we allow our veterans to
have access to all the information they need to decide whether
they want to request the VA consider the left out evidence in a
potential future claim.
The bill would also require the Board to explicitly state
in its decision which appeal forms successfully started an
appeal and which did not. Right now, when the Board overlooks
or incorrectly rejects a veterans' appeal form as untimely but
does not issue an explicit decision stating that, the U.S.
Court of Appeals cannot correct the Board's mistakes, sending
veterans back to square one. My bill would cut through the red
tape and ensure the U.S. Courts of Appeals can hold the Board
accountable for their mistakes. Let me say this again, their
mistakes, not the veterans', where right now, that falls on the
veterans' shoulders.
I look forward to working with Chairman Bost and my
colleagues on this subcommittee to advance these important
proposals today. I also appreciate the feedback from the
witnesses who have joined us. I know my colleagues have worked
hard on each of these proposals to improve the overall
disability benefits process for the veterans and their
families. This is a top personal priority for Chairman Bost and
myself, having gone through the VA disability claims. I welcome
a healthy decision about the merits of all the legislations,
and I am looking forward to the input from the VA and the other
stakeholders. I appreciate the discussions we are holding today
and having--excuse me, I appreciate the discussions we are
going to have today on the bills, but that does not guarantee
that all of them will move to markup, especially since some of
these bills have a high cost and are not fully offset. I now
yield to the Ranking Member Pappas for his opening remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHRIS PAPPAS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
convening this hearing. I want to welcome our colleagues who
are joining us from off committee and all of the witnesses who
are contributing to this session here today. Thank you for your
shared goal of improving the lives of our veterans and their
family members.
Today, we have several critical measures aimed at enhancing
the experiences of veterans, their survivors, and dependents
when seeking access to their hard-earned benefits from VA. For
example, Representative Slotkin has introduced H.R. 3790, the
Justice for ALS Veterans Act. This legislation would ensure
that families of service members diagnosed with ALS receive
critical assistance. While the cause of ALS remains unknown, it
is established that veterans are twice as likely to be
diagnosed with ALS compared to civilians. Alarmingly, ALS
patients typically have a life expectancy of just 2 to 5 years,
often leaving their families without necessary assistance. The
proposed bill aims to broaden the scope of increased VA
dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) to encompass the
surviving spouse of a veteran who succumbed to ALS related to
their service, irrespective of the duration of the veteran's
affliction before passing.
Additionally, my colleagues Representatives Connolly and
Trone have introduced bills targeting fraud against veterans in
VA's fiduciary program. These bills are H.R. 4016, the Veteran
Fraud Reimbursement Act and H.R. 4190 the Restoring Benefits to
Defrauded Veterans Act. Together, these bills seek to safeguard
and support veterans, their survivors, and their estates by
providing avenues for compensation and benefits restitution in
cases of fraudulent activity by fiduciaries, something this
subcommittee has heard a great deal about.
Furthermore, Representative Spanberger has put forward H.R.
4306, the Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act,
named in honor of a Virginia veteran and firefighter who passed
away in 2021 after a long battle with cancer. This bill aims to
build on the efforts that were led in the last Congress with
the The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our
Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act to address
the legacy of toxic exposure among service members and
veterans.
Now currently, VA does not acknowledge the direct service
connection between military firefighting and cancer beyond 1
year following active duty. This bill would establish the
presumption that veteran firefighters who become disabled by
serious diseases, including heart disease, lung disease, and
certain cancers, contracted the illness due to their service in
the military. This bill represents an important first step in
tackling the toxic legacy of Per- and Polyflyoralkyl Substances
(PFAS) exposure among service members. There is much more to
do, certainly on the broader issue.
Of course, there are other bills today on the agenda from
colleagues on both sides of the aisle, and I look forward to
the testimony that we will hear on them, and I hope it will
provide this subcommittee with valuable information to refine
and pass these bills before us to offer much needed services to
our Nation's veterans and their survivors. With that, I yield
back.
Mr. Bost. [Presiding] The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize myself to introduce and talk about the bill I have
before the committee today.

STATEMENT OF MIKE BOST

Mr. Bost. I am proud to have introduced my bill, H.R. 5559,
the Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act. My bill will remove
the new and relevant evidence requirement for supplemental
claims filed within 1 year of VA denial of a veteran's
disability claim.
When the veterans file a supplemental claim, they expect VA
to consider their additional evidence and issue a new decision
on that claim. The new and relevant requirement is meaningless
to the veteran who simply wants decisions on their claim. This
is an unnecessary burden for the proof of the veteran. The
veterans are forced to first convince the VA that their
additional evidence is new and relevant. This process violates
every veteran's right to continue the pursuit of VA benefit
claim. This can add months and sometimes years of waiting to
the process.
Veterans are being punished simply by submitting additional
evidence to support their VA benefit claim. My bill would
ensure that no veteran has to jump through hoops in the claims
process. My bill would also ensure that our veterans have all
the information they need to navigate the appeals process after
the Board denies their claim. When a veteran appeals the
Board's decision to the Veterans Court, they often learn
exactly what evidence is needed for them to succeed in their
claim for the VA benefits. My bill would allow veterans to
submit such additional evidence to the Board after the Veterans
Court sends the case back to the Board to fix its mistakes.
My bill would ensure that each step of the veterans claims
appeals process is effective. We have more and more veterans
submitting claims and coming to VA, and we owe it to these men
and women to make the process as effective and efficient as
possible.
I look forward to the discussions on my bill today, and
with that, I yield back, and now recognize myself again.
I like the flow on this. Here, you can have that. Thank
you.
All right. We have got a full agenda today, so I will be
holding everyone to 3 minutes per bill so that we can get
through this all. You know, Jeff Miller used to chair this and
he called this whenever we held them real tight, we called it a
rodeo hearing. That means when the light turns red, you got 8
seconds to finish or we throw you out.
This morning, we are joined by several of our colleagues--
and I will not be throwing you out, we will let you finish,
okay--both on and off the committee who are going to be
testifying about the bills they have sponsored. Now we first
want to recognize Representative Self for his bills.

STATEMENT OF KEITH SELF

Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. My bill is H.R. 5870, the Veterans Appeals
Transparency Act, and I believe this bill represents a vital
step toward making the appeals process for our veterans more
transparent, fair, and streamlined. The Board currently
publishes the average time it takes for the Board to issue
decisions in cases on each of its dockets. These averages can
be misleading, and those averages provide veterans with no
accurate sense of where they are in line.
Further, the Board does not report to veterans, the public,
and Congress exactly how far behind they are in working down
their backlog of cases in each docket. One of the key
provisions of my bill is the requirement for the Board to
publish information about which appeals in each of the Board's
dockets are actively working on during a given week. This is a
critical step toward transparency and ensuring that veterans
have a sense of where they are in line.
Another important aspect of this legislation is
clarification it provides regarding the appeals process. I will
get to that in just a second. My bill clarifies that the
appeals process under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and
Modernization Act was always meant to be streamlined. My bill
makes it clear that this streamlined process, veterans have the
option to submit a single administrative review request such as
a supplemental claim, higher level review request, or notice of
disagreement within 1 year of the most recent VA denial of
their claim. This streamlined approach is veteran friendly
because veterans can navigate a single appeal stream and VA can
easily track that stream.
However, a recent legal development has brought complexity
into the appeals process. The Terry v. McDonough decision by
the Veterans Court interpreted the Appeals Modernization Act
(AMA) as allowing veterans to submit multiple administrative
review requests against a single VA denial as long as they file
within the one-year deadline. This has created a convoluted
system that will undoubtedly be challenged in court by both
veterans and the VA and challenging to navigate. This
convoluted system might just end up being more complicated than
the legacy appeal system the Appeals Modernization Act was
intended to fix.
My bill corrects the Veterans Court misinterpretation of
Congress's intent when Congress passed the Appeals
Modernization Act. This, along with your bill, Chairman, the
Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act, will simplify the
appeals process while protecting every veteran's right to
appeal denials of their claims handed down by the agency of
original jurisdiction. A clear and streamlined process is
beneficial for our veterans. Ultimately, my bill restores
clarity and efficiency to the appeals process. I yield back.
Mr. Bost. I thank the gentlemen for yielding back. Yes, we
do. We recognize Representative Spanberger, and you are
recognized for 3 minutes to speak on H.R. 4306, the Michael
Lecik--how do you pronounce it?
Ms. Spanberger. Lecik.
Mr. Bost. Lecik, Okay. Military Firefighters Protection
Act.

STATEMENT OF ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER

Ms. Spanberger. Thank you so very much, Chairman Bost.
Thank you to the Ranking Member Takano. Thank you to the
members of the committee. Mr. Pappas, thank you for your kind
introduction of this legislation. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify before the committee in support of my bipartisan
Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act.
I am here today not only as a Congresswoman, but also as a
representative who had the privilege of getting to know Mike
Lecik and his family, including his wife, Tiffany, and his
three beautiful daughters. Mike was a former U.S. Air Force
firefighter who selflessly served our Nation. He deployed twice
to the Middle East. He later became the chief fire inspector at
the U.S. Army Garrison, Fort Gregg-Adams.
In 2021, Mike Lecik tragically passed away due to multiple
myeloma, a rare and aggressive form of cancer that attacks the
body's plasma cells. He was only 41 years old. Mike's service
to our country undoubtedly led to his cancer, and civilian fire
departments across the country recognize the connection between
the chemicals used in firefighting and certain types of cancer.
However, the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) currently
does not cover treatment costs for diseases like Mike's because
the VA still inexplicably fails to recognize the direct service
connection between military firefighting and life-threatening
illnesses such as his, if it is more than 1 year beyond active
duty.
This injustice must be rectified. The Michael Lecik
Military Firefighters Protection Act would finally provide
veteran firefighters with the compensation, healthcare, and
retirement benefits that they have earned through their
service. This legislation would create a presumption that
veteran firefighters who become disabled by serious diseases,
including heart disease, lung disease, and certain cancers,
that they contracted these illnesses due to their military
service. This presumption of service-connected illness is so
important.
It would also extend the window of time for veteran
military firefighters to claim presumptive service connections
to 15 years. By establishing this presumption, the VA would
finally be able to provide long overdue benefits and treatment
costs coverage to veteran firefighters like Mike, who gave so
much of themselves to our country.
I am proud to lead this legislation alongside my Republican
colleague, Congressman Don Bacon, himself, the former U.S. Air
Force chief. Our bill would at long last recognize the link
between occupational hazards faced by military firefighters and
the development of these devastating diseases. Scientific
evidence demonstrates the connection between firefighting and
the increased risk of certain diseases, and it is time for the
VA to recognize this fact. Many states have already
acknowledged this link, but the VA does not.
We have bipartisan support to fix this issue, demonstrating
that this is a cause that transcends party lines and unites us
in the name of gratitude to our military firefighters.
Throughout his fight with cancer, Mike never stopped advocating
for his fellow veteran firefighters. It is why I introduced
this bill. It is why I continue to push for it. As Members of
Congress, in his memory, in his honor, we have the opportunity
to make sure that his fellow military firefighters receive the
care, the benefits, and the recognition that they have earned.
Thank you to the committee, and I yield back.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Representative Spanberger, and we
appreciate it. Thank you for your testimony today. I want to
now recognize Representative Issa and recognize him for 3
minutes to speak on H.R. 1753, the Jax Act.

STATEMENT OF DARRELL ISSA

Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for this
opportunity to talk about a small bill, 310 brave women who
were CSTs. They did not fight, but they carried weapons. They
carried 60-pound packs. They, in fact, as cultural support team
members, were essential to our operations in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
As many of you know, within Islam, women have a special
role, particularly in countries like Afghanistan, one in which
they are uncomfortable, or even in fact, could become frantic
if confronted by a man, let alone a man with a gun. In order to
get cooperation and information and to save lives on both
sides, the United States military employed these special brave
women, many of them intelligence officers, but all of them
willing to do everything their male counterparts did.
We are relatively new to women in combat at this level, and
as a result, it is not surprising that the VA, and for that
matter, the Department of Defense (DOD), was not prepared to
have their DD 214s, and their VA records show this direct
combat activity. As we all know, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD) and other injuries occurred during their operations. In
fact, put them in a special category of people, mostly men, but
310 women. Currently without a designation, these 300-plus CSTs
find themselves being treated as noncombat individuals, not
recognized along with their counterparts. In a perfect world, I
guess we would simply update all of them to say that they were
men. Since that is not in the making here today, let us simply
say that this Act designates them in a way, in a one-time way,
effectively, but a model for the future, to make sure that
women are recognized and treated for their combat activities
equally.
This is a bipartisan effort with more than 25 cosponsors.
To say the least, we could have gotten more cosponsors, but our
goal was to keep it simple. This is something where we can cure
a wrong by simply having a designation.
I want to close with just one thing. Many of you probably
are aware that Congressional Budget Office (CBO) decided there
was a score. I ask you, if there has ever been a time in which
to look at CBO and roll your eyes, it would be this one. These
women are entitled to what they are to receive, and if there is
a change in what they receive, it is not a score. It is evening
a score, making it right. I thank you for your indulgence and
for moving this legislation. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Spanberger, forgive my
absence. Mr. Issa, having been part of the spec work community,
working alongside women in combat, and I mean actual
gunfighting combat, I support everything that you are doing. I
just wanted to add that. Mr. Ciscomani, you are recognized,
sir.

STATEMENT OF JUAN CISCOMANI

Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it,
and my fellow members of the subcommittee for convening today
to discuss my bill, H.R. 5938, the Veterans Exams Expansion Act
of 2023.
I represent southeastern Arizona, including parts of the
Tucson metropolitan area, but also very rural areas in Cochise
County, Graham County, and Greenlee County, which borders New
Mexico. Veterans in our rural areas have historically had
issues with access to care and benefits due to the lack of
resources nearby. This bill aims to close those gaps by
extending the license portability that VA-certified
practitioners currently have and also expands this authority to
dentists, optometrists, and so on. This authority helps
veterans who may have difficulty getting to a VA facility or a
contract facility for their exams because of their disability
or because of the rural area in which they live.
We must meet our men and women who serve our country where
they are, and it is in Congress' responsibility to ensure that
the VA has the authorities they need to do so. I urge all my
colleagues to support this legislation. I yield back, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani. As is our practice,
we will forego a round of questioning for the members. Any
questions may be submitted for the record. I now invite our
second panel to the table. In accordance with committee rules,
I ask unanimous consent that Representatives Issa of California
be permitted to participate in today's subcommittee hearing.
Never mind, he left.
Everyone ready? All right. Joining us today from the
Department of Veterans Affairs is Ms. Beth Murphy, Executive
Director of Compensation Services at the Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA). She is accompanied by Mr. Kevin Friel,
Deputy Director of Pension and Fiduciary Services at the
Veterans Benefits Administration and Mr. Kenneth Arnold, the
Vice Chairman of the Board of Veterans Appeals.
I ask all witnesses, please stand and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Luttrell. Please be seated. Thank you. Let the record
reflect that all witnesses answered in the affirmative. Ms.
Murphy, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to present the
Department's testimony.

STATEMENT OF BETH MURPHY

Ms. Murphy. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Lutrell,
Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the committee. Thank you
for the invitation to discuss our views on pending legislation.
Thank you for introducing my colleagues Mr. Friel and Vice
Chairman Arnold from the Board of Veterans Appeals.
VA offers support for much of the proposed legislation
before us today. We have provided detailed comments in the full
testimony to include areas of support and concern, along with
noting certain provisions that could be clarified or amended in
the text of the bills. We look forward to collaboration with
the committee on those provisions.
I will briefly highlight key points on each. First, VA
supports H.R. 4016, the Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act, which
would streamline reissuance of benefits in fiduciary misuse
cases, enabling timelier repayment of misused funds to veterans
and their survivors.
VA supports the intent of H.R. 1753 to ensure proper
recognition of veterans combat service. However, we cite
concerns with specific elements and have provided feedback in
our testimony for the committee's consideration.
VA appreciates the aim of H.R. 3790, which would amend
existing law to extend increased indemnity and--dependency and
indemnity compensation paid to surviving spouses of veterans
who died from ALS, regardless of how long the veteran had such
disease prior to death. VA supports this bill but requests
amendment to include criteria for determining whether a
disability has a high mortality rate.
Moving to H.R. 4190, the Restoring Benefits to Defrauded
Veterans Act, this bill would address reissuance of misused
benefits in cases where reissuance did not occur prior to the
beneficiary's death. VA supports the bill if amended. We have
highlighted our concerns and suggestions in the written
testimony.
Regarding H.R. 4306, the Michael Lecik Military
Firefighters Protection Act, this bill represents a veteran
centric approach to addressing health effects related to
firefighting during active military service. VA supports this
bill if amended. We recommend changes to enhance administrative
efficiencies and ensure fairness and equity, such as removing
some of the qualifying requirements.
VA supports the intent of H.R. 5938, the Veterans Exam
Expansion Act, to improve temporary licensure requirements for
contract healthcare professionals performing medical disability
exams for VA and for other purposes. VA would advocate to
remove the license portability sunset date and expand the
definition of a healthcare professional.
VA appreciates the intent of H.R. 5890 to preclude VA from
denying a claim for benefits solely because the veteran failed
to appear for a VA medical exam scheduled in connection with
the claim. However, we do have some concerns, including the
effect the bill may have on practices of some in the for-profit
disability benefits questionnaire completion industry. We
provided additional details in the testimony and welcome
opportunity to discuss those concerns with the committee.
Regarding H.R. 5559, the Protecting Veterans Claims Options
Act, VA cites concerns with part of the bill and does not
support other provisions. In particular, VA is concerned that
the bill would negatively impact progress made since
implementation of the Appeals Modernization Act by rolling back
some of that law's key provisions. We welcome opportunity to
discuss the bill further.
Moving to H.R. 5870, the Veterans Appeals Transparency Act
of 2023, this bill aims to improve processing for claims for
benefits by VA and transparency of actions by the Board. VA is
committed to make ongoing improvements to these programs.
However, the intent of some of the proposed language is
unclear. VA does not support the bill unless amended. We have
provided specific comments in the testimony for consideration.
Last, VA does not support H.R. 5891, the Veterans Appeals
Decision Clarity Act, for several reasons outlined in our
testimony, including that the bill would add significant delays
to appeals processing timelines, increase the appeals backlog,
and result in confusion among veterans.
In closing, thank you again for the opportunity to discuss
this important legislation to improve benefits and services for
veterans, service members, survivors, and their families. We
look forward to working with you and are prepared to respond to
your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Beth Murphy Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Ms. Murphy, thank you for your testimony. We
will now move into a line of questioning. Mr. Arnold, good
afternoon, sir. VA testimony states that the Veterans Appeals
Decision Clarity Act would add significant delays to appeal
processing timelines, but the Board judges should already know
the time periods during which untimely evidence was submitted
and therefore cannot be considered. Why do you think the
general statement that my bill would add significant delays to
the Board issuing a decision?
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir, thanks for asking that question.
Basically, the Board opinions have grown in length based on the
procedural requirements. I mean, in some cases, they are as
long as a Supreme Court opinion. In this case, what happens is
when a veteran chooses under AMA to come to the Board, there is
an evidentiary window. Either they come in clean, everything
that VBA, for instance, considered is the record, consider
that.
Mr. Luttrell. We can make believe that no veteran is going
to come in clean. It is not in the cards, I do not think, but
anyway.
Mr. Arnold. Sir, actually about 45 percent right now choose
that option, consider what VBA had, and just make a decision
judge. Then another percentage of the people say, hey, I got 90
days to offer additional evidence. They can add 90 days to add
or get delays on that. Or they can request a hearing, at which
time they can offer evidence at the hearing plus 90 days after
that.
One of the challenges here is in the waiting period, for
instance, for a hearing or for the court to get to the
decision, very often the veteran will send in news articles or
even thousands of pages of information for the Board to
consider, but it is outside those evidentiary windows. I am
worried that a requirement like this would cause so much
administrative burden to identify the time period that we
received it and why it could not be considered that it turns
into essentially a gotcha exercise. You put the wrong date, and
then it is a basis for remand from the court.
Mr. Luttrell. The legislation is trying to streamline the
process.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. For more or less what I am understanding you
are saying is the veterans overloading the system with
arbitrary, superfluous material that does not need to--is that
the case?
Mr. Arnold. Not intend----
Mr. Luttrell. For us, we are trying to streamline it so the
veterans are taken out of the equation once it enters into the
VA system.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. I find it hard to believe through all the
Inspector General (IG) investigations that I have sat in front
of today that it is on the veterans, it is the veteran's fault,
and not--I am going to throw this one at you--and not the VA's
lack of ability to create a structured environment to process
the applications appropriately.
Mr. Arnold. Not at all, sir. The concerns that we are--
first of all, I am going to say that the Board makes mistakes
all the time. We are human. This is not an issue of the veteran
complicating the system. The veteran is trying to just get as
much information to VA as possible on their claim. When you----
Mr. Luttrell. The VA is hand-walked through this process by
all the VA staff, correct? More or less from start to finish.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. I do not really say that we cannot put the
veteran in the position that it is their fault. I hate to say
that----
Mr. Arnold. Sure, it is----
Mr. Luttrell [continuing]. but they are not trained in law
and they are not the judges and they are not the Board.
Mr. Arnold. No, sir. I am not saying that at all. The
overwhelming majority, almost all veterans come in represented.
They get free representative.
Mr. Luttrell. Sure, yes, sir. I got it, yes. I got it.
Mr. Arnold. They are being guided through the process. What
happens is we provide direct interface with veterans even when
they are represented, and they will send us information via the
mail. It is often duplicative. I saw this news article in the
Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) magazine, I wanted to share
that. It is about Agent Orange. It is a whole bunch of
information that the Board cannot consider because the choice
that they made when they came into the Board with their
representative on how they wanted us to review the case, this
is a bunch of extraneous information that if we had to call it
out specifically in our opinions and list each of those pieces
of evidence and talk about when we received it and why we
cannot consider it, we are adding a lot of burden.
Mr. Luttrell. The challenge that comes into that and where
I have a problem is on my side, not only as Member of Congress,
but as a veteran, is that if the more information that I gather
from your side, the better off I am going to be, or they are
going to be. I find it troublesome that there is more or less
an irritability that providing the veteran themselves with more
information, and that may be two sentences, it may be three,
and I do not know.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Again, you shoulder a very heavy rucksack,
okay? Having answers, this is something I hear from my veterans
all day, the more information I can have from those that I am
engaging with, the better off I am going to be in order to
solve my problem. If I just receive a letter in the mail from
the VA that says, hey, you have been declined.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. That is----
Mr. Luttrell. That is where this piece of legislation
cleans the process some.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. One of the most robust, the most
robust decision you are going to get out of the Board is if we
are denying, because we have to provide the reasons and bases
for why we are denying your appeal.
Mr. Luttrell. That is important, yes?
Mr. Arnold. Super important.
Mr. Luttrell. The veteran needs to know that, correct?
Mr. Arnold. They absolutely do.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay.
Mr. Arnold. Absolutely. Sir, as a 30-year veteran and as
somebody who is the beneficiary of getting our sole income as a
family when I was growing up was my dad's 100 percent
disability benefits and related, like, free milk free lunch
program, this is super important to me. It is why I am at VA. I
really I love what we are trying to do with these things for
how we can benefit the veteran. This is one that I am so
worried it is just going it is going to slow down how we do our
decisions. It is going to create complexity in the appellate
space with the courts. I know some people probably have
questions about that. That is going to be gotcha exercises that
just contribute to the churn and keep more people waiting in
line. That is my biggest concern.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, sir. All right.
Mr. Arnold. Yes.
Mr. Luttrell. I will circle back. My time is up. I yield to
the ranking--excuse me--I recognize the ranking member for his
line of questioning.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Murphy, if I could
start with you on H.R. 4306. This is the Michael Lecik
legislation that Representative Spanberger spoke about before.
This would establish a service connection based on a specific
occupation, which is a first, I believe, as opposed to dealing
with specific service dates and locations. It is based on what
we know to be true, where firefighters are exposed to toxic
substances, including PFAS, through their work, and creates
presumptives around that. You mentioned that you could support
this legislation if amended. Could you explain a little bit
further what you mean by that and how you would like it to be
changed?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you, Ranking Member Pappas. This is
really a veteran centric bill, as I mentioned before. What we
have seen when we are talking about actual claims processing,
the more complexities that you add to a process, the more
difficult it can be to navigate for the claims processors and
to get to yes for the veteran. In particular, the requirements
for a 10 percent minimum evaluation, the 15-year disease
manifestation period, and the aggregate of 5 years, adding up 5
years of service in that particular occupation are some of
those complexities that would make this more difficult,
potentially, for our claims processors.
Stripping out those requirements that way, we are not
hunting for additional records, it looks like this person was
in 4 years and 2 months. We need, you know, 10 more months.
Those are the sorts of changes that we are advocating, is strip
out those complexities and just make it more streamlined for
our claims processors and for the veterans.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Can you address the broader issue about
PFAS exposure? I know we have got hundreds of military bases
around the country where there is PFAS contamination that our
service members have been exposed to. We are talking about
drinking water near or on military installations. How can VA
address this challenge if we do want to move in this direction
of ensuring that people get access to care and benefits through
their service who have been exposed to these substances?
Ms. Murphy. Certainly, sir. This is a great start, Congress
putting this presumptive in place. I will tell you that we on
the benefits side have been working increasingly more with our
VHA partners in the health outcomes, military exposure, or home
office, who they are doing the surveillance, the research,
studying the PFAS issue. It is an important one, and I think it
is coming to a head, but certainly not fast enough. This bill
would move us forward faster on a topic that is recognized, is
being researched, but is just not there yet on the VA side.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Switching gears to H.R. 3790, this is the
ALS Veterans Act legislation that Representative Slotkin has
introduced. You mentioned that you would support this if it was
modified to include criteria for determining whether a
disability has a high mortality rate. I am wondering what
criteria VA uses to determine if a service-connected disability
has a high mortality rate currently and how these criteria
could be incorporated to ensure consistency moving forward as
we consider this legislation.
Ms. Murphy. Chairman--I am sorry, Congressman, I am going
to turn to my colleague, Mr. Friel----
Mr. Pappas. Thank you.
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. who is the expert in this matter.
Mr. Friel. Yes, thank you for the question. To clarify the
ALS, today if a veteran passes away from ALS, the surviving
spouse is entitled to DIC because we have made that connection.
What this law will do, what this proposed bill will do, is
allow us to pay them the additional eight-by-eight, which is
where we identify that a veteran was 100 percent for 8
consecutive years and the spouse was married to them for that
timeframe, and pay the additional, like today, it is $313 in
benefit.
Where we talk about the high mortality rate, our concern
is, is that it is not just about mortality, right? I guess it
is about speed. I am not trying to be cold hearted, but speed
to death, right? From onset of the disability to when the
beneficiary passes away. We know ALS is a rapidly progressing
disease and does not give the veteran potential to meet that 8-
year period. That is kind of where we are trying to look at the
requirement for the high--the definition of the high mortality
rate as it relates to a disability that is, you know, has a
short lifespan from onset to the potential death of the person
Mr. Pappas. Well, I guess my question is, should not we be
supporting the work that VA clinicians and researchers are
doing around that, as opposed to Congress making a
determination?
Mr. Friel. Yes, and we were just kind of looking for
clarity on Congress's intent. Is it 5 years, is it 7 years? You
know, like what is the actual timeframe that we would be
looking at where we consider it a high mortality rate?
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Well, maybe we can keep working to refine
that. I appreciate the flag. Yield back my time.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. Chairman Bost, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, chairman. Ms. Murphy, with the AMA,
the supplemental claim option was intended to allow veterans
the option for filing additional evidence for their claim.
Under the current law, when VA decided that the veteran did not
file a new and relevant evidence, VA refuses to issue the
decision on the claim for the benefits. Now, this effectively
has forced thousands of veterans to start the claims process
all over again. How do you think my bill would ensure that the
veterans receive a decision on their VA claim that they can
then appeal?
Ms. Murphy. Chairman Bost, if I could make kind of an
overarching statement about many of these are appeals-related
bills. I think VA's position is that we certainly want more
clarity.
Mr. Bost. Right.
Ms. Murphy. We want it to be more streamlined, easier to
understand, simplified. AMA has been in progress now for, you
know, 5, 6 years. We have learned from that. I think the
process that we used to create the AMA legislation was one of
the most solid that I have heard great feedback from
stakeholders. The fact that folks got to come to the table, be
heard, give their perspectives, and really contribute to a
holistic change from a system that was not working for
anybody----
Mr. Bost. Right.
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. VA or veterans.
Mr. Bost. It was not working.
Ms. Murphy. I think to the extent that we can continue that
forward movement----
Mr. Bost. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. collectively, rather than having
maybe one-off changes and tweaks to the process, would be what
VA would support more.
Mr. Bost. Okay.
Ms. Murphy. Does that makes sense?
Mr. Bost. Let me say this, because you know how much I was
involved with this.
Ms. Murphy. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Bost. Let me say that. Then I am going to ask Mr.
Arnold a question as well. Like any legislation, once we put it
in place and then we start implementing, we see how different
agencies, it is not doing everything that we want. That is why
we tweak. It is, and it was our concern the long, long, long
wait times, and we do not want to tweak and cause those long
wait times to come back. We also know where we have seen the
flaws.
As we are trying to work through this, it is for the
veteran that we are trying to make the decision so that their
claims can be handled. There has to be--the frustration that a
person could feel if all of a sudden they said, okay, I have
got new evidence, and now all of a sudden it just gets dropped
and we are going to start the whole thing over again. That is
the frustration we feel.
Mr. Arnold, I am going to ask you something here. In your
testimony, you suggested the veterans would file more appeals
with the court simply to add additional evidence that would
further delay the final resolution of the appeals that they
originally filed. I just want to let you know I disagree with
that, okay? They do not file Appeals Court to prolong their
claim. They are wanting to get their claims taken care of. They
want a final, correct decision on their claim from the Board.
After the court sends a claim back to the Board, veterans
cannot file additional evidence to the Board. Their only option
is start new claims process all over again with VBA. Why do you
think the focus is on returning the claim to VBA to look to
additional evidence rather than making the Board--making it so
sure that the Board can consider evidence when it is fixed--
when it is just fixing a mistake that they may have caught?
Mr. Arnold. It is a great question, sir. I started on the
day that--I started on the day that--I am button-challenged.
Sorry, sir. I started on the day that AMA was implemented fully
in 2019. I was not at the table in 2017 when all of the sausage
making happened. As I understand it and the evidence is proving
this, that there was a--in all of the debate amongst the
stakeholders, it was a really important facet of what I think
is incredible legislation under AMA. As a veteran, I am so
proud of that. I mean, you built a four-lane highway.
Mr. Bost. I am too.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, you built a four-lane highway and but we
are not recognizing is all the tractor trailers that are on it.
I got that analogy from our new chairman when he started a year
ago when we were educating him, he goes, this is a beautiful
four-lane highway. There is all these tractor trailers that are
blocking progression.
I would view what we are trying to do here in a piecemeal
fashion is it is time for people to step back and look more
holistically. This part of the legislation that is proposed
would add a new 90-day window when one important facet that
everybody agreed to with AMA for accountability purposes is the
evidence and information that was considered by VBA, that is
what the Board looks at. Thumbs up, thumbs down. Did you get it
right because you said no. We added a kicker as part of the
compromise, you can have 90-day windows at the Board if you so
choose to supplement it. You got something else you want to
tell us after getting that no from VBA. It was, I am looking at
the case plus what you want to add.
Then we make our decision. It is only going to the court
really, if we denied it, although that is not always true
either. If we deny and we give the reasons and basis for why we
have to deny, it comes back from the court oftentimes to say,
explain further. The court's looking at the case that the Board
looked at. Here, we would be talking about now it is an
entirely new case. I am going to be honest, given the passage
of time, sir, for how long this whole process takes with the
court, and something that I am really glad you are pointing
out, what happens is when it comes back to the Board, the
condition's often gotten worse. It is a new case. Somebody has
been waiting an extra 2 years. Now, their foot's numb from
their back, and it was not 2 years ago when they were at the
Board.
The challenge with that is then there is new medical
evidence that really, we are not supposed to play doctor at the
Board. We can evaluate the evidence that does come in, but 99
times out of 100, we are going to have to say, we got to send
this back to VBA anyway to have them evaluate this new set of
conditions that the veteran is facing. That is what I am
worried about, because we very liberally grant delays when
people need evidence for good cause, and it is not uncommon to
see multiple additional delays. I want the veteran to get the
fastest decision they can. If the Board gets it wrong, heck, I
want the court reverse it and grant. Please, do not make these
veterans wait any longer. I am with you, sir.
Mr. Bost. Okay.
Mr. Arnold. Our concern with this was it is adding delays
and we actually cannot really solve it in most cases then.
Mr. Bost. I am out of time, but we will talk more about
this, I guarantee it.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bost. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Chairman Bost. Mrs. Ramirez, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman Luttrell. You really are
committed to making sure that we experience how it feels
physically on the other side. I appreciate the seating chart
here.
I want to transition and first to say thank you to the
witnesses that are here today. I also want to talk about the
importance of uplifting and amplifying the contributions of
women, women veterans. Even as a Member of Congress, look
around, I find myself often being the only woman in the room on
this side. Certainly, in many more cases, the only Latina. I
think it is important to acknowledge that and how critical it
is for us to be in these spaces, certainly for me to be able to
serve my community.
While I know that our women in uniform do not serve for
recognition, their sacrifices and their contributions are too
often overlooked. That is why it is so important that our
service women and their contributions to our country and our
communities are uplifted and truly recognized. Ms. Murphy, I
first want to ask you a quick question around the cultural
support team program. Can you describe how important the
cultural support team program is to achieving the U.S. military
objectives?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you for the question. We have been in
initial conversations with the Department of Defense, our
colleagues in DoD, about what this cadre of service persons
did, what their roles were. We are still in those early
learning phases. We are in that gathering information from DoD
to understand what their role and missions were.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Well, can you describe how important it
is that those service women be fully recognized for their
engagement in combat in order to receive the benefits and care
that they have earned?
Ms. Murphy. We go out of our way, we bend over backward
every claim we touch, we look at all the facts and
circumstances, we take the evidence into consideration.
Sometimes in cases maybe such as this, when all of the
information is not there that we need to demonstrate what that
service member did, where they were, what may have happened to
them during service, that is where we are kind of hamstrung in
the claims process. The more transparency that we could have
and the more information about this cadre of individuals, we
would be better positioned to assist.
Ms. Ramirez. Got it. A couple of yes or no questions.
Ms. Murphy. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you for your response.
Ms. Murphy. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Ramirez. In your opinion, have service women been
historically not fully recognized?
Ms. Murphy. I do not have an opinion on that. We just take
each case by case and we process the claims----
Ms. Ramirez. Okay.
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. and proceed that way.
Ms. Ramirez. Let me ask you a follow up.
Ms. Murphy. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ramirez. This is also yes or no, and maybe you could
answer yes or no in this case. Do you think this is something
that the VA should actively work to correct to make sure that
service women are fully recognized?
Ms. Murphy. Yes. We should do everything we can to gather
all the necessary information so that we can say yes on every
case that we encounter that we are able to.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes. Well, thank you so much, Ms. Murphy.
During my time in the committee, one of my priorities has been
to address fraud and waste at every level, from education to
veteran benefits. We certainly have to strengthen the
protection of our most vulnerable communities, and that
includes veterans. Ms. Murphy, your testimony provides that
this bill will enable timelier reissuance of misused benefits
to veterans and their survivors and enable more effective
application of VA resources toward more productive methods of
oversight to protect beneficiary funds.
Let me ask you a follow-up question. In Fiscal Year 2022,
there were only 25 investigations into fiduciary misuse opened
and referred for prosecution. Of those 25, eight cases were
declined for prosecution. Are all instances of misuse by
fiduciary intentional?
Ms. Murphy. Ma'am, if I could turn to my colleague, Mr.
Friel. He is the subject matter expert here. Thank you.
Ms. Ramirez. Great, thank you.
Mr. Friel. Thank you for the question. No, not all issues
or circumstances of misuse are intentional. In some cases, we
find that, you know, the individual just made a mistake. They
withdrew money from an account, you know, used the wrong debit
card, or things like that. We work with them to correct it and
identify the circumstances. I do not know, is that the
question?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes, no, that is helpful. I mean, just in my
last 20 seconds, I mean, how are funds that were negligently
misused recovered?
Mr. Friel. We actually create a debt for them that is
transmitted out, you know, and we give them an opportunity to
repay. If we are unable and unsuccessful with that, we transmit
that debt to Treasury, and then Treasury does their piece in
garnishing, you know, tax returns or other assets to collect
that debt.
Ms. Ramirez. All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Friel. With
that, I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mrs. Ramirez. Mr. Self, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Chairman. I have heard a great deal
here about concern about adding to the VA workload. I am
addressing my H.R. 5870, Veterans Appeals Transparency Act of
2023. Mr. Arnold, is it true that the law requires the Board of
Veterans Appeals to issue decisions in docket order?
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. Does that mean that the Board is already
carefully tracking and selecting the range of dates of cases
for each docket, each Board docket that are being assigned to
veterans law judges for a decision at any one time, you are
tracking it at any given time?
Mr. Arnold. We know what we are distributing for cases at
any given time, sir. The pace at which they are decided when
they are with the judge, there is some variability on that.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. Got it. Given those two answers, can you
elaborate on why your testimony states that it would be
administratively burdensome to simply publish what the Board is
already doing?
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. Administratively burdensome, but
actually our greater concern, even though it says that is how
confusing it would be for the veteran, which is why I go to
the----
Mr. Self. That is my next question, so----
Mr. Arnold. Oh, yes, sir. Okay. Let me go to administrative
burden----
Mr. Self. Right.
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. first of all, sir. I am going to
tell you that the line is changing at every moment of every
day. To understand how appeals move through the Board in docket
order, there is a bunch of exceptions to that. In any given
year, let us say we do 100,000 decisions. Last year we did
103,000-plus. One hundred thousand decisions every year, 30
percent of those, so 30,000, are advanced on the docket. We get
notified this veteran moved to hospice. This veteran's----
Mr. Self. Well, let me----
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. stage four. They jump to the head
of the line. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. Let me stop you stop you there. How far do they
move?
Mr. Arnold. They move to the head of the line.
Mr. Self. To the head of the line?
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. Every time I have got somebody who is
like, say, a stage four, they move to hospice. They are at end
of life, over the age of 75, very advanced age. They are--there
is a motion, or on the Board's own motion, they are moving to
the head of the line in the fast pass lane.
Mr. Self. How often do you publish them now?
Mr. Arnold. In terms of what we are doing with dockets?
Mr. Self. Yes.
Mr. Arnold. What we are doing now, sir, is because the
range might be 10 years in a given week, I could be doing a
case that has a 2004 date and a date--all right, well, yes.
Mr. Self. Well, how often do you publish?
Mr. Arnold. We publish monthly. We update our average days
to complete them and average days that cases have been pending
by docket.
Mr. Self. Okay. I am still not following why it would be
burdensome if you took a weekly update or whatever, but let us
move to the----
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self [continuing]. misleading. I assume it is because
of the changes that you are talking about.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. I accept the fact that you might have 30,000 in a
year, did you say?
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. That move to the head of the line. Would it not
then be possible to have a separate category of them that you
notify them as opposed to simply publishing? I got the issue.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. What--the better way to explain this
is it is 30 percent----
Mr. Self. I do not want the outliers to drive the entire--
--
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self [continuing]. system.
Mr. Arnold. Yes. That is 30 percent of what moves in the
line. I still got 200,000 in line at the end of the year----
Mr. Self. Correct.
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. which is unconscionable to me.
Then there is another 15 percent that come back from the court.
They go to the head of the line by law. By law, they must be
expedited. That is the second category. Now I am up to 45
percent. Then everything that has to go back to VBA, either as
a pass-through remand from the court, or because we say I
cannot call this thumbs up or thumbs down. This needs a new
exam. You did not have a duty to assist. That is another 25
percent. 70 percent of what we put out every year essentially
cuts the line.
Mr. Self. Okay.
Mr. Arnold. That is happening constantly.
Mr. Self. Okay. I----
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self [continuing]. I have got that. If you did it, then
the next question is, once they jump to the head of the line,
how long is it before they get heard?
Mr. Arnold. Again, it depends on how many the judge can
decide. Right now, we are deciding on average of, say, 2,000 to
2,200 cases a week.
Mr. Self. Per judge.
Mr. Arnold. No, sir, at the Board.
Mr. Self. Ah-ha.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. We have whittled it down quite a bit. I still
think, and I have got 25 seconds, from this discussion, you
have enlightened me, and I appreciate your answers.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. I think we can do a better job. That is what this
bill does. Now, I have not even gotten to the other issue in
the bill, but great discussion, I think we can do a better job
in the bill of making it transparent to the veterans. I yield
back.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Self. Mr. McGarvey, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To switch gears just
a little bit here and appreciate what you guys are doing. Also,
you know, thank you all. One of the things I try to say at
every committee hearing is this committee is united in its
effort to protect our veterans. I think we do share the common
mission of making sure that the men and women who put on a
uniform to take care of us, that we are doing everything we can
to take care of them, that we are doing everything we can, just
as when they go in, as when they come out.
One of the things we know is that in the Veterans Board of
Appeals, we are dealing with our veterans who are out of the
service, but we are taking care of them, right? The people who
are taking care of them are in a way still part of the VA,
still on their active-duty tour. In order to make sure that we
are properly taking care of our veterans, we have got to make
sure that we have enough people within the veteran system who
are qualified and ready to take care of them.
One of the things I am worried about is the adjudication of
appeals and making sure that those appeals are adjudicated
correctly because I do not think any veteran should ever have
their earned benefit taken away from them. I know you guys
probably share my feelings on that. While there are several
bills on the agenda today aiming to enhance service and
transparency at the Board of Veterans Appeals, I want to
highlight that there is not a bill to improve the recruitment
and retention of the board of attorneys who are on the front
lines of moving those veterans claims forward.
Again, we are taking care of our veterans. They have done
their tour. They have earned this benefit. We have people right
now taking care of them who are still on the front lines and
need help. The Board of Veterans Appeals currently faces a 7
percent attrition rate in board attorneys, which is well above
the average in the Federal workforce. This is why I found it
surprising that the Board downgraded the full performance level
of board decision writing attorneys hired after November 2021
from GS-14 to GS-13. For such a small but critical subsection
of the VA workforce, with fewer than 1,000 decision-writing
attorneys, it seems like a misstep not to fully compensate our
public servants and have the best tools at our fingertips to
attract the top talent for our veterans. Again, these are the
people who are processing these claims to make sure our
veterans get the benefits they deserve.
Mr. Arnold, what can this subcommittee do to help address
this counterproductive policy to improve recruitment and
retention at the Board, which is going to make sure that
veterans, including those in Louisville, including those in
Kentucky, who are waiting for appeal decisions, have their
appeals handled quickly by the best and by the brightest?
Mr. Arnold. That is a great question, sir, and I am really
glad you asked it. First of all, I am proud that in the 5 years
I have been at the Board, the attrition rate for attorneys has
dropped from 13.9 percent in Fiscal Year 2018, that is what I
inherited, to 7.4. We got a ways to go. Like you said, 7.4 is
not acceptable----
Mr. McGarvey. Right.
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. to me. The one thing I just want
to correct, sir, is we did not downgrade our attorneys from GS-
14. We did change our automatic career ladder system where
there is an automatic, assuming successful performance, up to
13, and then there is I am going to call it a competition, but
not with numbers attached to it. There is essentially an
evaluation. Are you ready to make that step as a GS-14
attorney, where we are relying on you more than you are relying
on us to help learn the craft----
Mr. McGarvey. Okay.
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. on that. This was an important
development in our attorneys. I am going to say the Board of
Veterans Appeals has become really an employer of choice in a
lot of different areas in terms of the diversity that we are
able to hire and the scope and breadth of people we are
attracting. Last year, our open announcement, we had 1,705
applicants. We evaluated or interviewed 600, and almost 700 of
them. We extended offers to about 300, and we onboarded over
200 so far this year. We are going to rinse and repeat.
We have got people who want to come to--we changed our
workforce to being virtual. That was something that we really
struggled with. Did they need to be in the office, especially
in the early years? That is contributed to we got people all
over the country now that are really kicking it. Our
productivity, it shows what we are gaining from it.
We increased our attorney ranks by 16 percent last year, so
we are beating the attrition curve. Again, losing one is not
okay for me. I will tell you there is some internal policy
stuff with respect to retention. The law is already on the
books, but we have some VA policies that we have been working
on really hard to allow the ramp up time for attorneys where we
do not have to make a go, no go decision as quickly on, hey,
they are going to be able to swim here as fast as we are trying
to move through the veterans' line. Thank you, sir.
Mr. McGarvey. No, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir. Mr. Crane, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was told it was going
to be Mr. Ciscomani next, but I do appreciate you sticking me
on this side.
Mr. Luttrell. You are welcome.
Mr. Crane. All right.
Mr. Ciscomani. They went by looks, so. Mr. Crane, you were
next.
Mr. Crane. What did you say?
Mr. Ciscomani. They went by looks. Yes, yes, you got it.
Mr. Crane. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. We can shift over to Mr. Ciscomani if you
would like.
Mr. Crane. No, no, no. I will take it now. Thank you.
First question. I consistently receive feedback from
veterans in my district regarding significant shortcomings in
the VA's claims processing. These ongoing issues result in
delays and denials for veterans, mainly stemming from
mishandling the review of new evidence submitted by veterans
contributing to major setbacks. Specifically, Ms. Murphy, when
the VA recognizes a deficiency in new and relevant evidence in
a supplementary claim, does this obligate veterans to restart
the entire process for claiming compensation?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you for that question. It depends on the
case. I know that sounds like not the answer you are looking
for. When we are looking at claims, when we are looking at
supplemental claims, we do have two different lanes that were
created by AMA. If you have a closed record, we go to the
higher-level review. If there is additional evidence, that
would be a supplemental claim. The new and relevant evidence,
it helps us manage to work. It helps us make sure that
actionable claims are being considered and moving forward. We
are trying to avoid just churn or rehashing if the same or
similar evidence is received over and over again. It helps us
balance our resources and make sure that those actionable
claims can move forward more quickly.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Ms. Murphy. What type of
communication is the veteran receiving typically at that time
the decision is being made?
Ms. Murphy. There are notification letters at different
stages. We received your claim. You have this option. This was
the decision on your claim. Here are your options for, you
know, higher level review, supplemental claim, appeal. There
are follow-up letters that are sent. We also have a very robust
call center. They are answering millions of claims a year----
Mr. Crane. Okay.
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. inquiries a year, and they are
available to answer questions. I also want to give credit to
our Veterans Service Organization (VSO) partners and other
advocates who assist greatly in this process.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. This is a follow up for my colleague,
Mr. Lutrell. Mr. Arnold, VA's testimony refers to letters that
the Board sends veterans when the Board could potentially
reject their notice of disagreement. He was not talking about
those letters. He thinks those letters are a good thing. What
he is really talking about here are the letters that the Board
administrative staff sends veterans letters actually rejecting
their appeals. I think it is unacceptable that veterans must
dispute those rejection letters in order to get a decision from
a Board judge that the court can review.
Mr. Lutrell's bill would get rid of that unnecessary hoop
that veterans have to jump through just to get their notice of
disagreement in front of a Board judge. His bill would ensure
that any Board rejection of a veteran's appeal can be reviewed
by the court, and his bill would also ensure that the Board
will be held accountable for when it improperly rejects a
veteran's appeal. Do you agree that when the Board improperly
rejects a veteran's appeal, the Board should be held
accountable for that error?
Mr. Arnold. I absolutely do, sir, and we have a process in
place to do that. I think there is some confusion around this.
When a veteran, and we get, you know, thousands and thousands
of appeals on a weekly basis, when they file their notice of
disagreement, if it is timely or not, yes, we have
administrative staff who are essentially hand jamming that into
the system.
This is where I mentioned earlier, and I really appreciate
Chairman Lutrell's comment about mistakes and the Board being
accountable for mistakes. Mistakes do happen.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely.
Mr. Arnold. That letter notices the individual, if you
think we got this in error, please tell us, because it is then
going to go to a Board member judge. I created an Office of the
Clerk of the Board that is headed by a judge right now. It will
be headed by an executive Board member with a presiding judge
when we are done. Right now, a presiding judge is there to rule
on that when it comes in and actually give a formal
determination. They are not waiting for 2 years in line waiting
for it to actually get distributed to a judge, which is one
thing I worry about the----
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Mr. Arnold. Yes, so, yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Real quick, what does that accountability look
like, Mr. Arnold, when there is a mistake like that?
Mr. Arnold. For the individual employee----
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. or for the judge or what are you--
--
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Arnold. Sir, it runs the gamut and it just it kind of
depends. There is actually an en banc decision that we got in
the Kearns case that went for over 2 years up in the Court of
Appeals for Veterans Claims, where we were notified when that
mistake was made. We tried to immediately rectify it, and then
went on 2 years of litigation to eventually be dismissed
because we docketed it. We docketed that appeal. Then it
occurred in the first week of when we were evacuating for
COVID----
Mr. Crane. That----
Mr. Arnold [continuing]. at the end of March.
Mr. Crane [continuing]. so, it really----
Mr. Arnold. That was a----
Mr. Crane [continuing]. does not answer to my question as
far as accountability is.
Mr. Arnold. That was a set of circumstances where the
mistake that was made at the time when we were converting to
all virtual operations at the beginning of COVID we extended a
lot of grace to the individual that made that miscount. I think
they were off by a day or two when they did it. In that
particular case, there is no formal repercussions for that
other than essentially a counting line.
Mr. Crane. Can you give us an example of any repercussions
or accountability that is actually that employees are held to
when mistakes that affect veterans' lives are----
Mr. Arnold. Sir, I would not get into personnel actions in
this kind of forum, but I am happy to talk about that offline
in terms of how we hold people accountable.
Mr. Crane. Is that secret information?
Mr. Arnold. It is not secret information, sir, but I would
not talk about. You asked for an example on a particular case,
and I am just I am super cautious about talking about any
particular set of circumstances on how we handled it.
Mr. Crane. Okay. Well, this is the VA committee, and we are
asking about accountability. You said that you believe in
accountability, and you said that it happens. We are just
wanting to know, what does that look like? Nobody is asking
for----
Mr. Arnold. Yes----
Mr. Crane [continuing]. an employee to be thrown in prison
or to be----
Mr. Arnold. Yes, sir. No, Okay.
Mr. Crane [continuing]. you know, whipped, but.
Mr. Arnold. Generically speaking, so we created an Office
of the Clerk of the Board that has been now built out over the
course of the last couple of years. It is currently headed by a
dual-hatted executive. We are in the process of creating
another senior executive position to oversee this function.
There is a presiding judge who is detailed there for up to a
year. They oversee right now this whole process. The
administrative, from inbound operations, like you are talking
about here, when somebody files an appeal and they are
responsible for accountability in that whole process for how an
appeal moves through the Board from the time it is filed until
the time a decision goes out the door.
I will say one thing I am the most proud of is how the
veteran trust increases in the Board throughout that journey.
It increases about 10 to 11 percent in trusting the Board to
above 50 percent, which I find really incredible when we are
only granting about a third of the time. Almost 20 percent of
veterans say when they roll craps and they get a denial at the
Board, when they get that final decision, they say they trust
the Board. That is because of the way we handled it and the way
we were accountable for ourselves and the way that we educated
them for why it was still a no.
I appreciate it, sir. I really do. Accountability is a big
watchword for me.
Mr. Crane. Yes, it sounds like a watchword, but yet, with
all due respect, sir, it does not sound like you gave me any
example of any accountability that, you know, any actions that
are taken at all. Honestly, sir, that is one of the biggest
problems with the American citizens and the U.S. Government, is
that they feel as if there is never any accountability. I have
been trying to ask you for the last 3 minutes, can you give us
an example of, you know, any administrative actions,
accountability that has been taken when mistakes are made on
these claims and yet this panel has not heard any. That is a
problem. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Crane. Mr. Ciscomani, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to the
panel for being here. Just a few minutes ago, I talked about
the bill, of course, and a little bit on my district. Just to
reiterate, I serve in Arizona's 6th congressional District,
southeastern Arizona, and I have over 70,000 veterans in my
district, two military bases, both in Tucson, the Davis-Monthan
(DM) Air Force Base, and also in Sierra Vista, Fort Huachuca
Army Base. Very important issue in my district.
I have just a few questions and I am going to direct them
to you, Ms. Murphy. The first one, how has the temporary
authority of licensed portability granted in Isakson and Roe
been useful for veterans in more rural areas, or those veterans
with issues traveling to their exam appointment from the five
counties that I serve in Arizona? Four of those are considered
rural counties, and even the fifth, Pima County, has some areas
that could be rural as well. Very important question for my
district.
Ms. Murphy. Congressman, the ability to use contract exam
support to augment what VHA's ability to conduct C&P exams, it
has been tremendous. It is been phenomenal. The ability to have
that flexibility to utilize providers across state lines in
rural areas has further enabled that support. It has been
essential.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. Would you mind also, Ms. Murphy,
elaborating on the VA's concern that my bill does not
adequately cover the definition of a healthcare professional?
Ms. Murphy. I want to clarify that we are thankful and
appreciative of all the expansion in this area. I do not want
to come across that we are not appreciative. I would ask my
colleague, Mr. Friel, to expand on your question.
Mr. Friel. Thank you. What VA is asking is that we actually
get a little more expansion into the bill. As Ms. Murphy said,
we appreciate the expansion that is been granted, but we would
also like the opportunity for VA to be able to identify and
designate, you know, specific physicians, dynamics that would
meet the need of VA without having to have a congressional
mandate, you know, to identify this particular physician group
as being acceptable for VA purposes. Allow VA to do that, which
would allow us to expedite, you know, treatment for where--when
a condition is something that we do not yet have a physician
that is covered for it, and allow VA to opt that particular
group of physicians into the program.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you to both. Last question, Ms.
Murphy, how do you think talking about here the expansion and
the extension of the license portability authority, how will
that contribute to veterans receiving more timely and accurate
decisions?
Ms. Murphy. It will be a great expansion. Being able to
identify which healthcare professional that we deem necessary
to provide the C&P exam, any of that flexibility, any of the
portability that comes with that, like I said before, it just
further expands our ability to go find the veteran where they
are. We have heard over the years concerns about veterans who
have had to travel long distances for their C&P exam. That is
not something that we want to put them through. Any of these
authorities enable us to meet the veteran where they are more
effectively.
Mr. Ciscomani. We have got a few more seconds here, and I
can either yield it back to my friend Representative Crane to
continue the exchange with Mr. Arnold, but I think I will skip
on that for a second. Although I am very interested in the
accountability as well. I think that is essential in all that
we do. Kind of like in the same light here, when you did this
expansion, I think for us here, and this is part of what I
think Mr. Crane was getting at, is important to know how this
impacts people and give examples. Not always are we asking with
name and last name on things, but I do think it is important
to, when it comes down to accountability, get some guidance of
how you usually approach these kinds of things. I think that is
important to us to better understand and actually, to some
extent, support whatever effort is out there so we can--but we
need to better understand that.
Now, in this case with Ms. Murphy, you talked a little bit
about how this impacts and gave a few examples. Can you just
give me in the last 20 seconds how this exactly would help, and
maybe just a couple of examples on that.
Ms. Murphy. So, if we are speaking still about
accountability, sir?
Mr. Ciscomani. No, no, I am sorry.
Ms. Murphy. Oh.
Mr. Ciscomani. I went back and forth. You are right.
Ms. Murphy. Okay. I am sorry.
Mr. Ciscomani. No, I am talking about the expansion and the
extension of the----
Ms. Murphy. Oh, oh.
Mr. Ciscomani [continuing]. of license portability.
Ms. Murphy. Certainly. I think if we could ask for, you
know, still one more thing is expanding or taking away any of
the sunset provisions so that we do not have to keep coming
back and asking for extension would be also something that
would be very helpful.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. I yield back, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir. In accordance with committee
rules, I ask unanimous consent that Representative Trone from
Maryland be permitted to participate in today's subcommittee
hearing. Without objection, so ordered. Mr. Trone, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF DAVID TRONE

Mr. Trone. Thank you, Chairman Lutrell, and thank you,
Ranking Member Pappas, for this hearing today to review
legislation that will help support our veterans. It was an
honor to serve on the Disability Assistance and Memorial
Affairs (DAMA) subcommittee last Congress, and I am thankful to
have the opportunity to testify on behalf of my bill Restoring
Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act. I want to thank my co-lead,
Mr. Ciscomani, a member of this committee. Thank you for your
leadership in advancing this bill.
As we approach Veterans Day, we are all reminded of the
courageous men and women who have dedicated their lives to our
country. It is now our job to ensure we pass legislation that
improves their quality of life and tackles the various
challenges that they face today. Today, as a proud son of a
World War II Navy combat veteran, I am here to shine a light on
an issue that affects far too many of them, fraud.
Many veterans fall victims to financial predators, online
scams, identity theft. These veterans are then exploited out of
their benefits that they have so rightfully earned. Last year,
the Federal Trade Commission reported over 195,000 complaints
from military consumers, including over 150,000 reports from
veterans and military retirees. The military community reported
monetary harm over $414 million of fraud, an increase of 50
percent from the year before.
Under current law, if a veteran passes away before their
case is resolved, the family cannot be reimbursed for those
lost dollars. Unacceptable. Our bill, the Restoring Benefits to
Defrauded Veterans Act, will help those veterans and their
families reclaim the defrauded dollars and give them access to
the money they are entitled to. This legislation required the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs to reissue misused benefits to
the beneficiary's estate and costs when the beneficiary passed
away before that reissuance.
While we ask so much of our service members, we must never
forget their in-service has been on the families who are there
to support their systems back home. It is the best that we can
do to ensure these earned benefits stay with their loved ones.
I encourage my colleagues support this commonsense bill will
help our vets and their families reclaim defrauded dollars and
give them access to money they deserve. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir. Ladies and gentlemen, thank
you so much. It is a heavy rucksack that you carry. We know
that. We understand that. We listen to our veterans in our
districts. It is our job to explain to you what we are hearing
at our level. It is our job to provide oversight so that these
fraudulent waters are streamlined in a way that the ship will
sail smoothly, and it is not an easy task. The machine that you
work for is incredible, but it is very important. Thank you
very much for coming today. On behalf of the subcommittee, I
thank you for your testimony and joining us. You are now
excused. We will for a moment, and then the third panel will
come to the witness table. Have a blessed day.
Good afternoon. Is everyone ready to start this fun filled
day? Outstanding. Welcome, everyone, and thank you for coming.
Our third panel includes Mr. Shane Liermann, Deputy National
Legislative Director for Disability American Veterans, Ms.
Quandrea Patterson, N. Patterson, excuse me, Associate Director
for Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States, and Mr.
Zachary Stolz, partner at Chisholm, Chisholm, and Kilpatrick. I
will please ask all witnesses to stand and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Luttrell. Please be seated. Thank you. Let the record
reflect that all witnesses answered in the affirmative. Mr.
Liermann, you are recognized for 5 minutes to present the
testimony of Disability American veterans.

STATEMENT OF SHANE LIERMANN

Mr. Liermann. Thank you. Chairman Lutrell. Ranking Member
Pappas, and members of the subcommittee, Disabled American
Veterans (DAV) is grateful for the opportunity to appear before
you today and our written testimony covers the 10 bills being
considered. However, my comments this afternoon will focus just
on a few of these. Mr. Chairman, DAV is a congressionally
chartered and VA accredited veteran service organization that
provides VA claims and appeals representation to veterans and
their families at no cost.
H.R. 3790, the Justice for ALS Veterans Act would provide
the DIC kicker to survivors of veterans who died due to
service-connected ALS. If a veteran is 100 percent disabled 8
years prior to their death, the survivors will receive an
additional monthly DIC payment, which is commonly referred to
as the DIC kicker.
Individuals diagnosed with ALS usually live only 2 to 5
years after diagnosis. Sadly, many veterans are unable to meet
DIC's 8-year requirement for their families to receive the
kicker. The Justice for ALS Veterans Act would provide the
kicker to families of veterans who die due to service-connected
ALS, regardless of the 8-year period.
Mr. Chairman, DAV strongly supports the Justice for ALS
Veterans Act, which is evident by the over 24,000 emails our
members have sent to Congress in support of this legislation.
We must ensure veteran survivors and their families receive the
benefits they deserve and are not penalized from receiving
increased compensation due to the rapid progression of ALS.
H.R. 5890, the Review Every Veterans Claim Act, would not
allow VA to deny a veteran's claim solely based on failing to
report for a VA exam. VA will deny a claim for an increase, for
example, based on that missed examination. Although the
evidence of record may contain sufficient evidence for that
increased evaluation, VBA will deny based on that failure to
report.
Mr. Chairman, for over 25 years as a VA-accredited benefits
advocate, I have personally seen thousands of claims denied
just for this reason. This is legislation that could be a game
changer. Not only would this impact claims for service
connection but would apply to all claims for a benefit under
VA's jurisdiction. We believe the Review Every Veterans Claim
Act would be applied to other claims such as total disability
based on individual unemployability and aid and attendance. DAV
strongly supports the Review Every Veterans Claim Act as it
would provide meaningful reform to the claims process while
ensuring VA's decision-making process is based on the entire
evidentiary record.
H.R. 5938, the Veterans Exam Expansion Act would expand
license portability for VA contract examinations. Specifically,
it will allow and extend the ability for certain medical
professionals to provide VA claims exams across state lines.
The current license portability expansion that began in January
2021, has resulted in over 1,400 providers completing over
150,000 medical appointments and over 425,000 disability
benefits questionnaires. This legislation would expand the
license portability for psychologists, podiatrists, dentists,
and optometrists, as well as extend the authority from 3 to 5
years, expiring in January 2026.
Previously, DAV recommended that the license portability be
made permanent and that all medical professionals that are able
to conduct VA exams within the Veterans Health Administration
be included in a permanent extension. Mr. Chairman, DAV fully
supports the Veterans Exam Expansion Act as license portability
has had a positive impact for veterans living in highly rural
areas, Tribal lands, and incarcerated veterans, all while
assisting in reducing the backlog of examinations, which has a
direct impact on the backlog of claims. We urge swift passage
as the current authorization expires in January 2024.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony, and I look
forward to any questions you and the subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Shane Liermann Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Liermann. Ms. Patterson, you
are now recognized for 5 minutes to present the testimony of
the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States.

STATEMENT OF QUANDREA PATTERSON

Ms. Patterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Lutrell,
Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the Subcommittee, on
behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States, to include its auxiliary, thank you for this
opportunity to provide our remarks on legislation pending
before this subcommittee.
The VFW views on today's bills can be found in my written
testimony. I will take the opportunity to highlight a few of
them. The VFW supports the Review Every Veterans Claim Act of
2023 that limits the authority of VA to deny a claim of a
veteran for benefits on the sole basis of failure to appear for
a medical examination. VA has made significant improvements to
ensure filing for service disability compensation is easier for
veterans. However, one of the major frustrations that remain
for veterans is the practice of denying benefits due to a
missed medical examination. The VFW has assisted countless
veterans that have had to reapply for benefits because they
fall within this category.
Life happens to us all, and competing priorities can at
times make it impossible for a veteran to make the scheduled
examination. Restarting a VA claim for this reason is
unnecessary, and veterans would benefit from a process that
does not place so much power in a missed appointment. We look
forward to working with the subcommittee to address our
concerns.
Fraudulent practices and growing scams are plaguing the
veteran community as compensation measures are approved by
Congress to provide for those who served and their families.
The VFW continues to stand against predatory acts and for
making victims whole who have experienced predatory advances.
Our position on fiduciary matters is unchanged from
previous testimony, but it bears repeating. The VFW supports
H.R. 4016, Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act and H.R. 4190,
Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act that seeks to
restore benefits to veterans and their families who are victims
of abuse or fraud by fiduciaries.
Historically, VA could make automatic payments only when
veterans were defrauded by their fiduciaries in certain cases.
A provision within the Isakson and Roe Veterans Healthcare and
Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 intended to correct this
inequity and allow for automatic reimbursements in all
instances of fiduciary fraud. It has also created a requirement
for VBA to make a negligence determination and for VA to
investigate its own culpability in all cases of fiduciary
misuse before reissuing payments to beneficiaries.
According to a 2021 Office of Inspector General (OIG)
report, it took VBA an average of 228 days to complete misuse
determinations on 40 cases. Some cases took a year or longer.
These delays perpetuate hardship for many veterans and their
family members who are eligible to receive these benefits. We
support this legislation that seeks to provide relief for this
already vulnerable population.
The VFW supports H.R. 4306, Michael Lecik Military
Firefighters Protection Act, to establish presumptions of--I
mean to establish presumptions of service connection for
diseases associated with firefighting. Many military
firefighters report the use of firefighting foam in training
operations and the presence of PFAS chemicals in bunker gear.
Our members who served as military firefighters reported
continuous exposure to these chemicals during training and
faced a significant occupational risk due to health hazards.
We have a suggestion to expand and improve the language of
this legislation so all veterans exposed to these chemicals are
provided with the care and benefits that they have earned. We
believe that the 5-year requirement as a firefighter is too
long, as it only takes one exposure to cause harm.
Additionally, there should not be a time limit for when the
veteran can file a claim, as many of these conditions manifest
years after exposure. This legislation is incredibly important
to prevent PFAS from becoming another situation like Blue Navy
or Camp Lejeune, in which veterans became sick and died waiting
decades for their conditions to be properly recognized and
appropriately treated.
Chairman Lutrell, Ranking Member Pappas, thank you for the
opportunity to provide my remarks. I look forward to your
questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Quandrea Patterson Appears In
The Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Patterson. Mr. Stolz, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to present the testimony of the
Chisholm, Chisholm, and Kilpatrick.

STATEMENT OF ZACHARY STOLZ

Mr. Stolz. Thank you, Chairman Lutrell, Ranking Member
Pappas, and members of the subcommittee. Good afternoon. I am
Zach Stolz, a partner with Chisholm, Chisholm, and Kilpatrick.
CCK is a law firm with dozens of VA accredited attorneys and
advocates handling VA benefits claims at all levels of the
process. I have personally spent the bulk of my career
practicing before the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims
and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. I would
like to focus my opening remarks on the procedural issues
contained in some of the proposed bills.
The Appeals Modernization Act has brought with it both good
and bad so far. Good, faster decisions at the regional office,
more choice and control for our veterans. Bad, some massive
delays at the Board of Veterans Appeals due to complications
for both adjudicators and veterans with simultaneously running
procedural systems.
H.R. 5559, Protecting Veterans Claims Option Act, would
have a positive effect on the VA adjudicatory system. Amending
38 United States Code Section 5108 and requiring VA to
adjudicate all supplemental claims filed within 1 year of the
original decision without a requirement for new and relevant
evidence would help to advance the non-adversarial nature of
the VA claims system. The bill also has provisions close to my
heart as an advocate who handles cases at the Courts of Appeals
for Veterans Claims (CAVC), the amendment to 38 U.S.C. 7113.
This amendment would aid the thousands of veterans whose claims
are sent back to the Board on remand from the court. The
amendment would put AMA veterans on the same footing as their
legacy counterparts by providing a 90-day period in which the
appellant could submit evidence directly for Board
consideration.
Appellants are currently sent back to the lane from which
the appeal originated. This process leads to a number of
scenarios in which efficiency is reduced and it subjects
veterans to needless shuffling around VA. Even worse, it costs
many veterans their place in line at the Board because in the
AMA, veterans do not retain their docket numbers once the case
is sent back to the regional office. It may seem esoteric, but
if the Board decides for any reason to remand a veteran's case
back to the regional office, the veteran has to start the
appeal process to the Board at the very end of the line.
Given the 3-to 5-year delays at the Board that we already
know about, this is devastating for pursuing appeals. This
amendment to 7113 is certainly a step in the right direction
and will help get the right issues before the right
adjudicators at the right time.
Speaking of Board delay, until recently, the only appeals
being decided in the AMA at the Board were those cases advanced
on the docket for advanced age, severe financial hardship, and
serious illness. What about everyone else? It is unclear
sometimes what is happening at the Board. Combining H.R. 5559
with Section 3 of the Veterans Appeals Transparency Act, 5870,
would mandate more transparency at the Board that is critically
needed. In my written testimony on this subject, I mentioned
the frustrations we encountered in attempting to get basic
information for how the Board was adjudicating appeals. This
section is a good step in requiring more transparency and
better information from the Board.
Last for my opening remarks, I would like to offer support
for H.R. 5891, the Veterans Appeals Decision Clarity Act. Under
the proposed amendment to 38 U.S.C. 7104, when the Board
declines to consider evidence because it was not received
during a period permitted under section 7113, it would be
required to, ``identify the time when such evidence was
received and provision of section 7113 of this title that
establishes that such evidence may not be received at such
time.'' In other words, the Board has to let a veteran know
when evidence came in and that they cannot use it. It would
also require the Board to state the adequacy of the timeliness
of a notice of disagreement.
All of this is essential for veterans and their advocates
to navigate this very complicated system. I would also suggest
that it would be better for personnel at the Board and at the
regional offices. It could cut down on unnecessary claims,
questions, and requests from veterans.
It is always good to remember this is a non-adversarial
system. There is no traditional discovery. This puts veterans
in a position to understand what is happening in their cases,
both substantively and jurisdictionally. Thank you so much for
the opportunity to be here today, and I look forward to your
questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Zachary Stolz Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir. We will move into our first
line of questions. Mr. Stolz, do you agree with the VA's
statement that Board decisions on appeals would be delayed if
we required the Board to provide a general statement about the
timeframes during which untimely evidence was submitted?
Mr. Stolz. No. I do not quite understand. With all due
respect, and I know the Board of Veterans Appeals has a
Herculean task, and I do not in any way want to advocate for
something that would slow them down. From where I sit and it is
just from where I sit, they have to do this work anyway. The
Board member and their staff is going to have to go through the
evidence that comes in. They have to do it writing it in one or
two sentences, I think, as you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, I do
not see how that would slow down the Board in any meaningful
way. Would it create a little bit more typing? Yes. Would it
slow them down in a meaningful way that will affect veterans? I
do not see it.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. What happens when the Board sends a
veteran a letter rejecting their notice of disagreement?
Mr. Stolz. Well, what happened in the case before the court
is it becomes very confusing, and it is happened several
thousand times. I do not know that there is one simple case I
can talk about the one----
Mr. Luttrell. I am sure everyone is different.
Mr. Stolz. Everybody is different, right. It is confusing,
because you get this, you do not get appeal rights, and you get
a letter from probably, and the way that I understand that it
was working, and I understand that perhaps some of it has been
fixed, but the way that it was working in what is a publicly
recorded case, is administrative staff sent a letter. The
veteran got very confused by it. You try to fix it through the
Board, then the Board issues a decision that should have
appellate rights, and then you get your day in court. The fast
answer is you get something that you cannot appeal. You cannot
appeal.
Mr. Luttrell. Cannot.
Mr. Stolz. That is my understanding.
Mr. Luttrell. Can the veteran appeal the rejection letter
to the court? You said, no.
Mr. Stolz. Not directly. They have to go through the Board,
and then the Board would have to issue a decision.
Mr. Luttrell. Do you think that a veteran should have to go
through the extra hoop of disputing a rejection letter from the
Board administrative staff in order to receive a Board decision
by a Board judge that the court can review for accuracy?
Mr. Stolz. I do not.
Mr. Luttrell. Mr. Liermann, how would the Review Every
Veterans Claim Act help veterans who are filing claims other
than original claims for compensation, such as claims for
increased compensation?
Mr. Liermann. Thank you. Actually, it would have a big
impact. Whenever a veteran files a claim for an increase
evaluation when the condition has grown in severity, VA
automatically is going to order them an examination if there is
no evidence currently to grant that increase. In a lot of
cases, if the veteran fails to report for that for the
increase, VA will automatically deny it from that part because
they requested the exam solely for the increase.
Then we have to come back and say, well, no, actually, the
veteran tried to reschedule the exam, and for some reason, that
did not get relayed. Now we have a denial. Now we got to find a
way to fix it to where if they cannot deny it solely for that
reason, the veteran is going to have more continuity or more
time to continue through the process without being just stymied
up front for failing to report.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Pappas.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for your
comments here. I think these are all incredibly helpful as we
go about our work.
Ms. Patterson, maybe I could start with you. We heard
earlier from Representative Issa about his legislation, the Jax
Act. I understand that VFW supports the bill, and a lot of us
up here do. From my perspective, the constraints on eligibility
in the bill make it narrow, and it leaves people behind, for
example, the Lioness teams of Iraq in 2003. My question is,
should we be looking to improve the bill to make sure that we
do not continue to leave groups of women veterans behind?
Ms. Patterson. Thank you for that question, sir. We also,
VFW also agrees that if there are other categories of veterans
out there who have experienced similar situations to where they
are not included, that we do revise the bill, or that we do
things to make sure that they are included.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you for that. Similarly, the way the bill
is drafted causes some confusion as to who is eligible under
the bill, and particularly, it seems to limit eligibility to
veterans who have previously filed a claim and had that claim
denied. We all know that veterans often decline to file a claim
in the first place because of the perceived futility in some
cases of doing so. I imagine that it is particularly true for
the women that we are discussing today. I am wondering if VFW
would support removing the requirement that a veteran must have
previously filed a denied claim in order to be eligible under
this Jax Act?
Ms. Patterson. Absolutely.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Mr. Liermann, I see you nodding as well.
Would you provide any comments on that legislation?
Mr. Liermann. Yes and thank you. I think once they
determine that they have combat exposure, everything is
applicable at that point. I do not think it would just--they
would have to have been denied before. I think that presumption
of combat, which is so important to help veterans establish
benefits, I think that would override what their language
writes, but we would be supportive of correcting that. When
there are a group of other women veterans that fit those
categories and criteria under DoD, absolutely we think it
should be expanded.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you for that. Maybe I could follow up
with you about a separate piece of legislation. This is
Representative Slotkin's bill, the Justice for ALS Veterans
Act. I understand that DAV supports the bill, has mobilized its
membership to reach out to their Member of Congress in support
of the legislation. We thank you for that.
One provision instructs VA to identify other diseases or
illnesses with similar characteristics of fast progression and
high mortality, and that also may deserve similar treatment to
what is being proposed for ALS under the bill. Can you talk
about DAV support and what other conditions that you may see
that we should consider with the same treatment as ALS under
this legislation?
Mr. Liermann. Thank you. Just real quick to make reference
to what was discussed earlier, we believe that it is already
ALS in itself meets the criteria of a rapid progressing
disease, because once a veteran files a claim for it, it is an
automatic 100 percent disability evaluation within the VA. We
think that meets that already, especially when you look at the
average of 3 to 5 years from the diagnosis until the veteran
passes.
Other conditions, pancreatic cancer, which is now a
disability presumptive to the PACT Act, would be one other
disability that I would clearly mention because of its
devastating effects, and sometimes it is a weight
manifestation, so it does progress very rapidly.
Mr. Pappas. I am sure you must have members that either
have ALS or have firsthand knowledge about how terrible this
disease is. I am wondering if you also could provide some
comment on what the additional DIC payment would mean to
survivors of veterans who suffered from ALS.
Mr. Liermann. When the veteran passes, the family no longer
gets the veteran's compensation. The family and the surviving
spouse would have to apply for what we often refer to as DIC,
or dependence indemnity compensation. Right now, that is about
40 percent of what a 100 percent veteran receives. It is a
great reduction in their income. Making them eligible for this
additional compensation or the kicker is going to help improve
the quality of life for that family after the veteran has
passed.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir. Mr. Crane, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you guys for
showing up. I realize we are here today, ultimately, to make
sure that our veterans are taken care of. I do believe that the
vast majority of people in this room, and at the VA as well,
try and do everything they can to take care of our veterans.
That being said, there are circumstances where that does
not happen, and I think that is one of the things that we are
looking into today. Were you guys in the room when I was asking
the panel before you about accountability? What did you guys
think about the responses that I was getting? Ms. Patterson, I
want to start with you. Did it sound like there was any
accountability whatsoever as far as, you know, any, you know,
any counseling documentation being put into records? You know,
clearly, I was just asking for, hey, can you tell the panel
what happens when people at the VA make mistakes? What do you
think of that, Ms. Patterson?
Ms. Patterson. Thank you for that question. The VFW thinks
that accountability for veterans, whether it is in the
processing of the claims or for those who are involved in the
process, the processing of the claims, the more clarity that is
out there, the more that it can be clear that this is the
consequence to failing a veteran in this process, the more
proficient the process will be.
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Ms. Patterson. I did not hear where there is a process or
what that process is. I did not think you were asking for
names. You were just asking for what is the process? How do
you----
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Ms. Patterson [continuing]. determine who is accountable?
If people who are doing things wrong, if they know that if they
do not do certain things, that there is a consequence. We would
like to see also a clear, you know, process that does hold
people accountable just so we can ensure that the veterans are
being taken care of.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Ms. Patterson. Mr. Stolz, you realize
this is an oversight hearing, right?
Mr. Stolz. I do.
Mr. Crane. Do you think that that is appropriate, that, you
know, those of us that are tasked to not only fund the VA, but
also conduct oversight of it, be given reasonable answers to
questions such as, is there any accountability when individuals
at the VA make mistakes?
Mr. Stolz. I do.
Mr. Crane. You do? Did you think that the answers that this
panel was given are acceptable?
Mr. Stolz. I did not hear a direct answer to your question,
Mr. Crane.
Mr. Crane. Did it sound like I was asking for specifics,
specific names?
Mr. Stolz. It did not.
Mr. Crane. Okay. What about you, sir, on the end? Liermann,
Mr. Liermann?
Mr. Liermann. I do not believe the question was answered to
your point. There was no actual discussion on the
accountability. Again, I have been doing this for 25 years for
DAV at five different locations around the country. We reviewed
rating decisions, would find problems, take them back to
coaches, people within VA, to explain an issue.
When it comes to accountability, my experience has been it
is there. It just may not move nearly as quick as we want it to
or have the correct measures that we deem would be appropriate.
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Liermann. Accountability is a big issue for us, but I
think sometimes it is hard to actually see it take place.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. I want to reiterate that I do not
believe that the vast majority of employees at the VA are
making mistakes or making mistakes on purpose. I do believe
that they try and do a good job. I agree with the chairman who
said that we understand that the individuals sitting on that
panel have a very daunting and difficult task. This is a huge
organization. As somebody, you know, who came from the military
myself and then started a small business, I can tell you that
when we had employees that, you know, continually made
mistakes, we tried to document those mistakes, have a
counseling, and, you know, made sure that that went their
personnel file, so that if we continue to see the same mistakes
over and over and over again, we could take, you know, follow
on actions. Possibly, if it got too bad, even termination.
It is disappointing when we have these oversight hearings
and we are not just talking about products being made like at
my company. We are talking about actual veterans, their
families, their health, their lives. If there is no
transparency or accountability, it makes me understand why I
hear the same things from veterans in my district over and over
and over again about the type of care that they are receiving,
the type of communication they are receiving, the type of
transparency that they experience. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Crane. Mrs. Ramirez, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, chairman. You know in the panel
right before this, I mentioned that one of the priorities for
me is to ensure that we continue to recognize the service of
women. I certainly just want to follow up on a few questions
related to female veterans, and then I want to move into a
couple of other things. Mr. Liermann, can you speak to the
importance of women veterans being fully recognized and how
recognition in combat can result in access to benefits?
Mr. Liermann. Absolutely and thank you. As we were
discussing earlier, the presumption of combat will open up
doors to where a veteran will not have to prove a specific
disability as long as it is consistent with the hardships of
combat. That is why this is such an important presumptive.
Getting people recognized, women veterans who may not have
been recognized before as at combat, this is going to help
their ability to get claims granted, to not have to be burdened
with an over amount of evidence to prove it, and it is going to
streamline the process for them to get access to those
benefits.
In reference to women veterans as a whole, DAV has been
championing this particular issue for women veterans for
decades. We came out with a Women Veterans Report in 2014,
2018, and we are currently going to be putting out another
Women Veterans Report going to be focusing on the importance of
mental health and women veterans. We are hoping to have that
out in March or April of next year, and we will make sure----
Ms. Ramirez. Great.
Mr. Liermann [continuing]. the committee gets a copy of it.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you. I was about to ask you when we can
expect it, so thank you. I appreciate that.
I want to shift gears a tad bit, and I want to go to your
testimony. In your testimony, you state that the Director of
Claims and Fiduciary Inspection Division, the Office of Audits
and Evaluations of the VA OIG--a mouthful--confirmed that
negligence determinations by the VA do not have a specified
time period and that beneficiaries are waiting more than 400
days for reimbursement of misused funds. My question for you
is, can you describe how this wait is impacting, wait time is
impacting veterans?
Mr. Liermann. It is a matter between paying their rent,
buying groceries, getting prescriptions, because once that
misuse has been done, they stop making any payment.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Liermann. Now that veteran's family is not getting any
compensation payment for that 400-day period until they either
make a determination of the misuse or establish a new fiduciary
and then set up new funds. We are talking potentially a year
and a half of a veteran's family not having direct access to
compensation just for the basic daily needs.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes. You could imagine in that year and a
half, where a shelter, where food, with basic needs, and the
impact that they have. I ran a homeless shelter, so I can tell
you I have seen the impact of both female veterans and male
veterans. I want to ask you just a few more questions before my
time is over. Does your organization work with veteran
fiduciaries?
Mr. Liermann. DAV provides free representation for veterans
and their families. We have and do represent veterans that have
fiduciaries, and I have interacted and represented them myself
multiple times over the last 25 years, and our organization
does on a daily basis.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. What does this procedural fix mean
practically for veterans and their families?
Mr. Liermann. Well, it is giving them access back to their
compensation. I mean, fiduciaries do a very difficult job, and
when there is a decision of misuse or waiting for it, that
slows down what the fiduciary can do, but more importantly,
slows down the access to veterans and their families for the
money. This fix would give them access to their compensation
much faster than waiting for that determination.
Ms. Ramirez. I got a little bit, about 45 seconds left. I
am going to give you 30 of those seconds to share with us here
to the committee, is there any suggestions you have for
additions or changes to the current legislation we are
discussing or any of the legislation before us today? Go.
Mr. Liermann. Oh, thank you. The Michael Lecik bill. DAV
does not support it. We are a resolution-based organization,
which means we must have a resolution to support it. We do not
support it or oppose it. We are really concerned with the 5-
year must have served on active duty, then your disability must
have been diagnosed within 15 years in order to get it service
connected. When we do that to presumptives, what we are doing
is limiting and restricting the number of veterans who are
actually going to be eligible. If we want to do this to provide
that benefit, we need to remove it. The other part of that I
want to mention is----
Ms. Ramirez. I am out of time. I am going to take what you
gave us before the chairman rings the bell. I would love for
you to be able to provide any of the other additional
information, if it is not in the testimony, in writing. Thank
you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, ma'am. Mr. Pappas, closing remarks?
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening
this hearing, and I want to extend my gratitude to all the
members and witnesses who participated in it. I appreciated all
the insights that were shared, and I think this hearing
highlighted some important issues. We received an abundant
amount of feedback that is going to help us ensure we are
working together on the bills that were put forward.
I believe that both Republicans and Democrats share a
genuine commitment to enhancing the well-being of veterans. I
also believe we need to continue to uphold our promise that we
made to veterans and their families who may face challenges in
accessing the benefits to which they are entitled. For me,
these benefits are vital in safeguarding the dignity and well-
being of all those who have served this great Nation.
In advance of Veterans Day this weekend, I want to thank
all those who have served this great country and who are
serving today in uniform and extend my gratitude to our
panelists for their insights. I want to thank all my colleagues
for their contributions. Let us keep working together on these
bills and see what we can get done here. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir. I look forward to working
through these issues with the department and my colleagues on
the subcommittee. The bills discussed today would provide
important improvements for veterans going through the veterans
claims and appeals process. They would also improve access to
benefits for groups of veterans who earned their benefits.
As I said before, the complete written statement of today's
witnesses will be entered into the hearing record. I ask
unanimous consent that the statements for the record submitted
from the following members and organizations be entered into
the hearing record. Representative Gerald Connolly of Virginia,
American Veterans, AMVETS, National Organization of Veterans
Advocates, NOVA, Paralyzed Veterans of America, PVA, Quality
Timeless Customer Service, QTC, Special Operations Associations
of America, SOAA, ALS Association, Service Women's Action
Network, SWAN. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the letter of support for
Military Veterans Advocacy is entered into the hearing record.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous
materials. Hearing no objections, so ordered.
I thank the members and the witnesses for their attendance
and participation today. I thank all the veterans and their
spouses and families in the room today for show going up. God
bless you. Thank you for your service. Happy Veterans Day. This
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:57 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Beth Murphy

Good afternoon, Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas and
Members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss pending legislation, including bills
pertaining to disability compensation, VA fiduciaries and appeals.
Accompanying me today are Mr. Kevin Friel, Deputy Director, Pension &
Fiduciary Service, Veterans Benefits Administration and Mr. Kenneth
Arnold, Vice Chairman, Board of Veterans' Appeals.

H.R. 1753 - To ensure that certain members of the Armed Forces who
served in female cultural support teams receive proper credit for such
service

H.R. 1753 would require VA to consider service on a female cultural
support team (CST) as combat service for purposes of determining
whether a Veteran incurred a disease or injury during that period of
service.
VA supports the intent of the bill to ensure proper recognition of
Veterans' combat service; however, as discussed below, we cite concerns
with several specific elements, which we believe may prevent VA from
being able to implement the legislation. VA has discussed this bill
informally with the Department of Defense (DoD). Further collaboration
between VA and DoD is needed to confirm both the number of Veterans who
participated in CSTs and whether these Veterans meet the definition of
``engaged in combat'' for the purposes of 38 U.S.C. 1154(b).
Per VA's procedural guidance in M21-1.VIII.iv.1.D.2.b, there are no
limitations as to the type of evidence that may be accepted to confirm
engagement in combat. Any evidence that is probative of combat
participation may be used to support a determination that a Veteran
engaged in combat. The requested list and memo from DoD may be
sufficient to satisfy this evidentiary requirement. However, VA notes
that a finding that a Veteran engaged in combat for 1154(b) purposes
requires that the Veteran ``have personally participated in events
constituting an actual fight or encounter with a military foe or
hostile unit or instrumentality, as determined [by VA] on a case-by-
case basis.'' Moran v. Peake, 525 F.3d 1157, 1159 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
VA also provides the below comments on the bill. To obtain an award
of service connection, a claimant must generally establish three
elements: (i) a current disability, (ii) a disease or injury was
incurred or aggravated during service (i.e., in-service incurrence) and
(iii) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-
service disease or injury (i.e., nexus). By statute, satisfactory lay
or other evidence that an injury or disease was incurred or aggravated
in combat will be accepted as sufficient proof of in-service incurrence
if that evidence is consistent with the circumstances, conditions or
hardships of such service even if the disease, disability or injury is
not otherwise documented in the official record. Thus, if a CST Veteran
states that a disease or injury was incurred in combat and the same is
consistent with the circumstances, conditions or hardships of service,
the rating activity and the examiner will accept the lay evidence as
satisfying the ``in-service incurrence'' requirement for an award of
service connection, even if there is no other record of the same. This
would allow for grant of service connection of a disability, from
traumatic brain injury to a musculoskeletal disability from carrying
heavy gear, assuming the CST Veteran establishes a current disability
and a causal relationship (i.e., nexus) between the current disability
and the in-service disease or injury.
The bill contains provisions specific to cases in which a Veteran
or survivor (i) prior to the Act's enactment submitted a claim for
service-connected disability or death;(ii) had such claim denied for
lack of service connection; (iii) submits a claim within 3 years of the
Act's enactment for the same disability that was previously denied. In
those cases, the bill would specifically require VA to re-adjudicate
entitlement to service connection and, if service connection were
granted, to apply an unusually liberal effective date rule. Under
current law, VA already has an obligation to re-adjudicate entitlement
to service connection when the claimant submits another claim seeking
service connection for the same condition if, since the last denial,
there has been a change in law that would provide a new basis for
entitlement. Combat Veterans are afforded a relaxed standard of proof
to satisfy the ``in-service incurrence'' requirement for an award of
service connection. Because this bill would enable CST Veterans to
avail themselves of the same relaxed standard of proof, it would create
a new basis of entitlement for which VA would already be obligated to
re-adjudicate. Therefore, VA believes the re-adjudication provision is
superfluous and recommends removing it.
As for the effective date provision, H.R. 1753 authorizes an
effective date as early as the date of the previously denied claim.
Under existing effective date rules, an award of benefits pursuant to a
liberalizing law will not be earlier than the effective date of the law
or 1 year prior to the date VA receives the supplemental claim,
whichever is later. While H.R. 1753 would also place a 3-year time
limit for qualifying claimants to file a supplemental claim and have
this effective date provision applied, it may nonetheless result in
significant retroactive benefits for some claimants, depending on the
original date of claim. This bill would carve out an effective date
exception for only this small group of Veterans, which may be perceived
as inequitable. VA would suggest amending this section of the bill to
align with current laws concerning effective dates of claims.
Mandatory costs to the compensation and pension account are
estimated to be $69.2 million in 2024, $101.9 million over five years,
and $147.1 million over 10 years. There are no discretionary costs may
be associated with H.R. 1753.

H.R. 3790 - Justice For ALS Veterans Act of 2023

Dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) is a monthly monetary
benefit payable to the qualifying survivors of Veterans who die from a
service-connected disability or who die while either receiving or
entitled to receive VA compensation for a disability that has been
continuously rated totally disabling for a period of 8 or more years
immediately preceding death. Under current law, a higher rate of
benefits is payable to a surviving spouse if two conditions are met for
a continuous period of at least 8 years immediately preceding the
Veteran's death: the Veteran was married to the individual seeking
benefits as a surviving spouse and the Veteran was either receiving or
entitled to receive VA compensation for a disability rated totally
disabling.
H.R. 3790, the ``Justice for ALS Veterans Act of 2023'' would
authorize payment of the higher DIC rate to surviving spouses of
Veterans who die from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) regardless of
whether the Veteran had a disability rated as totally disabling for a
continuous period of at least 8 years immediately preceding death. In
addition, the bill would require that, within 180 days of enactment,
the Secretary submit a report to Congress that identifies any service-
connected disability, other than ALS, that the Secretary determines
should be treated in the same manner as ALS for purposes of entitlement
to the higher rate of DIC. The report should include a comprehensive
list of service-connected disabilities with high mortality rates and
detailed information on the average life expectancy for persons with
each such disability. We note that the bill recommends that the
Secretary of VA identify similar service-connected disabilities with
high mortality rates but does not define criteria for what is
considered a high mortality rate. VA believes that a clear definition
for a high mortality rate should be incorporated within the bill to
ensure implementation that is consistent with congressional intent.
We would support this bill, if modified to include criteria for
determining whether a disability has a high mortality rate, and subject
to the availability of appropriations.
Mandatory costs are estimated to be $847,000 in 2024, $4.9 million
over 5 years, and $11.9 million over 10 years. There are no
discretionary costs associated with this legislation.

H.R. 4016 - Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act

H.R. 4016 would streamline reissuance of benefits in fiduciary
misuse cases. Where VA finds that a fiduciary has received VA benefits
for the use and benefit of a beneficiary's VA benefits, but uses those
benefits for another purpose, 38 U.S.C. Sec.  6107 requires VA to
reissue the misused benefits to the beneficiary or a successor
fiduciary. The Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans Health
Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-315), authorized VA
to reissue the amount of funds misused by a fiduciary without regard to
whether the misuse was due to VA's failure to exercise proper
oversight. However, current law contemplates that VA will make a
determination regarding whether VA failed to exercise proper oversight
prior to any reissuance of benefits.
VA supports this proposed legislation and its incorporation of
language which would result in a shift of negligence considerations
toward program oversight and away from an unnecessary determination
tied to the reissuance of benefits that will occur regardless of the
outcome of the determination. This proposal will enable timelier
reissuance of misused benefits to Veterans and their survivors and
enable more effective application of VA resources toward more
productive methods of oversight to protect beneficiary funds.
No mandatory or discretionary costs are associated with H.R. 4016.

H.R. 4190 - Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act

H.R. 4190 addresses reissuance of misused benefits in cases where
reissuance did not occur prior to the beneficiary's death. This bill
would provide a preferred hierarchy for payment of reissued funds to an
individual or entity in a stipulated order of preference. Additionally,
the bill would not allow for a reissued payment to be made to a
fiduciary who misused the benefits of the beneficiary.
VA supports the bill, if amended. For uniformity, VA suggests the
various forms of the term ``reissuance'' be used in lieu of the various
forms of the term ``repayment'' in 38 U.S.C. Sec.  6107. Existing
statutes specifically address the disbursement of VA benefits that were
either due and unpaid or paid, but not negotiated prior to the death of
the beneficiary. See 38 U.S.C. Sec. Sec.  5121, 5122. In the reissuance
context, however, the payment and negotiation of benefits necessarily
occurred before the question of reissuance arose. See 38 U.S.C. Sec.
6107(b) (providing that VA ``shall pay to the beneficiary or the
beneficiary's successor fiduciary an amount equal to the amount of such
benefit'' ). Existing law does not address disbursement of such funds
if the claimant predeceases reissuance. Adding legislative language
addressing who may receive payments representing reissued benefits on
behalf of a deceased beneficiary would provide greater consistency and
clearer legal basis for making such a determination prior to the
reissuance of misused funds. Incorporating an order-of-priority would
also align this statute with other sections of title 38 United States
Code (i.e., 38 U.S.C. Sec. Sec.  5121 and 5122).
Nonetheless, the proposed priority scheme differs from the priority
scheme in those statutes in that the proposed priority scheme relies on
state law. Where Federal law does not address questions of inheritance,
State law applies. The proposed language would specifically direct VA
to apply State law. An alternative would be to apply the same priority
scheme currently codified in 38 U.S.C. Sec. Sec.  5121, 5122.
Alternatively, VA suggests some modifications to the proposed
prioritization. In the bill, the first priority class is ``[t]he estate
of the beneficiary'' while the third priority class is ``[t]he next
inheritor determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction. Yet, a
decedent's ``estate'' typically refers to the individual's collective
assets and liabilities at death. ESTATE, Black's Law Dictionary (11th
ed. 2019). An inheritor is someone who is entitled to receive any
assets remaining in the estate after all liabilities have been
satisfied. INHERITOR, Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019).
Therefore, VA recommends consideration of whether the first and third
priority classes may be effectively coextensive.
In the bill, the second priority class is ``[a] successor fiduciary
serving the beneficiary when the beneficiary died.'' VA notes that
existing caselaw establishes that a fiduciary does not have rights
beyond the beneficiary himself. Youngman v. Shinseki, 699 F.3d 1301,
1304 (Fed. Cir. 2012). VA is concerned that the bill language would
create a disparity between successor fiduciaries in cases of prior
misuse and fiduciaries in cases not involving any misuse: because the
bill provides for reissuance to the successor fiduciary without
directing what the successor fiduciary must do with the funds, the
successor fiduciary would obtain a right to some of the Veteran's
benefits based on the happenstance of misuse by a prior fiduciary.
VA notes concern over the addition of proposed (c)(2) which
provides that ``[t]he Secretary may not make a payment under this
subsection to a fiduciary who misused benefits of the beneficiary.''
VA's concern is the wording would preclude a fiduciary who misused
benefits, but who is also a member of the estate of the beneficiary as
identified under proposed (c)(1)(A) or an inheritor as identified under
proposed (c)(1)(C) from receiving payment of reissued funds. VA notes
concern this imparts a legislative restriction which surpasses
precedential legal estate disposition. This is particularly a concern
if the fiduciary who previously misused benefits of the beneficiary is
also a member of the beneficiary's estate or an inheritor. In this
example, a previous fiduciary who is not the subject of the current
misuse matter, but who did misuse benefits at one time, may be entitled
to a reissuance payment following misuse by a more recent fiduciary. VA
recommends the Committee consider removing the restrictive language
within (c)(2) and instead explicitly provide that funds due to be paid
to a fiduciary who misused benefits may not be withheld by VA.
Ultimately, this would allow VA to reissue misused funds to the
appropriate heirs while ensuring that estate administration laws are
properly followed.
No mandatory or discretionary costs are associated with H.R. 4190.

H.R. 4306 - Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act

H.R. 4306, the Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act,
would create presumptions of service connection for Veterans who were
trained in fire suppression, served on active duty in a military
occupational specialty or career field with a primary responsibility
for firefighting or damage control for at least 5 years in the
aggregate, and in whom one or more specified diseases manifest to a
degree of 10 percent or more within 15 years of the date on which the
Veteran separates from active service. The specified diseases are heart
disease, lung disease, certain cancers and each additional disease for
which the Secretary determines a presumption is warranted.
VA supports this bill, if amended, and subject to the availability
of appropriations. This bill represents a Veteran-centric approach to
addressing health effects experienced by Veterans who trained in fire
suppression and served on active duty in an occupation with a primary
responsibility for firefighting.
VA views the proposed presumption of service connection as a
reasonable first step for Congress to address potential health outcomes
from firefighting hazards to include exposures to per-and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), which are synthetic chemicals
commonly used as a key ingredient in firefighting foams.
This bill would also provide immediate relief for certain covered
Veterans and at a much faster rate than if VA were to consider the same
presumption under the new presumptive decision-making process created
by the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to
Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act of 2022.
The establishment of a presumption for firefighters would
streamline the claims process, thus reducing the number of claims that
would be subject to medical opinions and other time-consuming
development of evidence showing exposure to chemicals such as PFAS.
However, VA supports a broader-based policy approach. To further
enhance administrative efficiency and to ensure fairness and equity, VA
recommends removal of the 10 percent minimum evaluation requirement;
the 15-year disease manifestation period; and the requirement of 5
years in the aggregate in an occupation or career field with a primary
responsibility for firefighting.
These requirements of H.R. 4306 are more onerous than the fiscal
year (FY) 2023 National Defense Authorization Act provision that
established a presumption for Federal firefighters under 5 U.S.C.
8143b, which recognizes 16 diseases (mostly cancers) as presumptively
related to fire suppression duties. Removing the above requirements
would ensure Veteran firefighters do not face a higher standard of
proof than other Federal firefighters. It should also be noted that the
PACT Act did not include any such requirements for presumptions, and
this has significantly streamlined the processing of PACT Act
presumptive claims. Relaxing these standards would allow claims
processors to process claims more quickly and at a higher accuracy
rate. For example, analyzing the exact number of years and days that a
Veteran served as a firefighter could involve extensive development and
review of a Veteran's military personnel records which may or may not
be conclusive regarding time spent in an occupation. Also, a review of
firefighter mortality studies by Haas et al. (2003) did not observe an
increase in all-or specific-cause mortality with increased time in
firefighting occupation. And finally, amending the bill to streamline
eligibility requirements would facilitate VBA's ongoing effort to
automate disability compensation claims.
Finally, although VA supports the bill, VA also provides the
following discussion on the current state of the scientific evidence on
health outcomes based on firefighting occupation. Notwithstanding the
state of the scientific evidence (below), VA aims to ensure that
military firefighters who may have been exposed to toxic substances and
chemicals during military service do not have a higher burden of proof
than other toxic-exposed Federal firefighters who may be entitled to
compensation for these diseases under comparable Federal statutes (5
U.S.C. 8143b).
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) published a
monograph in 2023 that classifies the firefighter occupation as a Group
1 carcinogen (known to cause cancer in humans). This conclusion is
based on sufficient evidence in multiple cohorts for mesothelioma and
bladder cancer and limited evidence for colon, prostate and testicular
cancers; malignant melanoma; and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. IARC noted that
evidence for all other types of cancers in firefighters is inadequate.
Additionally, recent studies and authoritative reviews have noted
associations between kidney and testicular cancers and PFAS exposure
specifically, with less conclusive evidence for breast cancer. In terms
of other chronic health outcomes, a cursory review of the literature
reveals an association between firefighting and cardiovascular disease
risk. There is also evidence for lung diseases, such as sarcoidosis and
interstitial lung disease, in firefighters. Further, an association has
been noted between exposure to PFAS and the development of thyroid
disease, as well as less evidence for an association with ulcerative
colitis.
Mandatory and discretionary costs are associated with H.R. 4306;
however, additional time would be needed to complete estimates.

H.R. 5559 - Protecting Veterans Claims Options Act

Under existing law, VA must re-adjudicate a previously decided
claim if the claimant files a supplemental claim and identifies new and
relevant evidence. Subsection 2(a) of H.R. 5559, the Protecting
Veterans Claims Options Act, would remove the new and relevant evidence
requirement with respect to supplemental claims filed within 1 year of
the agency of original jurisdiction's decision on the earlier claim.
The bill provides that subsection 2(a) would apply to supplemental
claims filed on or after August 23, 2017, and directs VA to prescribe
implementing regulations for subsection 2(a) within 180 days of the
bill's enactment. Subsection 2(b) would add a new evidentiary window
under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  7113(d) for cases that have been remanded by the
Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims to include evidence submitted by
the appellant and his or her representative, if any, within 90 days
following such remand, which the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board)
shall consider in the first instance.
VA cites concerns with subsection 2(a) and does not support
subsection 2(b). With respect to subsection 2(a), VA is concerned that
eliminating the requirement for new and relevant evidence in support of
certain supplemental claims will result in needless re-adjudication of
claims based upon identical evidentiary records, which would be
unlikely to result in a different decision. VA does not consider such
duplication of efforts to be an efficient use of scarce adjudicatory
resources. This amendment would essentially collapse any distinction
between a supplemental claim filed within 1 year of when the agency of
original jurisdiction issued a decision and higher-level review of such
a decision under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5104B.
VA also is concerned with the retroactive provision of section
2(a)(3) of the bill. In effect, that retroactive provision would
require VA to re-adjudicate every claim decision made after August 23,
2017, upon submission of a supplemental claim without new and relevant
evidence, since section 2(a)(1) of the bill eliminates any requirement
for new and relevant evidence in support of supplemental claims filed
within 1 year ``after the date on which the agency of original
jurisdiction issues a decision with respect to such claim.'' The
combined effect of these provisions would seem to require that VA re-
adjudicate every supplemental claim filed since August 23, 2017, that
was in turn filed within 1 year of an initial decision on a claim but
denied for lack of submission of new and relevant evidence. Once again,
this will result in needless re-adjudication of claims based upon
identical evidentiary records. It would also require VA to data mine to
identify every claim filed since August 23, 2017, that might be
eligible for re-adjudication, including those where claimants expressed
no disagreement with VA's decision that the supplemental claim filed
within 1 year of the initial decision was not accompanied by new and
relevant evidence. VA does not consider such duplication of efforts to
be an efficient use of resources.
VA also notes that while the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) was
enacted on August 23, 2017, AMA was not fully implemented until
February 19, 2019. Some claims were processed under AMA on an opt-in
basis prior to that date, but for most claims, the term ``supplemental
claim'' as characterized in AMA would not have been applied prior to
February 19, 2019.
In addition, VA is concerned that section 2(a)(4) of the bill
requires VA to develop complying regulations within 6 months following
enactment. VA generally estimates 1 year for development and
publication of a regulation or regulatory amendment. Therefore, VA
anticipates difficulty complying with this timeframe.
With respect to subsection 2(b), VA believes that this newly
proposed evidentiary window frustrates current jurisdictional
considerations for having a closed appellate record for the Board of
Veterans' Appeals (Board) and reviewing Federal Courts to consider.
Approximately 6,800-7,700 remanded appeals are returned to the Board
each year by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) and the
majority of those remands require the Board to provide additional
``reasons or bases'' for why the original, closed record considered by
the Board was insufficient to grant the relief sought. This newly
proposed evidentiary window would erode the carefully considered
relevant evidence windows currently available to Veterans under AMA and
may act as an inducement for appellants to file even more appeals with
CAVC simply to add additional evidence that would further delay final
resolution of the appeals they originally filed. This would contribute
to even higher backlogs of pending appeals.
We would welcome the opportunity to discuss the bill in more detail
with the Committee.

H.R. XXXX - Veterans Appeals Decision Clarity Act

Under current law, each decision of the Board must include a
written statement of their findings and conclusions, and the reasons or
bases for those conclusions, on all material issues of fact and law
presented on the record; a general statement reflecting whether
evidence was not considered in making the decision because the evidence
was received at a time when not permitted under section 7113 of this
title and noting such options as may be available for having the
evidence considered by VA; and an order granting or denying relief. The
Veterans Appeals Decision Clarity Act would further require that each
Board decision includes a written determination as to whether the
Notice of Disagreement was adequate and timely, and if there was
evidence that was not considered because it was received outside the
time limitations in section 7113, identification of the time when such
evidence was received and the provision of 38 U.S.C. Sec.  7113 that
establishes that it may not be received at such time.
VA believes that the bill would add significant delays to appeals
processing timelines and lead to exponential growth in appeals
backlogs. At the end of FY 2023, VA began to see a reduction in the
number of appeals pending before the Board after AMA went into effect
in 2019. However, VA also anticipates an increase in pending appeals
due to implementation of the PACT Act. The bill would further delay
resolution of appeals and would create an additional burden on the
Board because, having identified the evidence received outside the
allowable submission window, the Board would then have to provide a
written statement of when each piece of evidence was received and the
provision of section 7113 that is implicated. From VA's perspective,
the closing of the evidentiary record is one of the foundational
features of AMA, and one of its most valuable in terms of enabling VA,
over time, to process appeals more efficiently. Requiring VA to
individually list or summarize each piece of evidence received outside
of the window of time permitted by section 7113 would dilute much of
the administrative value of closing the record.
The requirement would substantially increase the likelihood that
Veterans will inappropriately appeal decisions with allegations that
the Board failed to administratively identify each piece of evidence
submitted outside the relevant evidentiary window and discuss why it
cannot be received at such time. VA feels that this will cause
increased confusion and slow the appeals process as Veterans and their
representatives appeal Board decisions that fail to meet these new
administrative requirements to CAVC, only to end up with a remand that
requires the Board to cure the administrative deficiency without any
substantive change in the ultimate outcome of the appeal. Under those
circumstances, the attorney representing the appellant on such appeals
to the Court will receive a substantial attorney fee under the Equal
Access to Justice Act while the Veteran receives no better outcome than
they had prior to the appeal.
As for the adequacy and timeliness of a Notice of Disagreement,
currently, written docketing notices must be sent to appellants and
their representatives, advising them that their appeal was docketed or
that there are potential timeliness or adequacy issues with the filing.
These notices also provide an opportunity to appellants and
representatives to dispute and/or cure any potential defects well in
advance of when the case would be adjudicated. Those final timeliness
and adequacy determinations that are disputed and potentially adverse
to the appellant are ruled upon by a Veterans Law Judge on detail to
the Office of Clerk of the Board. The bill would delay those formal
determinations until the time when the Board formally adjudicates the
case (which may be months or even years later), which will cause
unnecessary delay and potential harm to appellants.

H.R. XXXX - Veterans Appeals Transparency Act of 2023

The ``Veterans Appeals Transparency Act of 2023'' seeks to clarify
which review options are available to claimants within 1 year following
a decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) and to clarify
that only one review option may be selected at a time. In addition, the
bill would require the docket dates of cases assigned to a Board member
for a decision that week to be published weekly by the Board.
VA does not support the bill unless amended. VA generally supports
efforts to clarify or simplify the decision review and appeals process,
and to clearly establish that only one decision review option is
permissible at a time for any given issue; however, the impact of some
proposed language in this bill is unclear absent amendment.
Specifically, VA has concerns with the proposed removal of the
phrase ``in succession,'' from 38 U.S.C. Sec. 5104C(a)(2)(B) as this
may cause confusion, or inadvertently allow multiple, redundant
decision or appellate reviews of the same evidence by the same
appellate or reviewing body--a practice that is currently prohibited to
ensure that each time a claimant exercises a review option it offers
either a review of new evidence or a review by a higher-level body. For
example, the statute as currently written, with its implementing
regulations, prohibits claimants from challenging a higher-level review
(HLR) decision by the AOJ by filing an HLR on the same issue with the
AOJ; prohibits filing for an HLR by the AOJ of a Board decision and
precludes requesting Board review of a Board decision. If such
redundant review of the same evidence by the same reviewing authority
were allowed under the proposed bill, it would create endless cycles of
review by the same body of the same evidence, which would bog down the
system and fail to offer a meaningful review process to claimants.
If the bill's intent is to clarify the requirement to only pursue
one decision review or appeal option at a time and to clarify in
statute which specific review options are available to challenge either
an AOJ or a Board decision, then VA suggests either leaving the current
statutory language explaining that options may be exercised ``in
succession'' for the reasons above, or adding the following language
specifying which particular review options are available within a year
following an AOJ, Board or CAVC decision, which mirrors current
regulatory language in 38 C.F.R. Sec.  3.2500(c):

``(1) Following notice of a decision on an initial claim or a
supplemental claim, the claimant may file a supplemental claim,
request a higher-level review, or appeal to the Board of
Veterans' Appeals.

(2) Following notice of a decision on a higher-level review,
the claimant may file a supplemental claim or appeal to the
Board of Veterans' Appeals.

(3) Following notice of a decision on an appeal to the Board of
Veterans' Appeals, the claimant may file a supplemental claim
or file a notice of appeal to the Court of Appeals for Veterans
Claims.

(4) Following a decision on an appeal to the Court of Appeals
for Veterans Claims, the claimant may file a supplemental
claim.''

We note that to the extent the Committee opts to model the language
on VA's current regulation, the Committee should be aware that VA has
committed to change current paragraph (c)(4) to extend to review by the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit and the U.S. Supreme
Court, and currently applies this rule pursuant to Policy Letter 20-01.
Accordingly, the Committee could consider replacing ``a decision on an
appeal to the Court to Appeals for Veterans Claims'' with ``completion
of judicial review'' or a similar phrase.
With respect to the weekly reporting requirement, VA believes that
the requirement will be administratively burdensome to execute and,
more importantly, may be misleading to Veterans and representatives
because of how variable those docket dates will be. For example,
approximately 2,000-2,500 appeals are adjudicated each week at the
Board. Approximately 30 percent of cases adjudicated by the Board each
year are Advanced on the Docket (AOD) cases which are automatically
moved ahead of other cases which may have been pending much longer.
These are cases involving Veterans with serious health conditions,
severe financial hardship and advanced age. They will have docket dates
that may be years ahead of others waiting. Another 35-40 percent of
cases adjudicated are also expedited because they are legacy cases
returned after remands from either the Court or the AOJ and they
automatically move to the head of the line either because the law
requires it (Court remands) or because the docket dates are much older
in comparison to AOD cases or those waiting for first-time
adjudication. Finally, original appeals (those getting first-time
adjudication) will fall somewhere in between those two extremes. For
example, the Board still has over 15,000 original Legacy system appeals
that have not been adjudicated previously by a Board judge because so
many other appeals (older Legacy remand cases and AOD cases under both
AMA and Legacy) move ahead of them in line. It would be impossible for
the Board to provide an exact estimate for when a particular appeal may
be adjudicated because each appeal place in line is constantly based on
which appeals are joining (or re-joining) the appeals queue each day.

H.R. XXXX - Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

The Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023 would preclude VA from
denying a claim for VA benefits solely on the basis that the Veteran
failed to appear for a VA medical examination scheduled in connection
with the claim. VA has a statutory duty to provide a medical
examination or obtain a medical opinion or when such examination or
opinion is necessary to decide a compensation claim. A medical
examination or opinion is necessary to decide a claim in certain cases
in which the evidence of record is insufficient to support a grant of
benefits, but there is a reasonable possibility that the examination or
opinion will provide that evidence.
VA notes that while this bill would prohibit denial of a claim on
the sole basis that a Veteran failed to appear for a medical
examination, there may be cases where, without the examination, there
is insufficient evidence to support entitlement. Even if this bill were
enacted, claims would still be denied in those circumstances. The only
difference would be that the denial would be due to lack of sufficient
evidence, not solely the failure to appear for the examination.
VA cites concerns with this bill as written. While VA appreciates
the intent, the bill may have the effect of continuing and worsening
the practice of those involved in the for-profit Disability Benefits
Questionnaire completion industry who often submit inconsistent and
questionable disability impairment descriptions in exchange for large
fees and a portion of any future VA compensation benefits awarded.
These bad actors intentionally and specifically instruct Veterans to
not report for their scheduled VA disability examinations.
If a Veteran who fails to report for a VA examination establishes
good cause for failing to report, VA will reschedule the examination.
Absent good cause, VA action depends on type of claim at issue. If the
examination was scheduled in connection with an original compensation
claim, VA will decide the claim based on the evidence of record. If the
examination was scheduled in connection with any other claim for
compensation or a claim for pension or dependency and indemnity
compensation, the claim will be denied solely on the basis of the
failure to report for the examination. VA recognizes that this
distinction may result in inequities. VA intends to consider whether a
single rule should apply to all types of claims. Moreover, the bill, as
written, is limited to compensation claims. VA recommends that the same
principle apply with respect to pension claims. However, expanding the
bill as written to include pension claims may have unintended effects.
We would welcome the opportunity to discuss the bill in more detail
with the Committee.

H.R. XXXX - Veterans Exam Expansion Act of 2023

The Veterans Exam Expansion Act of 2023 would extend existing
temporary licensure rules for contract health care professional who
perform medical disability examinations for VA to podiatrists, dentists
and optometrists. The bill would also extend the license portability
sunset date from 3 years to 5 years. The bill also includes a reporting
requirement for the 1-year period following the date of the enactment
of this Act.
While VA appreciates the legislation, VA seeks to further expand
the definition of a health care professional to include any health care
professional deemed appropriate by VA to conduct medical disability
examinations. This definition, for example, does not include advanced
practicing nurses. Expanding the definition of a health care
professional to any health care professional deemed appropriate by VA
to conduct medical disability examinations would provide VA with
greater flexibility to complete such examinations.
Additionally, while VA appreciates the extension of the Licensure
Requirements (Portability) for Contractor Medical Professionals to
Perform Medical Disability Examinations from 3 years to 5 years, VA is
seeking to eliminate the Sunset Date on the Licensure Requirements
(Portability) for non-physician Contractor Medical Professionals to
Perform Medical Disability Examinations altogether. Removing the sunset
date and expanding how a health care professional is defined are
critical to ensure continuous completion of thorough, accurate and
timely medical disability examinations to Veterans, thereby leading to
timely and accurate rating decisions associated with VA benefit
entitlement. Additionally, these suggested amendments would allow VBA
the flexibility to use a wider range of qualified medical professionals
and reach more Veterans.
No mandatory or discretionary costs are associated with this
proposed legislation. Any additional requirements could be funded under
existing budget authority.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. My colleagues and I are
prepared to respond to any questions you or other Members of the
Committee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Shane Liermann

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting DAV (Disabled American Veterans) to testify
at today's legislative hearing of the Subcommittee on Disability
Assistance and Memorial Affairs.
DAV is a congressionally chartered, VA-accredited, non-profit
veterans service organization (VSO) comprised of more than one million
wartime service-disabled veterans that is dedicated to a single
purpose: empowering veterans to lead high-quality lives with respect
and dignity. To fulfill our service mission, DAV directly employs a
corps of benefits advisors, national service officers (NSOs), all of
whom are themselves wartime service-connected disabled veterans, at
every Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (VARO) as
well as other VA facilities throughout the Nation, including the Board
of Veterans' Appeals (Board).
We are pleased to offer our views on the bills impacting service-
disabled veterans, their families and the programs administered by VA
and the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) that are under
consideration by the Subcommittee.

H.R. 1753 - to ensure that certain members of the Armed Forces who
served in female cultural support teams receive proper credit for such
service

H.R. 1753 would recognize the honorable service of women veterans
who served in a female cultural support team between January 1, 2010,
and August 31, 2021, as engagement in combat with the enemy in course
of active military service.
Purely from a VA claims point of view, this would positively impact
those women veterans seeking claims related to their combat service. VA
regulation 38 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 3.304 (f),
specifically relates to the requirements for service connection for
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Subparagraph (f)(2) states, ``if the evidence establishes that the
veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is
related to that combat, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence
to the contrary, and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent
with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the veteran's
service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence
of the claimed in-service stressor.''
By establishing combat service for the women who served in the
recognized female cultural support teams, H.R. 1753 would provide them
what is often referred to as a verified stressor for PTSD claims. This
would positively impact their ability to establish a claim for PTSD and
have it granted based on their combat service.
Additionally, the recognized combat service would make title 38,
United States Code, Section 1154 (b) for application. It notes, ``in
the case of any veteran who engaged in combat with the enemy in active
service with a military, naval, air, or space organization of the
United States during a period of war, campaign, or expedition, the
Secretary shall accept as sufficient proof of service-connection of any
disease or injury alleged to have been incurred in or aggravated by
such service satisfactory lay or other evidence of service incurrence
or aggravation of such injury or disease, if consistent with the
circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service,
notwithstanding the fact that there is no official record of such
incurrence or aggravation in such service, and, to that end, shall
resolve every reasonable doubt in favor of the veteran.''
In cases where a veteran asserts service connection for injuries or
disease incurred or aggravated in combat, title 38, United States Code,
Section 1154 (b) and its implementing regulation, 38 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 3.304 (d), are applicable. This statute and
regulation ease the evidentiary burden of a combat veteran by
permitting the use, under certain circumstances, of lay evidence. If
the veteran was engaged in combat with the enemy, VA shall accept as
sufficient proof of service connection satisfactory lay or other
evidence of service incurrence, if the lay or other evidence is
consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such
service.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal
Circuit) has held that in the case of a combat veteran not only is the
combat injury presumed, but so is the disability due to the in-service
combat injury. Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998-99 (Fed. Cir.
2012). Therefore, the veteran is not only competent to report an in-
service injury, but credible.
H.R. 1753 would provide eligible women veterans with the uniqueness
of presumption of a combat injury. In accordance with our Resolution
No. 010, DAV supports this bill, as it will ease barriers for women who
served in combat and assist them in establishing claims and appeals
within VBA and the Board of Veterans' Appeals.

H.R. 3790 - the Justice for ALS Veterans Act of 2023

The Justice for ALS Veterans Act would provide the survivors of
veterans who die of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the DIC
``kicker'' amount without meeting the eight-year time period
requirement.
Currently, title 38, United States Code, Section 1311(a)(2), allows
an additional DIC monthly payment of $331.84 to survivors in the case
of a veteran who at the time of death was in receipt of or was entitled
to receive compensation for a service-connected disability that was
rated totally disabling for a continuous period of at least eight years
immediately preceding death. This monetary installment is commonly
referred to as the DIC ``kicker.''
Studies have shown that veterans are twice as likely to develop ALS
as the general population. ALS is an aggressive disease that leaves
many veterans totally incapacitated and reliant on family members and
caregivers. VA already recognizes ALS as a presumptive service-
connected disease and due to its progressive nature, automatically
rates any diagnosed veteran at 100 percent disabled. Individuals
diagnosed with ALS have an average lifespan of between two to five
years. Sadly, many veterans are unable to meet DIC's eight-year
requirement.
In accordance with our Resolution No. 162, DAV supports the Justice
for ALS Veterans Act, which would provide these increased DIC payments
to surviving spouses of veterans who die from ALS, regardless of the
current eight-year period.
Earlier this year, our members sent over 24,000 emails to Congress
to elicit support for the Justice for ALS Veterans Act. We must ensure
veterans' survivors and their families receive the benefits they
deserve and are no longer penalized from receiving increased
compensation due to the fast progression of ALS.

H.R. 4016 - the Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act

The purpose of the VA Fiduciary Program, under VBA, is to protect
beneficiaries who are unable to manage their VA benefits. VBA appoints
fiduciaries to receive direct payments on behalf of beneficiaries and
disburse those funds for beneficiaries' care, support, welfare, and
needs. VA beneficiaries rely on their appointed fiduciaries to make
financial decisions in their best interests.
VA fiduciary staff provide oversight to help prevent fiduciaries
from misusing funds. Misuse occurs when a fiduciary spends a
beneficiary's benefit payments for something other than the ``use and
benefit'' of the beneficiary. Use and benefit is any expense reasonably
intended for the care, support, or maintenance of the beneficiary or
the beneficiary's dependents.
Currently when there are allegations and reports of misuse of funds
by the VA-appointed fiduciary, VA is required to investigate a VA
negligence determination during misuse determinations. The July 2021 VA
Office of the Inspector General (OIG) report found that in 40 cases,
beneficiaries faced significant wait times in the processing of misuse
determinations, an average of 228 days, negligence determinations, an
average of 468 days, and reimbursements of misused funds, an average of
426 days.
At the September 28, 2023, hearing of this Subcommittee, Lisa Van
Haeren, Director of Claims and Fiduciary Inspection Division in the
Office of Audits and Evaluations of the VA OIG, confirmed that
negligence determinations by the VA do not have a specified time period
and beneficiaries are waiting more than 400 days for reimbursement of
misused funds.
H.R. 4016 would amend title 38, United States Code, Section 6107,
by removing paragraph (a) ``Negligent Failure by Secretary.'' It would
further add, in any case in which a fiduciary misuse all or part of an
individual's benefits paid to a fiduciary, the Secretary would be
required to pay the beneficiary or the beneficiary's successor
fiduciary an amount equal to the amount of the benefit misused. In
addition, the bill would require the Secretary to make a good faith
effort to obtain recoupment from the fiduciary to whom the payment was
originally made.
H.R. 4016 would remove the requirements of negligent failures
investigations by the VA before an issuance is remitted. DAV supports
the Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act in accordance with our Resolution
No. 033, which calls for improvements to the VA Fiduciary Program.
Our most vulnerable, veterans and beneficiaries who have
fiduciaries, must be protected from fraud and misuse of their earned
benefits. When the fraud and misuse is discovered, VA needs to respond
with immediate repayment of those earned benefits.
Beneficiaries should never wait for more than a year for the
repayment of misused benefits. We are extremely concerned about the
financial hardships this creates for veterans and their families.

H.R. 4190 - the Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act

There are numerous reports of fraud and misuse by VA-appointed
fiduciaries. For example, the VBA FY 2022 Annual Report noted fraud and
misuse indicating that fiduciary personnel conducted 2,067 misuse
investigations, of which 817 fiduciaries were removed. Of the cases VA
referred to the VA OIG, 25 misuse cases were accepted by OIG for
further investigation.
Under current statute, title 38, United States Code, Section 6107,
if a veteran dies before their case with VA concerning misused funds by
the fiduciary is resolved, the veteran's family cannot seek
reimbursement for these funds.
The Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act would require VA
to reissue misused benefits to a beneficiary's estate in cases where
the beneficiary predeceased reissuance and would provide reissued
benefits to either the veteran's estate, successor, or next inheritor.
Most importantly, the Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act
would not allow the VA to make any reissuance to any family member who
was the fiduciary and was misusing the veteran's benefits.
DAV supports H.R. 4190, as it is in alignment with our Resolution
No. 095, which calls for meaningful claims reform. The Restoring
Benefits for Defrauded Veterans Act will not allow family members who
defrauded the veteran to receive any of the reissued benefits, which is
a significant reform to the claims process. However, DAV is concerned
about situations where the family member who misused funds is a part of
the estate and will still reap the benefits of the restored funds that
they originally misused.

H.R. 4306 - the Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act

H.R. 4306 would establish presumptive service connection for
certain diseases for veterans who were trained in fire suppression and
served on active duty with a military occupational specialty or career
field with a primary responsibility for firefighting or damage control
for at least five years. Additionally, it would require that the
disease be at a 10 percent degree or more within 15 years of the
veteran's separating from active military service.

The diseases that would be presumed due to firefighting are
listed as:

Heart disease;

Lung disease;

Brain cancer;

Cancer of the blood or lymphatic systems;

Leukemia;

Lymphoma (except Hodgkin's disease);

Multiple myeloma;

Bladder cancer;

Kidney cancer;

Cancer of the reproductive system (including
testicular cancer);

Cancer of the digestive system;

Colon cancer;

Liver cancer;

Skin cancer;

Lung cancer; and

Breast cancer.

On December 23, 2022, the Federal Firefighter Fairness Act was
signed into law. It creates the presumption that federal firefighters
who become disabled by serious diseases, including heart disease, lung
disease, certain cancers, and other infectious diseases, contracted the
illness on the job. This law is similar to the legislation being
discussed here today and is based mostly on exposures to perfluoroalkyl
and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), man-made chemicals found in
fire-fighting foams (or aqueous film forming foam; AFFF). However, to
date, neither VA nor Congress has conceded exposure to PFAS chemicals
found in the drinking supply of over 700 military installations.
DAV, a resolution-based organization, does not have a specific
resolution for this legislation and we take no position on H.R. 4306.
However, we do have some concerns, thus our recommendations below:

1. Remove the restrictions for exposure and disease
development. The ``Firefighters' occupational exposure:
Contribution from biomarkers of effect to assess health
risks,'' study published in the Environmental International,
Volume 156, in November 2021, does not cite a required amount
of exposure or a timeline for diseases to be manifested. Also,
the ongoing ``Fire Fighter Cancer Cohort Study,'' which started
in 2016, and aims to collect cancer-related information from US
firefighters over 30 years, has not yet yielded any results
based on required exposure timeframes or disease manifestation.

The 2018 National Defense Authorization Act authorized the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Agency
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), both
agencies of the of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, to conduct exposure assessments in communities known
to have had PFAS. The study did not provide any time
requirements for exposure or time for the diseases to develop.
Additionally, the 2022 National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) report, Guidance on PFAS
Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up, found no time
restrictions for exposure or disease development.

It is evident that the time requirement of at least five years
as a firefighter and all diseases must be manifested within 15
years are not based on the current findings of the scientific
community. Therefore, we recommend that these restrictions be
removed from this presumptive legislation. These restrictions
will greatly limit the number of veterans who will be eligible
for the same exposures and diseases except to an arbitrary time
not based on science.

2. Include PFAS exposure at all military bases with
contaminated water supplies. DAV strongly believes that if
there is legislation to address PFAS exposure for firefighters,
it must include the PFAS exposure in the contaminated water
supplies at potentially more than 700 military installations as
well. The previously noted NASEM report found suggestive
evidence of an association with PFAS exposure and increased
risk of breast cancer; liver enzyme alterations; increased risk
of pregnancy-induced hypertension; increased risk of testicular
cancer; thyroid disease and dysfunction and increased risk of
ulcerative colitis.

The men and women exposed to toxins, whether as a firefighter or
through exposure and consumption of contaminated water supplies, must
be a priority to ensure they have the benefits and health care they
have earned.

H.R. 5559 - the Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act

The Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act would provide needed
clarity on Supplemental Claims and specifically, VA's regulatory
provision of 38, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 3.2501. This
would direct VA to accept any Supplemental Claim within one year of the
VA decision in question, based on the evidence of record and not
require New and Relevant evidence. Conversely, it points to any
Supplemental Claim received after the one-year timeframe of the VA
decision in question and would require New and Relevant evidence.
The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) provided the Supplemental
Claims section as well as the requirement for New and Relevant
evidence. However, the VA regulations do not clarify on the application
thereof and has created confusion within VA and the regulation is not
following the Congressional intent of Supplemental Claims and the
requirement for New and Relevant evidence.
Additionally, H.R. 5559 would require a change regarding remanded
cases from the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), that
evidentiary record before the Board should ``include evidence submitted
by the appellant and his or her representative, if any, within 90 days
following such remand, which the Board shall consider in the first
instance.''
Without the ability to supplement the record after a Court remand,
the veteran is forced to wait until after a decision from the Board to
provide favorable evidence that may have changed the outcome of the
Board's decision. Currently, the Board's AMA remand rate of appeals is
near 40 percent. Allowing for post-Court remand evidence to be
submitted in support of a veteran's Board appeal should serve to reduce
the AMA remand rate.
In accordance with our Resolution No. 095, DAV supports the
Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act, as it will provide VA with
needed clarity for Supplemental Claims and allow the Board to take
jurisdiction over evidence submitted to the Court subsequent to a
remand decision. H.R. 5559 will provide the required reforms to ensure
the VA and the Board are adjudicating decisions and accessing evidence
in the best interest of veterans and their families.

H.R. 5890 - the Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

The Review Every Veterans Claim Act would limit the VA's authority
to deny a veteran's claim solely based on the veteran's failure to
appear for a medical examination associated with the claim.
Currently, title 38, United States Code, section 5103A (d)
paragraph (2) provides, ``the Secretary shall treat an examination or
opinion as being necessary to make a decision on a claim for
purposes....'' This requirement usually results in VBA denying a
veteran's claim if they did not attend the requested examination, even
if the rest of the evidence of record contains service medical records,
private medical records and lay statements from the veteran.
H.R. 5890 would strike that language from the statute and replace
it with ``provide for a medical examination or obtain a medical
opinion.'' Additionally, this legislation would add a new paragraph to
the statute, ``If a veteran fails to appear for a medical examination
provided by the Secretary in conjunction with a claim for a benefit
under a law administered by the Secretary, the Secretary may not deny
such claim on the sole basis that such veteran failed to appear for
such medical examination.''
Not only would these statutory amendments impact claims for service
connection, but would apply to all claims for a benefit under VA's
jurisdiction. We agree with this change, as in most claims for increase
in an existing disability, VA will deny an increased evaluation solely
on the missed examination. Although the evidence of record may contain
sufficient evidence for the increased evaluation, VBA will deny based
on the failure to appear. Additionally, this would be applied to other
benefits claims such as Total Disability Based on Individual
Unemployability (TDIU) and Aid and Attendance (A&A).
In accordance with our Resolution No. 095, DAV supports the Review
Every Veterans Claim Act, as this is meaningful and significant reform
to the duty to assist. As it was allowing VBA to deny a claim based
solely on a missed examination, we argue that it is interfering with
the veteran's due process of a claim. Thousands of veterans' claims for
service connection, claims for increase and for other benefits such as
TDIU and A&A are denied solely on the basis of the missed examination.
We look forward to the passage of the Review Every Veterans Claim Act
and the positive impact it will have for veterans.

H.R. 5891 - the Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity Act

Effective February 19, 2019, the AMA was a historic overhaul of
VA's appeals process. It provides claimants with three paths after a
final VA decision, a supplemental claim, a higher-level review and an
appeal directly to the Board, a Notice of Disagreement.
Additional changes brought by the AMA are specific to the
submission of evidence when establishing a Notice of Disagreement to
the Board. The choices at this stage include:

A direct review by the Board without a hearing or the
submission of additional evidence.

A review by the Board including additional evidence that
must be submitted within 90 days from the date of the Notice of
Disagreement.

A hearing with a Veterans Law Judge at the Board with the
opportunity to submit additional evidence within 90 days after the
hearing was held.

If additional evidence is received outside of those time periods,
the Board cannot review or use that evidence in their decisions and is
not required to note the receipt of such evidence in their decision.
This creates confusion for veterans, VSOs, attorneys and claims agents
as to when the evidence was received, why it was not considered and who
has jurisdiction over said evidence.
The Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity Act would require the Board to
identify the time the evidence was received and acknowledge they cannot
use it in their determination. Additionally, it would require the Board
to state the adequacy and timeliness of the Notice of Disagreement.
In accordance with our Resolution No. 095, DAV supports H.R. 5891,
which calls for meaningful appeals reform by clarifying the evidence
received outside of the mandated timeframes and that it cannot be used
by the Board. The Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity Act will help to
reduce confusion over evidence submitted during the appeals process. We
acknowledge this will increase the requirements of Veteran Law Judges
and attorneys in decision writing; however, it will further reform the
appeals process while removing doubt of what evidence was considered or
why it was not considered, thus providing veterans, VSOs, attorneys and
claims agents with clarity on their potential next steps.

H.R. 5938--the Veterans Exam Expansion Act of 2023

The Veterans Exam Expansion Act would positively impact VA contract
examinations for veterans' disability claims as it would expand license
portability. In our testimony before this Subcommittee in July 2023, we
recommended extending and expanding these authorities.
Enacted in 2016, Public Law 114-315, section 109, ``Improvements To
Authority For Performance Of Medical Disabilities Examinations By
Contract Physicians,'' notes that a physician may conduct an
examination pursuant to a contract, at any location in any state, the
District of Columbia, or a Commonwealth, territory, or possession of
the United States, so long as the examination is within the scope of
the authorized duties under such contract. A physician is defined as
one who has a current unrestricted license to practice the health care
profession of physician.
This allows contract exam vendors to provide examining physicians
to rural areas that may not have examining physicians available in
their state or territory. The provision speaks only to physicians and
psychiatrists; however, it did not include other licensed health care
professionals such as nurse practitioners, clinical psychologists, and
other clinical health care professionals that are qualified to conduct
VA examinations.
In January 2021, the Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans
Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020, granted certain types
of VBA-contracted examiners temporary authority for three years, until
January 2024, to conduct exams in states other than those in which they
hold a license.
The GAO report of June 2023, ``Actions Needed to Clarify Program
Requirements Regarding Examiners,'' looked specifically at this
temporary portability used by contracted examiners. VBA officials and
vendors said that the temporary expansion of license portability
expanded access in underserved areas.
The report noted that the guidelines VBA provided to its contracted
exam vendors included inaccuracies and VBA conducted inadequate
monitoring of the vendors. This contributed to vendors allowing
ineligible examiners to conduct exams using license portability. For
example, VBA incorrectly listed dentists as eligible for license
portability in the guidelines it provided to vendors. This contributed
to two of VBA's three vendors using dentists to conduct exams in states
other than where they were licensed.
Additionally, GAO's review found that one vendor used optometrists
to conduct exams in states other than where they were licensed, which
VBA officials said was not permitted. VBA acknowledged these errors and
agreed with the GAO recommendations for correction.
The report also showcases the impact of the expanded license
portability. Vendors were able to send examiners to rural and high-need
areas that did not have enough examiners to meet local demand. One
vendor said license portability allowed them to continue serving
veterans when natural disasters disrupted the availability of examiners
in the affected states. For example, this vendor reported using license
portability to send mobile clinics to Florida following Hurricane Ian
in September 2022.
Another vendor said license portability helped them serve more
veterans living on tribal lands. All three vendors said expanded
license portability helped them serve incarcerated veterans. Officials
from one vendor said reaching these veterans historically has posed a
challenge because not all examiners are willing to physically enter a
prison, and license portability allowed them to use examiners willing
to do so.
In July 2023, information from VBA's Medical Disability Examination
Office indicated that this license portability expansion in January
2021 had resulted in 1,462 providers completing over 150,000 medical
appointments and nearly 425,000 disability benefits questionnaires
(DBQs). The provision of license portability has had a positive impact
for veterans living in rural areas and tribal lands, and for
incarcerated veterans, all while assisting in reducing the backlog of
exams, which has a direct impact on the backlog of claims.
H.R. 5938 would expand the license portability for psychologists,
podiatrists, dentists and optometrists as well as extend the authority
from three years to five years, now expiring in January 2026.
DAV strongly supports the Veterans Exam Expansion Act, which will
provide VA exams in all areas, specifically for rural and underserved
veteran populations. Additionally, it addresses the deficiencies noted
by the GAO report and will enable VA and contract examiners to provide
more exams to more veterans than ever before. However, as we noted in
our testimony of July 2023, we recommend that the license portability
be made permanent and that all medical professionals that are able to
conduct VA exams within the Veterans Health Administration be included
in the permanent extension of license portability.

Draft Bill - the Veteran Appeals Transparency Act of 2023

The Veteran Appeals Transparency Act would amend Title 38 United
States Code section 5104C(a) language to make it consistent with VA's
interpretation in their regulatory provision of 38 Code of Federal
Regulations Section 3.2500.
Additionally, the Veteran Appeals Transparency Act would require
``[o]n a weekly basis, for each docket, the Board shall publish the
docket dates of the cases assigned to a Board member for a decision for
that week.''
In accordance with our Resolution No. 095, DAV supports the Veteran
Appeals Transparency Act. The changes in language will provide
consistency between the statute and regulatory provisions, resulting in
more reliable and consistent VA decisions and appeals. By requiring the
Board of Veterans' Appeals to weekly publish docket dates of cases
being worked, this provides veterans, their families and
representatives with greater understanding and transparency as to the
status of the pending appeal, not to mention it will help Congress hold
the Board accountable concerning appealed cases.
This concludes my testimony on behalf of DAV. I am happy to answer
any questions you or members of the Subcommittee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Quandrea Patterson

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars of the United States (VFW) and its Auxiliary, thank you for the
opportunity to provide our remarks on legislation pending before this
subcommittee.

H.R. 1753, Jax Act

The VFW supports this legislation to ensure that certain members of
the armed forces who served in female cultural support teams receive
proper credit for such service. A part of our organization's mission is
to foster camaraderie among United States veterans of overseas
conflicts. This aligns with the goal that the special operations forces
had in 2010 when a female cultural support team was implemented to
bridge a communication gap that prevented the maximization of strategic
objectives during counterinsurgency in Iraq and Afghanistan. However,
the Department of Defense 1994 Direct Ground Combat Definition and
Assignment Rule created a barrier that would not allow the combat
characterization assignment for females. The decision to implement
these teams in Iraq and Afghanistan combat operations paved the way for
a major change in this rule that integrated females into combat roles.
Today, covered service is not classified as combat service. In some
instances, this has a negative impact on the favorable awards of
service-connected disability compensation and benefits. This
legislation would allow the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) to treat
covered service as combat service and grant service-connected
compensation and certain benefits when female veterans who participated
in combat operations claim traumatic brain injuries, post-traumatic
stress, and disabling physical trauma. It is unjust that the members of
female cultural support teams, who facilitated a major change in combat
roles, should be denied the full benefits they deserve from their
hazardous duty experiences.

H.R. 3790, Justice for ALS Veterans Act of 2023

The VFW supports this legislation. VA considers amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) a presumptive service-connected disease and, due to its
progressive nature, automatically rates any diagnosed veteran at 100
percent once service connected. If a veteran with service-connected ALS
then dies, the surviving spouse is eligible to receive Dependency and
Indemnity Compensation (DIC). In cases where a veteran had a VA
disability rating of totally disabled with ALS for at least eight full
years leading up to death and was married during those same eight
years, the surviving spouse is then entitled to an additional monthly
payment called the DIC kicker. A surviving spouse should be entitled to
the eight-year provision regardless of how long the veteran had ALS.
Taking into consideration the full-time care often needed for a person
diagnosed with ALS and that the average life expectancy following
diagnosis is from two to five years, we see this as an important
addition for these survivors.

H.R. 4016, Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act and H.R. 4190, Restoring
Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act

The VFW supports both bills that seek to restore benefits to
veterans and their families who are victims of abuse or fraud by
fiduciaries. The Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) appoints
fiduciaries on behalf of veterans who are unable to manage their
financial affairs due to injury, disease, age, or other reasons. It
also investigates reports of fiduciary misuse of these funds. According
to a July 2021 Office of Inspector General (OIG) report, from January
1, 2018, through September 30, 2019, VBA staff initiated approximately
12,000 allegations of misused benefits by fiduciaries.
Historically, VA could make automatic repayments only to veterans
defrauded by their fiduciaries in certain cases. A provision within the
Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits
Improvement Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-315) intended to correct this
inequity and allow for automatic reimbursement in all instances of
fiduciary fraud. An unintended consequence of this provision was that
it created a requirement for VBA to make a negligence determination and
for VA to investigate its own culpability in all cases of fiduciary
misuse before reissuing payments to the beneficiaries. This has created
an unnecessary and time-consuming process as VA's role in the
appointment of the fiduciary or its lack of proper oversight does not
change the outcome for the veteran.
The OIG report identified significant wait times for beneficiaries
and delays in repayments. Of the forty cases reviewed, it took an
average of 228 days for VBA to complete the misuse determinations. Some
cases took a year or longer. It also cited that negligence
determinations were a key inefficiency in the reimbursement process. VA
negligence determinations should never delay veterans from receiving
their reimbursements, as this could potentially create significant
financial hardship for an already vulnerable population.
Additionally, we support the provision to ensure whenever the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs determines repayment of those funds must
be issued to the veteran, but the veteran has passed away, the funds
would be paid to the veteran's estate. These benefits may be critical
for the veteran's surviving spouse, next of kin, or caregiver.

H.R. 4306, Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act

The VFW supports this proposal to establish presumptions of service
connection for diseases associated with firefighting. Many military
firefighters report the use of aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF) in
firefighting and training operations, and the presence of per-and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in bunker gear. Our members who
served as military firefighters reported continuous exposure to AFFF
during training and face a significant occupational risk due to the
health hazards associated with these chemicals.
We have suggestions to expand and improve the language of this
legislation so all veterans exposed to these chemicals are provided the
care and benefits they have earned. We believe the five-year experience
requirement as a firefighter is too long. For these individuals, one
exposure alone could cause harm. Additionally, there should not be a
time limit for when the veteran can file a claim as many of these
conditions manifest years after exposure. This legislation is
incredibly important to prevent AFFF/PFAS from becoming another
situation, like Blue Water Navy or Camp Lejeune, in which veterans
became sick and died waiting decades for their conditions to be
properly recognized and appropriately treated.

H.R. 5559, Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act

The VFW supports the intent of H.R. 5559, and thanks Chairman Bost
for what he is trying to achieve with this legislation. Far too many
cases submitted in this category are left lingering with a ``no
decision'' classification on Appeals Modernization Act reports. We
believe the change of evidence threshold as written is too vague, and
we are concerned about the unintended consequence of further adding to
the appeals backlog. As VA works to streamline appeals processes and to
ensure staff is knowledgeable and trained in the complex areas involved
with some appeals, every effort must be made to provide veterans
suffering from service-connected disabilities with the compensation
they deserve. The retroactive component of this legislation is
applauded along with the other aspects that protect veterans as they
navigate this daunting process. The VFW is committed to working with
Chairman Bost's committee staff to clarify the intent of this bill.

Discussion Draft, Veteran Appeals Decision of Clarity Act

The VFW seeks further explanation on this legislation to amend
title 38, United States Code, to improve decisions issued by the Board
of Veterans' Appeals (BVA). This seeks to complete the communication
from BVA to the veteran, making all aspects of the decision clear. To
ensure that the full intent of the legislation is realized,
clarification of lines 23-25 is requested with reference to Section
7105 paragraph (1) of subsection (b). Specifically, a notice of
disagreement or modern-day appeal to BVA via VA Form 10182 should be
addressed prior to docketing of the claim at BVA. Therefore,
referencing either after a decision has been made is irrelevant and
cannot benefit the veteran. To wait until there is a BVA decision to
learn that a notice of disagreement was inadequate or untimely only
delays the opportunity for compliance or correction. This legislation
should provide the veteran with recourse to address deficiencies in a
timely manner prior to a final decision.

Discussion Draft, Veteran Appeals Transparency Act of 2023

The VFW seeks further clarification on this legislation to make
certain improvements to the processing of claims for benefits under the
laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the
transparency of BVA. This amendment is a positive clarifying change
that provides guidance in actions that can be taken by the veteran.
Although generally understood, this legislation amplifies options along
with other resources and aids such as the VA appeals status tool. This
calls for weekly publications of expected actions on each docket. The
VFW believes that publishing claims that are docketed at BVA is not
informative unless supporting information indicates the number of
claims being decided during that period. Monthly publications as
opposed to weekly should be considered and may be sufficient.
Otherwise, it gives the impression that a much sooner decision is
forthcoming. Further, there needs to be education on the fact that this
is not a first in, first out process. If clarity reveals that the
publishing of claims docketed for decisions each week implies that they
will receive decisions that week, then it is exceptional and welcomed
information to provide the public. These considerations would help
fulfill the intent of transparency in this legislation.

Discussion Draft, Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

The VFW supports this legislation to amend title 38, United States
Code, to limit the authority of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to
deny the claim of a veteran for benefits on the sole basis of failure
to appear for a medical examination. VA has made significant
improvements to ensure filing for service-connected disability
compensation is easier for veterans. However, one major difficulty that
remains is the practice of denying benefits due to a missed medical
examination. Veterans miss appointments for many reasons and would
benefit from a process that does not place so much emphasis on this
aspect. This legislation is a step in the right direction for continued
improvements.
The VFW has worked with countless veterans who had to reapply for
benefits because they missed examination appointments. Restarting a VA
claim simply because of this is burdensome and unnecessary. We
recommend that if an appointment is missed, then the file should go
back into the queue in a type of hold that can be reactivated later.
This would allow the veteran to restart the claim process from that
point instead of starting over from the beginning.

Discussion Draft, Veterans Exam Expansion Act of 2023

The VFW supports this bill that amends previous legislation to
improve the temporary licensure requirements for contract health
professionals who perform medical disability examinations for VA.
Veterans deserve the best care possible, but not at the expense of
timely service. It is important to develop an examination process that
is proficient and well serves veterans with service-connected
disabilities. Recent highlights in Government Accountability Office
reports recommend changes that would produce better results with the
practice of license portability. With well-developed procedures
accompanied by proper oversight and clear guidance on the execution of
this practice, the extension of license portability to include
psychologist, podiatrist, dentist, or optometrist would be instrumental
in the processing of PACT Act claims and all service-connected claims
going forward. Recommendations including reporting requirements that
measure the success of amendments proposed in this legislation would
allow VBA to continue with appointments at a faster rate to the benefit
of veterans.
Chairman Luttrell, this concludes my testimony. Again, the VFW
thanks you and Ranking Member Pappas for the opportunity to testify on
these important issues before this subcommittee. I am prepared to take
any questions you or the subcommittee members may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, the VFW has
not received any Federal grants in Fiscal Year 2023, nor has it
received any federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.

The VFW has not received payments or contracts from any foreign
governments in the current year or preceding two calendar years.
______

Prepared Statement of Zachary Stolz

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting Chisholm Chisholm & Kilpatrick LTD (CCK) to
testify at today's legislative hearing of the Subcommittee on
Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs.
CCK is a public interest law firm, with offices in Providence,
Rhode Island and Houston, Texas. We serve clients across the Nation
focusing on veterans disability compensation, bequest management, and
long-term disability insurance claims. Since 1999, CCK has represented
thousands of veterans and family members before VA and the U.S. Court
of Appeals for Veterans Claims. CCK has the most VA-accredited
attorneys, practitioners, and claims agents of any law firm in the
United States. The firm has been involved in legislative processes and
landmark, precedent-setting cases that have benefited the entire
veterans' community.
We are pleased to offer our views on these bills impacting service-
disabled veterans and their families.

H.R. 1753: Jax Act

H.R. 1753 is an important step in recognizing the honorable service
of women veterans who deployed alongside Special Forces in Iraq and
Afghanistan, expanding operational and intelligence-gathering
capabilities. These veterans shared combat experiences with their male
counterparts.
By acknowledging combat service for the women who served as members
of Cultural Support Teams, H.R. 1753 would positively impact their
ability to establish entitlement to VA benefits.
In cases where a veteran asserts service connection for an injury
or disease incurred or aggravated in combat, 38 U.S.C. Sec.  1154(b)
and its implementing regulation, 38 C.F.R. Sec.  3.304(d) (2023),
apply. These provisions ease the evidentiary burden on combat veterans
because VA must accept as sufficient proof of service connection
satisfactory lay or other evidence of service incurrence, if the lay or
other evidence is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or
hardships of such service.
H.R. 1753 would provide these veterans with the appropriate combat
presumptions already articulated in statute, regulation, and caselaw.

H.R. 5890: Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

The Review Every Veterans Claim Act would limit VA's authority to
deny a veteran's claim solely based on the veteran's failure to appear
for a medical examination associated with the claim.
Thousands of veterans' claims are denied only because the veteran
missed a VA examination. In our experience, many of these scheduled
examinations are unnecessary to adjudicate the claims. Yet, 38 U.S.C.
Sec.  5103A(d)(2) currently says that ``[t]he Secretary shall treat an
examination or opinion as being necessary to make a decision on a claim
for purposes....'' This requirement often results in VA regional
offices and the Board denying veterans' claims if they did not attend
the requested examination, even if the comprehensive record before the
VA contains other evidence, including service and private examination
reports, supportive of the claim.
The Review Every Veterans Claim Act would strike that language from
the statute and replace it with ``provide for a medical examination or
obtain a medical opinion.'' Additionally, this legislation would add a
new paragraph to the statute: ``If a veteran fails to appear for a
medical examination provided by the Secretary in conjunction with a
claim for a benefit under a law administered by the Secretary, the
Secretary may not deny such claim on the sole basis that such veteran
failed to appear for such medical examination.''
These changes would be enormously helpful to veterans seeking VA
benefits. Many claimants have already submitted reams of medical
evidence, testimony, service records, etc. It serves no purpose for VA
to deny claims simply because of a missed VA examination, especially
when the evidence is otherwise sufficient to grant a claim.

HR 5938: Veterans Exam Expansion Act of 2023

The Veterans Exam Expansion Act would positively impact VA contract
examinations for veterans' disability claims. It would expand the
license portability for psychologists, podiatrists, dentists, and
optometrists as well as extend the authority from three years to five
years--now expiring in January 2026.
This will give veterans greater access to expert evidence
substantiating their claims. This is particularly important under the
Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA)
because the role of examinations and examiners is heightened due to the
need for new and relevant evidence to begin the claims process or
continue an option of review in the appeals process. Moreover, the
supplemental claim lane has become the most popular selection for
veterans seeking benefits due to a host of reasons, including the
dramatic delays for appeals adjudication at the Board of Veterans'
Appeals. The PACT Act has also expanded the need for Toxic Exposure
Risk Activity examinations. The more professionals VA has on board to
serve our veterans, the more streamlined claims processing can be.

H.R. 5891: Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity Act

Under the AMA, claimants submit their notices of disagreement
directly to the Board, rather than to the regional office. See 38
C.F.R. Sec.  20.203(a) (2023). This is a change from the Legacy system.
See 38 C.F.R. Sec.  20.300 (2018). A recent case before the Court of
Appeals for Veterans Claims, Kernz v. McDonough, demonstrates that the
Board managed this change by having ``administrative
professional[s]''--not Board members--review and determine the
timeliness of NODs. Vet.App. No. 20-2365, Secretary's Response to
Request for Class Certification and Class Action, Exhibit J p. 2 (filed
5/17/21). If the administrative professional determined that the NOD
was untimely, VA sent a letter signed by the Vice Chairman notifying
the claimant that the appeal would not be docketed. Id.
Unfortunately, however, the administrative professionals'
timeliness determinations were often wrong. The result is that the
Board erroneously failed to docket the timely appeals of an estimated
2,000 claimants. Vet.App. No. 20-2365, Request for Class Certification,
p. 5-6 (filed 2/5/21).
Mr. Kernz sought to remedy this by appealing the untimeliness
notice he received from the Board to the Veterans Court and requesting
the Court certify a class of similarly situated claimants. While Mr.
Kenz's appeal was pending before the Veterans Court, the Board took
corrective action in his case and docketed his appeal. However, though
it was undisputed that other claimants were also wrongly denied their
right to a decision by the Board, the Board refused to identify those
claimants and take corrective action in those individual claims.
According to the Board, it would be too burdensome to identify these
claimants. Due to its inadequate mechanisms for tracking the notice
letters, it would have to manually identify the claimants who received
the letters. Therefore, instead of identifying the injured claimants,
the Board published a notice on its website inviting claimants to
contact the Board if they received notice and believed it was wrong.
In its decision earlier this month, the Court dismissed Mr. Kernz's
appeal as moot because the Board had taken corrective action and
docketed his individual appeal. See Kernz,--Vet.App.--, 2023 WL
6459373, *7-9 (Oct. 4, 2023). And it refused to certify the class,
citing the mootness of Mr. Kernz's appeal. Id. at *12-13. So, the many
claimants who were adversely affected by the Board's plainly erroneous
actions remain without a remedy, short of identifying the error by
themselves and asking the Board to docket their appeals.
This case demonstrates the necessity of passing this Act. It would
ensure that Board members no longer delegate their responsibility to
make decisions on all issues presented on appeal--including the
timeliness of an NOD--to ``administrative professionals.'' Claimants
would be entitled to a ``written determination of the Board whether the
notice of disagreement was adequate and timely filed under section 7105
of [Title 38].'' While this imposes an additional responsibility on the
Board, it will result in a more complete decision from that body. This
will place claimants in a better position to understand the decision
and the rights it confers on them.

H.R. 5559: Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act

This Act contains a vital change regarding remanded cases from the
Veterans Court in 38 U.S.C. Sec.  7113 proposed subsection (d). It
would require the evidentiary record before the Board to ``include
evidence submitted by the appellant and his or her representative, if
any, within 90 days following such remand, which the Board shall
consider in the first instance.''
This change is important because in the AMA, veterans are currently
sent back to the lane from which they originally appealed, without the
ability to supplement the record. This is harmful because veterans have
already waited years to have their day in Court. Without the ability to
supplement the record after a Court remand, the claimant will be forced
to wait until after a decision from the Board to provide favorable
evidence that may have changed the outcome of the Board's decision.
Moreover, the benefit that claimants were supposed to receive in
exchange for losing the Board's assistance in developing evidence was a
significantly lower Board remand rate. Yet, VA's own metrics document
that the Board's remand rate in AMA is close to 40 percent, which
remains much higher than anticipated. Allowing for post-Court remand
evidence to be submitted in support of a claimant's Board appeal should
serve to reduce the AMA remand rate. This is especially critical
because Board remands in AMA further harm veterans, who are forced to
file new appeals to the Board if those remands are denied by the
regional office. When veterans file appeals again to the Board, they no
longer retain their docket numbers before the Board, but are assigned
new docket numbers. This means their appeals go to the back of the line
for adjudication. So, the veterans fighting the longest are put in the
position of waiting the longest, too.
In the spirit of the choice and control the AMA provides veterans,
veterans should be able to have a Board member decide their appeals
without having to start over. The Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act
is a critical correction to ensure veterans are not harmed by the AMA.

Discussion Draft: Veteran Appeals Transparency Act

This Act contains an important provision for veterans and their
advocates to increase understanding of where claims are in the Board of
Veterans' Appeals process. Requiring that ``[o]n a weekly basis, for
each docket, the Board shall publish the docket dates of the cases
assigned to a Board member for a decision for that week'' will allow
for greater understanding and oversight of the Board's progress in
working its docket.
CCK spent months pursuing a writ of mandamus from the Veterans
Court in Gray v. McDonough, 36 Vet.App. 117 (2023). While the petition
ultimately became moot, it is telling that it took the Secretary's
counsel months--and several Court orders--to provide basic information
about how it was adjudicating cases in compliance with the laws
governing docket order. Should this Act become law, it will help
Congress hold the Board accountable and allow for veterans and
advocates to have much needed information concerning where cases are in
the appeals process.

H.R. 4016: Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act

The proposed amendments to 38 U.S.C. Sec.  6107 are important to
making whole a veteran who has been abused by the fraudulent practices
of a fiduciary. Veterans who require the assistance of a fiduciary to
manage their funds are, by definition, vulnerable. Often, investigation
into fraud is a slow process, which can delay the remedy required to
make the victim of the harm whole. This Act prioritizes providing a
remedy to the veteran over a determination of whether VA was at fault.
These solution-focused revisions are an important step in making
defrauded veterans whole. Unfortunately, fraud perpetrated against
veterans is prevalent especially as it relates to acquisition of
benefits. We support measures aimed at reducing and eliminating fraud
perpetrated against veterans and their families in the veterans
benefits arena, especially those directed toward actors illegally
charging fees or misusing funds belonging to veterans.

H.R. 4190: Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act

This Act recognizes the harm claimants experience at the hands of
fraudulent actors and provides additional recourse than currently
exists to make them whole. The addition of proposed section (c), to
reissue amounts when the beneficiary has predeceased resolution, is an
important step in redirecting those funds appropriately.

CONCLUSION

Thank you again for allowing us to present our views on this
important legislation. If you have questions or would like to request
additional information, please feel free to contact:

Zachary M. Stolz, Esq.
Partner
Chisholm Chisholm & Kilpatrick LTD
321 S Main St #200
Providence, RI 02903
[emailprotected]

401-331-6300

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of American Veterans (AMVETS)

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and Members of the House
Committee on Veterans Affairs, Subcommittee on Disability Assistance
and Memorial Affairs, AMVETS appreciates the opportunity to present you
with our views on proposed legislation in the House.
As the largest veteran service organization open to all who have
honorably served, we are dedicated to pursuing those issues that stand
to improve the quality of life for our nation's servicemembers,
veterans, and their survivors. AMVETS works tirelessly to address these
important concerns, and we are proud to provide our input on the
legislation included in today's legislative hearing. We thank the
Subcommittee for their consideration.

Regarding Surviving Spouses

AMVETS is a service organization dedicated to veterans,
servicemembers, and their families. As such, we as an organization
unequivocally stand behind our surviving spouses who have lost their
partners in the line of duty or due to service-connected conditions. We
pursue numerous efforts on their behalf in full recognition of their
immense and irreplaceable sacrifices.
AMVETS supports H.R. 3790 - Justice for ALS Veterans Act of 2023.
AMVETS recognizes the need to extend increased dependency and indemnity
compensation (DIC) compensation to those whose spouses died due to
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Regardless of how long a veteran or
servicemember suffered from this ailment, this service-connected
disability must be included among other recognized conditions eligible
for DIC payments upon their passing.

Regarding Disability Exam Expansion

AMVETS supports the Veteran Exam Expansion Act of 2023. AMVETS has
heard from its membership and other trusted partners that there is a
significant wait time for active duty servicemembers to receive
compensation and pension exams to determine service-connected
disabilities. Reducing these wait times and helping veterans complete
their disability exams would allow new veterans to get their disability
determinations, access to medical care, and compensation faster. Our
nation's veterans deserve speedy, efficient processes to provide them
with the benefits they earned.

Regarding Issues of Fraud

AMVETS remains concerned about the increasing number of fraud cases
related to veterans' benefits, claims, fiduciaries, and other relevant
circumstances. As such, AMVETS has made numerous strides to educate and
alert veterans to potential scams and fraudulent activity by immoral
actors. Protecting our veterans and their earned benefits continues to
be a top priority of our organization.
AMVETS supports H.R. 4016 - Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act. AMVETS
believes that in cases involving a fiduciary misusing a veteran's
benefits and related compensation, the VA must pay the beneficiary or
the beneficiary's successor fiduciary the same amount that was misused.
The VA must also investigate any misuse of funds by fiduciaries,
holding them accountable for their actions and combating negligence
within the Department of Veterans Affairs.
AMVETS supports H.R. 4190 - Restoring Benefits to Defrauded
Veterans Act. AMVETS supports the repayment of certain benefits to the
estates of deceased beneficiaries whose benefits were misused by
fiduciaries. Our organization believes that inheritors and successor
fiduciaries are entitled to these benefits.

Regarding Presumptive Conditions

AMVETS played a major role in the passage of the PACT Act last
year, a monumental law that compensates veterans impacted by service-
connected toxic exposure. Similar to this effort, AMVETS continues to
support the recognition of further conditions that impact
servicemembers, both presumptive to their service and following their
service experiences.
H.R. 4306 - Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act.
AMVETS supports this bill that would establish presumptions of service
connection for diseases associated with firefighting. Such conditions
included in this bill severely impact the quality of life for these
veterans and should be acknowledged as service-connected.

Regarding Transparency in VA Claims, Appeals, and Other Processes

AMVETS supports H.R. 5559, the Protecting Veterans Claim Options
Act, Chairman Luttrell's Review Every Veterans Claim Act, Chairman
Luttrell's Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity Act, and Representative
Self's Veteran Appeals Transparency Act. These bills work toward more
transparent processes within the Department of Veterans Affairs,
boosting accountability and accessibility for all of our nation's
veterans. AMVETS believes that each veteran's claim must be granted the
attention it deserves, and any further VA action with claims, appeals,
or similar processes should be clearly communicated to impacted
veterans.

Other Legislation

H.R. 1753 - Jax Act. This bill seeks to properly credit members of
the military who served in female cultural support teams. AMVETS
supports the recognition of these servicemembers given their
exceptional service to the United States.

Conclusion

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I would like to thank you once again for the opportunity
to provide commentary on these issues that impact AMVETS' membership,
active duty service members, American veterans, and their surviving
family members. As Congress continues its oversight of the Department
of Veterans Affairs and works with the VA to address these concerns, it
will be imperative to remember that this legislation will help improve
the lives of millions of individuals who have dedicated their lives to
defending our country. AMVETS looks forward to continuing to contribute
to this conversation and keeping the interest of our veterans and the
military-connected community at the forefront of national discourse.
Thank you.

Executive Director Joseph Chenelly

Joseph R. Chenelly was appointed national executive director of the
nation's fourth-largest veterans service organization in May 2016. In
this capacity, he administers the policies of AMVETS, supervises its
national headquarters operations, and provides direction, as needed, to
state and local components. Joe previously served as AMVETS' national
communications director.
Joe Chenelly is the first veteran of combat operations in
Afghanistan and Iraq to lead one of the nation's four largest veterans
service organizations' staffs. A native of Rochester, N.Y., Joe
enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps in 1998, serving with the 1st Marine
Division, and was honorably discharged as a Staff Sergeant in April
2006. He is a combat veteran of Operation Enduring Freedom and
Operation Iraqi Freedom, having served in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq,
Kuwait, East Timor, and the Horn of Africa.
Joe became a veterans' advocate, a journalist, and a political
adviser after his time in uniform. He covered military and veterans
matters on staff with Leatherneck magazine, the Military Times
newspapers, USA TODAY, and Gannet News, reporting on operations in the
Middle East, Southwest Asia, and Africa, as well as disaster relief in
the United States. Joe was named one of the 100 ``most influential
journalists covering armed violence'' by Action on Armed Violence in
2013. He was the first U.S. Marine combat correspondent to step into
enemy territory after September 11, 2001, as a military reporter in
Pakistan and Afghanistan. He also reported from the front lines with
American and Allied forces in Kuwait and Iraq as that war began. He was
on the ground for the start of both Operation Enduring Freedom and
Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Joe served as AMVETS' national communications director in 2005 and
for the past eight years as assistant national director for
communications for the Disabled American Veterans (DAV) in Washington,
D.C. leading grassroots efforts through social networking and new
media.
He has also served as president of Social Communications, LLC, and
as a public affairs officer director for the Department of Navy. Joe is
an alumnus of Syracuse University and Central Texas College. He resides
in Fairport, N.Y., with his wife Dawn, a service-connected disabled Air
Force veteran, and their five children.

ABOUT AMVETS

Today, AMVETS is America's most inclusive congressionally chartered
veterans service organization. Our membership is open to both active
duty, reservists, guardsmen, and honorably discharged veterans.
Accordingly, the men and women of AMVETS have contributed to the
defense of our nation in every conflict since World War II.
Our commitment to these men and women can also be traced to the
aftermath of the last World War, when waves of former service members
began returning stateside in search of the health, education, and
employment benefits they earned. Because obtaining these benefits
proved difficult for many, veterans savvy at navigating the government
bureaucracy began forming local groups to help their peers. As the
ranks of our Nation's veterans swelled into the millions, it became
clear a national organization would be needed. Groups established to
serve the veterans of previous wars wouldn't do either; the leaders of
this new generation wanted an organization of their own.
With that in mind, 18 delegates, representing nine veterans' clubs,
gathered in Kansas City, Missouri, and founded The American Veterans of
World War II on Dec. 10, 1944. Less than three years later, on July 23,
1947, President Harry S. Truman signed Public Law 216, making AMVETS,
the first post-World War II organization to be chartered by Congress.
Since then, our congressional charter has been amended to admit
members from subsequent eras of service. Our organization has also
changed over the years, evolving to better serve these more recent
generations of veterans and their families. In furtherance of this
goal, AMVETS maintains partnerships with other Congressionally
chartered veterans' service organizations that round out what's called
the ``Big Six'' coalition. We're also working with newer groups,
including Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America and The Independence
Fund. Moreover, AMVETS recently teamed up with the VA's Office of
Suicide Prevention and Mental Health to help stem the epidemic of
veterans' suicide. As our organization looks to the future, we do so
hand in hand with those who share our commitment to serving the
defenders of this Nation. We hope the 116th Session of Congress will
join in our conviction by casting votes and making policy decisions
that protect our veterans.

Information Required by Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives, the
following information is provided regarding federal grants and
contracts.
Fiscal Year 2023--None
Fiscal Year 2022--None
Fiscal Year 2021--None
Fiscal Year 2020--None
Fiscal Year 2019--None
Fiscal Year 2018--None
Fiscal Year 2017--None
Fiscal Year 2016--None
Disclosure of Foreign Payments--None
______

Prepared Statement of National Organization of Veterans' Advocates,
INC. (NOVA)

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the
Subcommittee, the National Organization of Veterans' Advocates (NOVA)
thanks you for the opportunity to offer our views on pending
legislation.
NOVA is a not-for-profit 501(c)(6) educational membership
organization incorporated in the District of Columbia in 1993. NOVA
represents nearly 850 accredited attorneys, agents, and qualified
members assisting tens of thousands of our nation's military veterans,
families, survivors, and caregivers seeking to obtain their earned
benefits from VA. NOVA works to develop and encourage high standards of
service and representation for persons seeking VA benefits.
NOVA members represent veterans before all levels of VA's
disability claims process, and handle appeals before the U.S. Court of
Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC), U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit, and the Supreme Court of the United States. As an
organization, NOVA advances important cases and files amicus briefs in
others. See, e.g., Henderson v. Shinseki, 562 U.S. 428 (2011) (amicus);
NOVA v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 710 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2013)
(addressing VA's failure to honor its commitment to stop applying an
invalid rule); Procopio v. Wilkie, 913 F.3d 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2019)
(amicus); NOVA v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 981 F.3d 1360 (Fed.
Cir. 2020) (M21-1 rule was interpretive rule of general applicability
and agency action subject to judicial review); Buffington v. McDonough,
No. 21-972 (February 7, 2022) (amicus in support of petition for writ
of certiorari before U.S. Supreme Court); Van Dermark v. McDonough, No.
23-178 (September 25, 2023) (amicus in support of petition for writ of
certiorari before U.S. Supreme Court). In 2000, the CAVC recognized
NOVA's work on behalf of veterans with the Hart T. Mankin Distinguished
Service Award.
NOVA also advocates for laws to improve the VA disability claims
and appeals process. NOVA participated in the stakeholder meetings that
resulted in the development and passage of the Veterans Appeals
Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017, Pub. L. 115-55, 131 Stat.
1105 (August 23, 2017) (AMA). As VA has implemented the new system over
the last several years, NOVA has provided extensive training to our
members on the statute, regulations, and practice under the AMA. We
have also gathered information from our members across the country on
their experiences advocating for clients in the new system. As such, we
have a unique view of the strengths and weaknesses of this legislation.
Our statement, therefore, will focus on the bills that impact the
adjudication of claims and appeals: (1) H.R. 5559: Protecting Veterans
Claim Options Act; (2) H.R. 5891: Veterans Appeals Decision Clarity
Act; (3) H.R. 5870: Veterans Appeals Transparency Act of 2023; and (4)
H.R. 5890: Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023.

H.R. 5559: Protecting Veterans Claims Options Act

The first major provision of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
5108 by eliminating the requirement to submit new and relevant evidence
with supplemental claims filed within one year of the original
decision. The ``new and relevant'' standard was adopted in the AMA to
replace the ``new and material'' standard required for reopening
previously denied claims in the legacy system. The statute makes clear
that the ``new and relevant'' standard is not intended to be a higher
standard than the former ``new and material'' standard. See 38 U.S.C.
Sec.  5108 note (the new and relevant standard ``shall not be construed
to impose a higher evidentiary standard than the new and material
evidence standard''). NOVA members report, however, that VA frequently
rejects supplemental claims due to a purported lack of ``new and
relevant'' evidence. By easing the standard, Congress recognizes the
importance of the nonadversarial process before the agency. This
amendment also more closely reflects the feedback of stakeholders
during discussions of the original legislation, who generally advocated
that the threshold requirement should be solely ``new'' evidence. NOVA
supports this amendment.
The second major provision of this bill would amend 38 U.S.C. Sec.
7113 by adding a new subsection (d). This amendment is important to all
appellants whose cases are returned to the Board of Veterans' Appeals
(Board) after a remand from the CAVC. First, the amendment clearly
provides for an appellant to submit additional evidence to the Board
for consideration and requires the Board to allow a full 90-day period
for such submission. Currently, appellants are sent back to the lane
from which they originated. If an appeal was previously adjudicated
through the direct review lane, for example, the appeal would be
returned to that lane with no opportunity to add additional evidence.
Such a restriction may rob the appellant of the benefit of the remand
negotiated by the parties or ordered by the CAVC in a decision. It also
promotes inefficiency in the system.
But most importantly, by adopting this amendment, an appellant
could have the appeal resolved more expeditiously and be spared a
return to the agency to endure another multi-year wait if they are not
granted the benefit at the agency level. An appellant in the AMA system
does not retain their Board docket date when sent back to the agency,
so this amendment could be a lifeline for veterans, families,
survivors, and caregivers who have already waited years for VA and the
Board to adjudicate their appeals. Not only is this amendment more
veteran friendly, it promotes efficiency throughout the disability
claims and appeals system. NOVA supports this amendment.
NOVA requests that this provision be expanded to allow an appellant
to choose to return to the hearing lane if desired.

H.R. 5981: Veterans Appeals Decision Clarity Act

NOVA supports the Veterans Appeals Decision Clarity Act. Under the
proposed amendment to 38 U.S.C. Sec.  7104, when the Board declines to
consider evidence because it was not received during a period permitted
under Sec.  7113, it would be required to ``identify[] the time when
such evidence was received and provision of section 7113 of this title
that establishes that such evidence may not be received at such time.''
This language codifies the CAVC's intent as expressed in Cook v.
McDonough, 36 Vet.App. 175 (2023). In that case, the Court stated that
``[f]or a claimant to make an informed decision on whether and how to
have VA consider any evidence not considered by the Board, the Board
must accurately inform the claimant whether it did not consider
evidence because it was received during a time not permitted by section
7113, and what options may be available for having VA consider that
evidence.'' Id. at 189. Codifying this clarification will reduce
confusion and provide important information to an appellant so they can
return to the supplemental claim lane if they choose, have the evidence
considered, and preserve the earliest possible effective date.
This amendment not only furthers the nonadversarial system intended
by Congress, it also promotes agency efficiency. When appellants
clearly understand what evidence has or has not been considered, it
reduces the need for repetitive claims and appeals and helps to
alleviate ongoing churn.
In addition, requiring the Board to provide ``a written
determination of . . . whether the notice of disagreement was adequate
and filed timely under section 7105 of this title'' provides a
definitive legal finding made by a Veterans Law Judge and not by a VA
administrative employee. It is critical that this basic jurisdictional
question be answered by the decision-maker to ensure there is no
confusion about the appellant's ability to challenge such an important
decision.

H.R. 5870: Veterans Appeals Transparency Act of 2023

NOVA does not support the Veterans Appeals Transparency Act as
written. This bill amends 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5104C, which governs options
following a decision by the agency of original jurisdiction. NOVA is
concerned about the language added at (B)(ii), which requires the
claimant to take the selected action ``in response to, and not later
than one year after, the date of the most recent decision on the claim
made by the agency of original jurisdiction.''
As written, this language could codify the Secretary's erroneous
position in a case just decided by the CAVC and serve to undermine
Congressional intent to provide more choice and control to veterans
over the adjudicatory process. Terry v. McDonough, No. 20-7251 (October
19, 2023). VA denied Mr. Terry's claim for sleep apnea and he opted
into the AMA via the Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP) by
choosing a higher-level review (HLR). VA again denied service
connection for sleep apnea and, within the year of the original denial,
the veteran filed a supplemental claim. VA denied the supplemental
claim, finding the veteran did not submit new and relevant evidence
required to readjudicate the claim. Still within a year of the original
decision, the veteran filed a VA Form 10182 seeking Board review. The
Board denied the appeal, finding the veteran could not appeal the HLR
because it was not the ``the most recent decision.'' On that basis, the
Board reviewed the supplemental claim, determined there was no new and
relevant evidence submitted, and denied the appeal without ever
reaching the merits of the veteran's original claim. Not only was the
veteran denied his right to one review on appeal of the claim as
required under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  7104(a), the Board misinterpreted Sec.
5104C(a) by rejecting his appeal.
The Court agreed with Mr. Terry, holding that ``5104C(a) plainly
provides that a claimant may file more than one administrative review
request within 1 year of an initial AOJ decision on a claim, provided
that such an administrative review request is not pending concurrently
with another administrative review request.'' Terry, slip op. at 2.
Because this bill would limit a claimant's options in the AMA, NOVA
cannot support the amendments to the statute as written.
NOVA appreciates and endorses the Subcommittee's plan to require
more transparency from the Board. We suggest amending subsection (f) to
state: ``On a weekly basis, for each docket, the Board shall publish
the docketing dates of the cases that have been assigned to all Board
members for decisions in the AMA system and legacy system and shall
publish the docketing dates of all decisions issued by the Board in the
AMA system and legacy system that week.'' Currently, the only way for
advocates to obtain this information is by filing a Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) request with the Board, which can be a timely
and expensive endeavor. When advocates petition the CAVC to order the
Board to issue a decision on an appeal that has been languishing, the
Secretary routinely asserts that the Board must adjudicate all non-
expedited appeals in docket order and asks the Court to dismiss the
petition. Without any substantive information, the Court routinely
grants the Secretary's request to dismiss. Amending subsection (f) will
promote transparency and provide veterans and advocates with useful
information regarding the status of their appeals.

H.R. 5890: Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

NOVA supports the Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023. This
bill would amend current 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5103A to provide that, ``[i]f
a veteran fails to appear for a medical examination provided by the
Secretary in conjunction with a claim for a benefit under a law
administered by the Secretary, the Secretary may not deny such claim on
the sole basis that such veteran failed to appear for such medical
examination.''
By eliminating denials based solely on the failure to appear for an
examination, veterans will stop being unfairly penalized for situations
often beyond their control. NOVA members frequently report instances
where a veteran tries to communicate an inability to attend an
examination for a host of reasons: conflict with work schedules,
illness, family responsibilities, continuing concerns related to COVID-
19, a lack of transportation, etc. Sometimes they are unable to reach
someone to reschedule or that request is not honored. In other cases,
the veteran never receives notice of the examination. Veterans who are
homeless or at risk of homelessness are particularly vulnerable.
Amending this provision reflects a veteran-friendly policy.
VA often schedules unnecessary examinations and reexaminations for
veterans, which has been frequently reported by NOVA. See, e.g.,
National Organization of Veterans' Advocates, Statement for the Record
Before the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on
Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs Concerning ``VA Disability
Exams: Are Veterans Receiving Quality Services?'' (July 27, 2023);
National Organization of Veterans' Advocates, Statement for the Record
Before the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee Concerning Pending
Legislation to Include Discussion Draft, S._, No Bonuses for Bad Exams
Act of 2022 (July 13, 2022); see also Department of Veterans Affairs,
Office of Inspector General, Veterans Benefits Administration: Veterans
Are Still Being Required to Attend Unwarranted Medical Reexaminations
for Disability Benefits (March 16, 2023), https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/
VAOIG-22-01503-65.pdf. Unnecessary examinations are particularly
troublesome considering the statutory requirement for VA to consider
private medical evidence. See 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5125 (``a report of a
medical examination administered by a private physician that is
provided by a claimant in support of a claim for benefits under that
chapter may be accepted without a requirement for confirmation by an
examination by a physician employed by the Veterans Health
Administration if the report is sufficiently complete to be adequate
for the purpose of adjudicating such claim''). By amending 38 U.S.C.
Sec.  5103A and prohibiting VA from denying a claim solely because of a
missed examination, VA will be required to conduct a more fulsome
review of the record to consider private evidence or ongoing VA
treatment before ordering more examinations in a system that is already
overloaded with requests.
NOVA urges the Subcommittee to clarify the change in the heading.
The current bill would strike ``COMPENSATION CLAIMS'' and replace it
with ``CLAIMS FOR BENEFITS.'' This change appears overly broad as VA
``claims for benefits'' encompass a broad range of services and awards
that do not require an examination as a condition for a grant. By
contrast, a heading such as ``CLAIMS FOR VA DISABILITY BENEFITS'' would
be clearer and ensure that this prohibition against denials solely
because of a missed examination would extend to all VA disability
benefit claims and appeals.
Finally, we ask the Subcommittee to continue to engage stakeholders
and consider other amendments to ensure the promise of the AMA is
fulfilled. Specifically, NOVA members report continuing high level of
remands from the Board, i.e., approximately 40 percent, often due to
inadequate examinations and/or remands for additional development/
examinations that often are unnecessary. Such a high level of remands
was not intended in the AMA. In this new system, if an appeal is not
granted on remand, it no longer retains its original docket date and
claimants are then forced to start all over at the end of the line if
they want to appeal back to the Board. NOVA members report many direct
review cases are waiting far in excess of the 365-day intended
timeframe for a decision. (Delays exceeding three years are now
common.) Given these long delays now approaching or surpassing the wait
times experienced in the legacy system, a legislative solution should
be considered.

CONCLUSION

Thank you again for allowing us to present our views on this
important legislation. If you have questions or would like to request
additional information, please feel free to contact:

Diane Boyd Rauber, Esq.
Executive Director
National Organization of Veterans' Advocates, Inc.
1775 Eye Street, NW
Suite 1150
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 587-5708

[emailprotected]

______

Prepared Statement of Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA)

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the
Subcommittee, Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA), would like to thank
you for the opportunity to submit our views on pending legislation
impacting the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) that is before the
Subcommittee. No group of veterans understand the full scope of
benefits and care provided by VA better than PVA members--veterans who
have incurred a spinal cord injury or disorder (SCI/D). Several of
these bills will help to ensure veterans receive much needed aid and
support. PVA provides comment on the following bills included in
today's hearing.

H.R. 1753, the Jax Act

The Jax Act will ensure that women who served in cultural support
teams assigned to the Commander of the United States Special Operations
Command from January 1, 2010, through August 31, 2021, are recognized
for their combat exposure in service while on active duty. While PVA
supports the intent of this legislation, enhancements could be made to
improve the bill's scope.
There are nearly two million women veterans in the U.S. According
to the VA, nearly 55 percent of them served in the Gulf or Post-9/11
eras. As of December 2022, women made up more than 17 percent of the
active-duty force and 21 percent of the National Guard and reserve
component.
The repeal of the Direct Ground Combat Exclusion Rule for Female
Soldiers by the Department of Defense (DOD) in 2013 authorized women to
serve in all combat occupations. This information underscores that the
scope of this legislation, which would impact 310 women, is far from
adequate.
Women have served in combat and combat support roles since the
Revolutionary War, a common statement often expressed by VA, DOD, and
even Congress. To ignore that fact does a disservice to women veterans
who have served this country through every major conflict we've faced
as a Nation. The scope of H.R. 1753, as written, only covers women
attached to Special Operations Command from 2010 through 2021, even
though for the last years of that timeframe women were no longer exempt
from combat. Women servicemembers were acting in the role of cultural
support teams, female engagement teams, and the well-regarded Lioness
Program well before 2010. To only offer recognition and support of such
a small group of women does a disservice to women who have filled these
roles and may also be facing difficulties when applying for VA
benefits.
PVA strongly supports the bill's goal of removing systemic barriers
for women who served in combat. We hope to see additional legislation
targeted toward other groups of women veterans in similar situations.
Service connection is granted for illness or injury incurred during
service, regardless of combat deployments. If women veterans are facing
challenges in accessing VA benefits and experiencing persistent denials
of their claims, VA needs to address this in a meaningful way.

H.R. 3790, the Justice for ALS Veterans Act of 2023

Currently, if a veteran was rated totally disabled for a continuous
period of at least eight years immediately preceding death, their
eligible survivors can receive an additional $331.84 per month in
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC). This monetary installment
is commonly referred to as the DIC ``kicker.''
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is an aggressive disease that
quickly leaves veterans incapacitated and reliant on family members and
caregivers. Many spouses stop working to provide care for their loved
one who, once diagnosed, only has an average lifespan of between three
to five years. Because so few veterans survive beyond five years, the
surviving spouses of veterans with ALS rarely qualify for the
additional DIC benefit. Jann Vasiloff, the surviving spouse of PVA
member George Vasiloff, was disqualified for this exact reason.
Determined not to let this happen to other spouses, Ms. Vasiloff helped
PVA craft the Justice for ALS Veterans Act to make the surviving
spouses of future veterans with ALS eligible for the DIC kicker,
regardless of how long the veteran had the disease.
Members of this Subcommittee were supportive of this legislation
when it was reviewed in October 2021, but some suggested that there may
be other service-connected conditions that deserve similar
consideration. The VA recognizes ALS as a presumptive service-connected
disease, and due to its progressive nature, automatically rates any
diagnosed veteran at 100 percent once service connected. Although we
are unaware of other service-connected conditions that have a 100
percent mortality rate, like ALS, we are pleased this version of the
bill incorporates PVA's recommended language directing the VA to study
the matter and provide their findings to Congress. With the addition of
this language, Congress should not further delay passage of this
critical language.

H.R. 4016, the Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act

In a July 21, 2021, report,\1\ the VA Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) highlighted the significant wait times defrauded veterans
in the VA fiduciary program face due to the universal negligence
determination requirement. Some veterans even died before seeing their
reimbursements. The purpose of the VA Fiduciary Program is to protect
beneficiaries who are unable to manage their VA benefits because of
injury, disease, advanced age, or if they are under age 18. Studies
show veterans are particularly vulnerable to scams, including those
perpetrated by someone entrusted with their care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ VBA's Fiduciary Program Needs to Improve the Timeliness of
Determinations and Reimbursements of Misused Funds (va.gov)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Too often, we hear about VA-appointed fiduciaries failing to honor
the trust given them and illegally misusing veterans' funds for their
own personal gain. Unfortunately, not all veterans who have VA-
appointed fiduciaries are treated equally under federal law. If a
fiduciary misuses a veteran's benefits, the VA will remove the
fiduciary, but it can only re-issue stolen benefits to the veteran if
the fiduciary manages benefits for ten or more veterans. According to
VA, however, 80 percent of beneficiaries have a one-on-one relationship
with their fiduciary. The ``10 or more'' requirement leaves thousands
of veterans unable to recoup benefits lost through no fault of their
own. PVA supports H.R. 4016, which makes it easier for veterans with
disabilities to be made financially whole by the Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA) in the event they are defrauded of their benefits.

H.R. 4190, the Restoring Benefits to Defrauded Veterans Act

Under current law, if a defrauded veteran passes away before their
case with the VA is resolved, the veteran's family cannot seek
reimbursement for the defrauded funds. PVA supports this bill, which
directs VA to reissue misused benefits to the veteran's estate,
successor, or next inheritor. The Subcommittee should, however,
consider adjusting the text of the bill so it prevents any family
members involved in the fraudulent activity from benefiting from funds
restored to the veteran's estate.

H.R. 5559, the Protecting Veterans Claim Options Act

PVA supports the Protecting Veterans Claims Options Act, which
clarifies that veterans have one year to submit a supplemental claim.
Also, if new and relevant evidence is included, all evidence of record
would be considered. Occasionally, we see problems with the way VA
interprets legislation that is directive in nature and we trust that
the Subcommittee will work with VA to ensure that the bill's
requirements are sufficiently clear to ensure that the Department will
properly implement Congress's intent.

H.R. 5870, the Veteran Appeals Transparency Act of 2023

PVA supports efforts like this bill to increase transparency of the
Board of Veterans' Appeals and the appeals process. Some of the
information required in the legislation is already published. Thus, we
encourage the Subcommittee to work with the Board to limit duplicative
work that could also prove to be confusing for veterans.

H.R. 5890, the Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

PVA strongly supports this legislation, which seeks to limit the
VA's authority to deny a veteran's claim solely based on the veteran's
failure to appear for a medical examination associated with the claim.
Thousands of veterans' claims for service connection, claims for
increase, and for other benefits like Total Disability Individual
Unemployability and Aid and Attendance have been denied solely on the
basis of missing an examination. There are many legitimate reasons why
a veteran may not be able to attend a scheduled exam. We are also aware
of numerous instances where VA contractors erroneously record the
veteran as a ``no show.'' Passage of this legislation will ensure that
a missed exam isn't the only basis for denying a veteran's claim.

Discussion Draft, the Veteran Appeals Decision Clarity Act

PVA was honored to play a role in creating the new appeals system,
along with some of the perfecting changes to the Appeals Modernization
Act passed by Congress in recent years. We strongly support this
legislation, which is consistent with prior U.S. Government
Accountability Office recommendations. It restates what information the
Board should provide veterans regarding the denial of an appeal, which
is critical to ensuring that they are able to further pursue their
claims, as needed.
PVA would once again like to thank the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to submit our views on some of the bills being considered
today. We look forward to working with you on this legislation and
would be happy to take any questions for the record.

Information Required by Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives, the following
information is provided regarding federal grants and contracts.

Fiscal Year 2023

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events----Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$479,000.

Fiscal Year 2022

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events----Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$ 437,745.

Disclosure of Foreign Payments

Paralyzed Veterans of America is largely supported by donations from
the general public. However, in some very rare cases we receive direct
donations from foreign nationals. In addition, we receive funding from
corporations and foundations which in some cases are U.S. subsidiaries
of non-U.S. companies.
______

Prepared Statement of Quality.Timeliness.Customer Service (QTC)

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting QTC - a Leidos Company - to submit a
statement for the Subcommittee's legislative hearing. Since our
company's founding in 1981, we have focused on delivering high Quality,
Timely, and Customer-focused examinations. Today, we are the leading
provider of medical, disability and occupational health examinations.
We are especially proud of our partnership with the Department of
Veterans Affairs to serve those who have given much to our country.
Claims development is the longest step of the claims process, with
evidence gathering that includes examinations if the existing evidence
is lacking. We provide veterans with critical access points to
compensation and pension disability examinations through our 90 medical
clinics, 19,000 subcontract providers, and 12 mobile medical clinics.
QTC is pleased to offer our views on the bills under consideration by
the Subcommittee, focusing on those bills that would impact disability
examinations.

H.R. 5938, Veterans Exam Expansion Act of 2023

QTC supports H.R. 5938 and urges swift enactment of the bill with our
recommended enhancements.

With the enactment of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson
Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT
Act), millions of Veterans with toxic exposures will receive expanded
healthcare and compensation benefits from the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA). This landmark legislation established 24 presumptive
conditions and is expected to lead to an influx of disability claims
numbering in the millions. To process these claims, VA relies on
contract primary care physicians, and specialty care physicians, to
conduct medical disability examinations (MDEs) for Veterans. However,
there is a national shortage of these medical providers who can conduct
these exams.
The United States faces a projected shortage of between 37,800 and
124,000 physicians within 12 years, according to the Association of
American Medical Colleges. The American Hospital Association called the
workforce shortage that hospitals are experiencing a ``national
emergency'' and projected the overall shortage of nurses to be 1.1
million. This issue is especially acute among behavioral and mental
health professionals. Today, more than 150 million people live in
federally designated mental health professional shortage areas.
According to the American Psychiatric Association, the country will be
short between 14,280 and 31,109 psychiatrists, psychologists, and
social workers within a few years. Moreover, demand for services is
growing, exacerbated by the pandemic and a dwindling supply of
professionals as they retire at a rate that outpaces new people
entering the field. The shortage of behavioral health professionals is
particularly acute in rural areas where many Veterans live.
In March 2013, VA's disability claims backlog peaked at 611,000
claims, and most Veterans waited more than 125 days to receive their
disability benefits. To support VA's plan to reduce the claims backlog
and relieve healthcare providers of the burden of conducting MDEs,
Congress passed P.L. 113-235, which expanded contract examination
coverage to VA Regional Offices (VAROs). This law enabled VA clinicians
to focus on healthcare while contract examiners performed MDEs for
disability claims, enabling the VA to achieve a functional zero in the
claims backlog by the end of 2015.
QTC used license portability to conduct 35,033 exams with 280
providers in 2021 and increased the number of exams using license
portability to 42,581 in 2022. License portability also enabled QTC to
provide services to vulnerable Veterans who are hard to reach. Rural
hospitals, which treat roughly one in five Americans, are struggling to
stay open. Over 180 rural hospitals have closed since 2005, and another
500 are at immediate risk of closing. Nearly 3 million Veterans in
rural communities rely on VA for healthcare services. QTC's rural
capacity has increased by more than 50 percent since Congress
authorized licensed clinicians to practice across state lines.
Not all Veterans are able to make their way to a clinic for an in-
person examination with physicians and other healthcare providers--and
it's not always the best solution. To provide high-quality medical
evaluations for Veterans who are homebound, have limited mobility, or
are living in rural communities or areas with limited medical
infrastructure, QTC now brings examination services to their doorstep.
The company's 12 mobile medical clinics are state-of-the-art, RV-sized
doctor's offices on wheels.
The 12 mobile clinics traverse the entire continental United States
to provide Veterans with all examination services that they would find
in a permanent clinic. Available services include radiology, audiology,
general medicine, vision services, and mental health exams. Staffed by
licensed medical providers, these mobile clinics help reduce wait times
from roughly 100 days to close to 2 weeks in many underserved
communities, such as Veterans on tribal reservations. QTC completed
24,000 remote exams for Veterans in 2021 and more than 14,000 exams
from January through June 2022. H.R. 5938 will enable QTC to expand
medical disability exam services to underserved communities.
QTC recommends that the committee amend the legislation to provide
VA with the flexibility to leverage the license portability authority
for additional provider types, when needed, for providers completing
disability examinations on behalf of VA. One way to do so is by
granting contract medical disability examiners with the same license
portability authorities that Veterans Health Administration employees
already have under 38 USC 7402. In addition, QTC recommends that the
license portability authority be extended to at least September 2028 to
cover the duration of the current MDE contracts. This would allow the
Department to be nimble and swiftly respond to the problem of providers
not being available where veterans live.
In 2016, Congress passed Veterans' Health Care and Benefits
Improvement Act of 2016, which granted contract MDE providers license
portability to ensure that the claims backlog stayed at functional
zero. License portability, which authorizes a provider's license to
cross state lines, is an effective solution to address the provider
shortage in parts of the country where demand outpaces supply. In 2020,
Congress expanded license portability to PAs, NPs, audiologists, and
psychologists (38 USC 2002). We would like to thank Congress for
passing S. 2795 last month, which extended license portability
authority for PAs, NPs, audiologists, and psychologists. Additionally,
we would like to thank the House of Representatives for passing license
portability to the Department of Defense's Military & Family Life
Counselors this year.
With the enactment of the PACT Act, Congress provided the legal
authority to expand disability benefits. However, Veterans will likely
encounter extended wait times if Congress does not concurrently
legislate full license portability authority to enable all types of MDE
providers to deliver timely, high-quality exams.

H.R. 4306, Michael Lecik Military Firefighters Protection Act

QTC supports H.R. 4306, as introduced

H.R. 4306 would establish a presumption of service connection for a
list of diseases that are associated with firefighting. QTC supported
the initial effort to baseline medical exams for first responders to
the NYC World Trade Center (QTC) site after the September 11th
terrorist attacks. We supported the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and
the Federal Occupational Health team during 2007-2008. Under these
contracts, we provided First Responders with the clinical evaluation
needed for their own health and to monitor the effects of the
exposures. The information gathered from these exams not only provided
early detection of potential WTC-related health problems and enabled
individuals to receive proper care and treatment. QTC stands by, ready
to help if H.R. 4306 becomes law.

H.R. 5890, Review Every Veterans Claim Act of 2023

QTC supports the intent of H.R. 5890.

H.R. 5890 would limit VA's denial of disability claims on the sole
basis that the veteran failed to appear for a medical examination that
is associated with the claimed condition. 38 U.S.C. 5103A governs VA's
duty to assist claimants. The Department's obligation to help veterans
develop their claims includes ordering examinations if the evidence is
lacking and believes that examinations will be helpful in resolving the
claim.
QTC's scheduling process exemplifies the pro-claimant nature of the
VA's duty to assist requirements by making multiple outreach attempts
via phone calls, text messages, emails, and tracked mail packets.
Contractually, we have 36 calendar days to schedule, conduct exams, and
deliver the complete exam results back to VA. To meet this requirement,
we will call the Veteran up to three times to schedule an appointment.
If an appointment is not scheduled after the third attempt, then we
send the Veteran a letter asking them to call us to schedule an
appointment. If we don't receive a response from the Veteran within 3
calendar days, then we will schedule an appointment proactively and
send them an appointment letter. If the Veteran does not show, then we
send the exam request back to VA. We always call the Veterans to remind
them of their appointment a day or two in advance. With these attempts,
we have maintained a low no-show rate of 5-7 percent, which is far
lower than the VHA's average (8 18 percent for outpatient care) and the
national average (23 percent across all medical specialties and a range
of 10 percent for primary care and over 60 percent for mental
health).\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Milicevic, Aleksandra, Mitsantisuk, Kannop, Tjader, Andrew and
et al. (2020) Modeling Patient No-Show History and Predicting Future
Appointment Behavior at the Veterans Administration's Outpatient Mental
Health Clinics. Military Medicine, Vol.185, Issue 7-8, pages e099-e004.
https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usaa095
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Prepared Statement of Special Operations Association of America (SOAA)
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of ALS Association
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Service Women's Action Network (SWAN)

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
The Service Women's Action Network (SWAN) appreciates the
opportunity to submit a Statement for the Record on today's hearing
that includes H.R. 1753 Jax Act. SWAN is a non-partisan, non-profit
501(c)(3) that represents over 10,000 servicewomen and women veterans
regardless of rank, military branch, or years of experience. SWAN has
specifically worked to transform military culture and reform veteran
services focusing since 2009 on opening all occupations to qualified
women, holding sex offenders accountable in the military justice
system, expanding access to services for a broad range of reproductive
health care, and eliminating barriers to women's disability claims
especially for those who have experienced military sexual trauma as
well as barriers to those who experienced combat injuries but whose
experience is not correctly documented in their service records.
Today we want to acknowledge the efforts of the bi-partisan co-
sponsors of the Jax Act to recognize the combat contributions of some
of the women who served in OIF/OEF. These women served on Cultural
Support Teams with Special Operations Command units during the Global
War on Terror from 2010-2021. These women served alongside their male
counterparts and suffered casualties, but have not been fully
recognized or credited for this dangerous and essential service.
Unfortunately, their service was seldom appropriately documented so
they have faced arduous barriers to receiving the care and benefits
they earned. It is especially important that those who were in the
Guard and Reserves are given everything they earned.
While we recognize this legislation is a significant step forward
for service women and women veterans, we also have to emphasize an
often-forgotten point that U.S. History is filled with women who have
served with or in the military under fire - many have been killed,
wounded, and/or taken as POWs, and they too have not received adequate
or appropriate care or full credit.\1\ All of these women helped open
opportunities for qualified women further in 2013-2016 when the combat
exclusion officially ended and since then. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Jeanne Holm, Women in the Military: An Unfinished Revolution,
Novato: Presidio Press, 1992 (revised edition). We see this
particularly starting in Desert Shield/Storm and through the changes in
combat exclusion laws and policies and military restrictions that
confronted commanders' realities ``on the ground'' starting in 1994.
One only has to mention Jessica Lynch and Lori Piestewa to spark this
recognition. See also Lorry M. Fenner, ``Either You Need These Women or
You Do Not: Informing the Debate on Military Service and Citizenship,''
Gender Issues, Summer 1998, Vol 6., Number 3, ed. Rita J. Simon, New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University. Lorry M. Fenner and Marie DeYoung,
Women in Combat: Civic Duty or Military Liability, Washington D.C.:
Georgetown University Press, and ``Women in Combat: Civic Duty or
Military Liability?,'' C-SPAN Videotape 166695 Part 1 of 1, 2001.
\2\ Service Women's Action Network, Women in the Military: Where
They Stand, 10th Edition 2019, pp.12-16 (https://
www.servicewomensaction network.org/swan-research). See also Ellen
Haring, ``Gender and Military Organizations, in Chantal de Jonge Oudrat
and Michael Brown, eds, The Gender and Security Agenda: Strategies for
the 21st Century, pp. 90-112.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The women of the Cultural Support Teams are fully deserving of the
recognition and benefits this bill will provide. SWAN, however, must
emphatically insist that this bill includes their predecessors-sisters
of all the Services who served on Team Lioness and the Female
Engagement Teams (FETs).\3\ These are the women from all the Services
who served with USMC and Army ground combat units in 2003-2010 in Iraq
and Afghanistan who pioneered and paved the way for the CST missions
with the Special Operations Forces in 2010-2021. These women who
volunteered (seldom receiving training or appropriate equipment) in the
immediacy of war conditions served beside their male peers. These
women, too, have earned (1) the correction of their records to document
service in combat; (2) appropriate care and benefits; and, (3) the
awards, recognition, and respect that have been denied them for so many
years. Most importantly, these women increased the efficiency and
effectiveness of field units as well as military readiness and the
recruiting numbers for the All Volunteer Force (AVF).\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Meg McLaren and Daria Sommers, ``Lioness: The Origins Story,''
Veterans Breakfast Club Podcast, particularly Episode 5 with CAPT Lory
Manning USN, Retired, Women's Research and Education Institute and
Shannon Morgan, Army Combat Veteran, August 24, 2023. Meg McLaren and
Daria Sommers, Lioness (IMDb documentary), 2008, currently available on
Amazon Prime.
\4\ Sarah Percy, Forgotten Warriors: The Long History of Women in
Combat, New York: Basic Books, 2023, especially pp. 268-281.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This oversight can be easily corrected by expanding H.R. 1753 to
specifically include the Lioness Teams and FET members from 2003-2010.
They too provided critical intelligence to U.S. and allied forces as
well as interacted with local populations where and when their male
counterparts could not effectively do so. A different kind of conflict
that required winning ``hearts and minds'' could not have been waged
effectively without these women. They too fired weapons, protected
their teammates, and faced death, injury, and disability. Army women
first joined U.S. Marine Corps ground combat units for raids on
locations where Iraqi women and children might be present. Later,
Marines and Sailors participated in Lioness operations with both Marine
and Army units. Let us never forget those women who fought for the
first time in close combat in Ramadi when that was not technically
allowed by law, and those who died in Fallujah, Holly Ann Charette, 21,
and Ramona M. Valdez, 20, in 2005 or the others who died like Marine
Cpl Jennifer M. Parcell in Anbar in 2007, or those who suffered seen
and unseen injuries and yet have not received due recognition. Even by
2005, 39 female U.S. troops had died in Iraq along with three Defense
Department women, and six servicewomen had died in Afghanistan.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ``Female Troops in Iraq Exposed to Combat: Despite ban on women
in combat, the front line in Iraq is everywhere, CNN, June 28, 2005.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Again, SWAN greatly appreciates the recognition of the women who
served with Special Forces from 2010-2021 during OIF/OEF in H.R. 1735
Jax Act and its Senate companion. Now the sponsors have the opportunity
to broaden this vital legislation in at least a small way. It should
include the women of Team Lioness, from various specialties who were
thrown into action with the USMC starting in 2004, and the women in the
Female Engagement Teams, introduced first by Task Force Leatherneck in
Afghanistan in 2009. These are the women who laid the ground work and
inspiration for the Cultural Support Teams earlier. None of these women
should ever be forgotten.
______

Prepared Statement of Gerald Connolly

I would like to thank Ranking Member Pappas, Chairman Luttrell,
Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano for bringing up the Veteran
Fraud Reimbursement Act (H.R. 4016) in this legislative hearing of the
Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs Subcommittee of the House
Veterans' Affairs Committee. This legislation will make it easier for
veterans to be made financially whole in the event they are defrauded
of their benefits and allow the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)
to reimburse victims of fraud without first meeting unnecessary
bureaucratic requirements. I would like to thank my friend
Representative Ciscomani for championing this important effort with me
to remove bureaucratic and unintended obstacles that have hampered
veterans who have been defrauded by a fiduciary.
In January 2021, Congress enacted the Johnny Isakson and David P.
Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020.
The bill included a provision meant to improve the VBA fiduciary
program, which helps deliver benefits to veterans who cannot otherwise
manage their finances. Unfortunately, one unintended consequence of the
provision is that all cases of benefits misuse now require what is
known as an internal negligence determination by VBA before a veteran
who is a victim of fraud can be made financially whole. This
determination, which is made for the purposes of improving VBA
oversight, is immaterial to whether a veteran will be reimbursed.
Furthermore, this extra, unnecessary step effectively extends the
timeline for veterans to be reimbursed and creates a backlog of
investigations. In some cases, a negligence determination can take well
over a year, potentially causing late or deferred bill payments.
In fact, in a July 21, 2021 report entitled, ``VBA's Fiduciary
Program Needs to Improve the Timeliness of Determinations and
Reimbursement of Misused Funds,'' the VA Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) highlighted the significant wait times defrauded veterans
in the VA fiduciary program face due to the universal negligence
determination requirement. The report notes that some veterans even
died before seeing their reimbursements.
Veterans under the VA fiduciary program are a financially
vulnerable population, with approximately 50 percent being pensioners.
Delaying reimbursement of misused benefits to this underserved
population through unnecessary negligence determinations is
unacceptable. My bill removes the negligence determination requirement
while allowing the VBA to instead conduct a statistically valid
analysis of the misuse cases to determine the rate and nature of
negligence on the part of the VBA. The negligence determination would
ultimately become a part of a quality assurance measure conducted after
the affected veteran had been reimbursed. We must ensure that oversight
of VA processes does not result in a financial burden on those who
sacrificed so much for our country.
This legislation is of high importance to some of our most
vulnerable veterans, and was drafted in close coordination with VBA,
who supports making this change. I once again thank my friend, Rep.
Ciscomani, Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, Chairman Bost, and
Ranking Member Takano for considering this legislation during this
legislative hearing and look forward to seeing this bill receive a vote
in the House of Representatives.
______

Prepared Statement of Military-Veterans Advocacy, Inc.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
