- "VA'S HR OFFICE: DID LEADERS IGNORE AND PERPETRATE SEXUAL HARASSMENT?"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

``VA'S HR OFFICE: DID LEADERS IGNORE
AND PERPETRATE SEXUAL HARASSMENT?''

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-49

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-077                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Mike Bost, Chairman................................     1
The Honorable Mark Takano, Ranking Member........................     7

WITNESSES
Panel 1

The Honorable Denis McDonough, Secretary, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     9

Panel 2

Ms. Cassandra Law, Assistant Secretary, Human Resources and
Administration/Operations, Security and Preparedness, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................    44

Accompanied by:

Mr. Bruce Gipe, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

The Honorable Denis McDonough Prepared Statement.................    63
Ms. Cassandra Law Prepared Statement.............................    65

``VA'S HR OFFICE: DID LEADERS IGNORE
AND PERPETRATE SEXUAL HARASSMENT?''

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2024

Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:38 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mike Bost
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Bost, Bergman, Rosendale, Miller-
Meeks, Murphy, Franklin, Van Orden, Luttrell, Ciscomani, Crane,
Self, Kiggans, Takano, Brownley, Levin, Pappas, Mrvan,
Cherfilus-McCormick, Deluzio, McGarvey, Ramirez, Landsman, and
Budzinski.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE BOST, CHAIRMAN

The Chairman. Good morning. The committee will come to
order.
Last month, I presented the committee's initial
investigation into allegations of sexual harassment and
misconduct within the VA Office of Resolution, Management,
Diversity, and Inclusion (ORMDI), the office that has been
charged with creating a VA free of harassment in all forms.
Since last month's hearing, my staff has received further
evidence as well as testimony from the brave whistleblowers
which have exposed this office for what it is, a broken
organization that has been poisoned with the toxic culture of
bad leaders.
Over the last few weeks, majority and minority staff
conducted over 10 hours of transcript interviews with
whistleblowers. The whistleblowers are not testifying here
today in order to protect their identities and because many of
them still fear retaliation by VA leaders. This fear is so real
that the reason why we just went into executive session was so
that the members of this committee could hear a recording
submitted by one of our brave whistleblowers. We did this in
executive session for the first time in at least 17 years to
protect the identity as they are fearful for their career.
However, I am going to share some of the other whistleblowers'
words today so that American people can hear their stories.
Now please look at the quotes on the screen.
``I have been in this field for years and to see this
happen to an organization that should be protecting people from
it, they do not adhere to the law. It is a sexual promiscuous
environment. Things are allowed that are not even allowed at
other organizations, but it is allowed here.''
As you can see, this is an organization that has completely
lost trust of over 300,000 VA employees they are supposed to
protect.
Two weeks ago, VA sent the committee the result of their
Internal Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
(OAWP) investigation. I will start by saying that I appreciate
VA sharing this report and additional documents with the
committee. I am also pleased that Mr. Gipe from the VA OAWP
office is here today to speak about the report.
The findings of the report are damning, disturbing, and
frankly despicable. The report confirms much of what the
whistleblowers shared with us, that VA ORMDI office is full of
misconduct to the highest degree. This is unacceptable, but
honestly not surprising given what the committee has continued
to uncover. For months, these whistleblowers have told the
committee how their leaders have failed them.
I quote, ``I sent in a complaint against Mr. Archie Davis
to the Secretary. I felt that if I did not go to the very top
that Harvey and Archie being in the position of power being--I
felt like it was not going to go anywhere. I felt like my voice
was not going to be heard.''
I ask you to read what the whistleblower told the committee
and try to put yourself in their shoes. The whistleblower
reached out to the Secretary himself because they felt like
their voice was not being heard.
This tragic story gets worse. The Secretary is going to
tell us in a few minutes that he does not recall the email, but
acknowledges that he forwarded it to VA lawyers, also somehow
remembered to send it to the U.S. Postal Service, who reviewed
allegations of harassment on ORMDI. It strains reasonableness
that he remembered to send the email to one entity outside of
the organization, but failed to remember the contents of the
email, which included many of the graphic text messages members
of this committee have already seen. He is going to say that he
does not recall seeing the letter I sent him on September 29.
This whistleblower filed the complaint. That was not
enough. Had a chairman's letter written on their behalf. That
was not enough. Contacted the Secretary himself. That was not
enough.
Mr. Secretary, the buck stops with you, right? I hope in
your testimony you will explain why a chairman's letter and the
whistleblower's contact to you directly was not enough to get
your attention.
Throughout the investigation, the whistleblowers have also
told me about hostile and toxic work environments they
experienced at VA's ORMDI office. I quote, ``Archie would
always tell me a person never wants to get on his bad side
because once you get on his bad side, you will feel the
wrath.''
Members, imagine how powerless it must feel to be treated
like that and then be ignored when you speak up. Some of you
know exactly how this feels.
The whistleblowers have told us about the harassment they
experienced and their fear of retaliation. One whistleblower
commented, how, and I quote, ``Archie would always try to
persuade me with money. Archie even asked me one time, what is
wrong with you? I am trying to offer to buy you this, that, and
the other. I am trying to offer to fly you to D.C. and you just
keep saying no. Any other woman would have taken me up on it.
What is wrong with you? I would state to him, there is nothing
wrong with me.''
How broken and dysfunctional does an organization need to
be to allow a senior supervisor to continue this behavior?
The internal VA investigation report confirmed most of the
major allegations against senior VA ORMDI leaders that I
personally had informed Secretary McDonough about in my letter
in September. These include employees engaging in inappropriate
personal relationships with subordinate employees, engaging in
inappropriate conduct of a sexual nature, failing to initiate
an investigation into sexual harassment allegations, failing to
take prompt and appropriate action when notified of allegations
that a chief of staff was harassing and potentially threatening
employees. Frankly, I would be stunned if anyone who had seen
the evidence and listened to these whistleblowers thought
differently, but apparently they did.
We all remember the text messages that were provided to
this committee and how disgusting and graphic they were. Later
you see how VAHR's top brass, Ms. Gina Grasso, dismissed them.
The OAWP report also made several recommendations on how VA
should address this misconduct. The jury is still out on
whether this administration and the VA will follow these
recommendations with action.
I want the witnesses to listen carefully when I say this. I
will be paying close attention to what VA does with these
recommendations and even more closely to how long it takes this
administration to act.
Now, unfortunately, I think we all see how a broken civil
service system deters good employees from reporting misconduct
and delays justice for those who committed it. If the average
American did half of these inappropriate actions outlined in
this report, they would face severe consequences at 99 percent
of businesses around this country.
I also doubt that, unlike the accused, few Americans would
be allowed to continue to collect high six-figure, taxpayer-
funded salaries while their case was reviewed by an endless
appeals system. Even fewer would then be allowed to retire with
a hefty pension, but they will.
It is troubling that VA did not start the investigation of
the most serious sexual harassment allegations until 45 days
after I personally informed the Secretary. It is inexcusable
for the Department to delay addressing the broken and toxic
situation within ORMDI any longer.
On September 29, I informed Secretary McDonough about the
allegations against Mr. Harvey Johnson, Mr. Archie Davis, and
Mr. Gary Richardson. Former VA HR Assistant Secretary Gina
Grasso refused to testify today, announced her--who refused to
testify today, announced her resignation November 14. This was
the day after I called the Secretary and the VA suddenly
decided it was a good idea to look into this and reassign the
accused.
Ms. Grasso oversaw Mr. Johnson and the ORMDI office for
over 2 years. Four days after her resignation was official, VA
wrote to me that Ms. Grasso had known about these allegations
since October 2. Once Ms. Grasso was out the door, VA was happy
to tell us when she knew about the allegations, no subpoena
required.
In their report, OAWP quoted her explanation as to why it
took so long for her to do anything. I quote, ``There were so
many complaints at once, and it took time to figure out who was
the grieved, and it is several things on my plate--on the
plate. I do not think I have any other great explanation,
honestly.''
Simply having other things to do is not an acceptable
reason for delaying acting on this issue. To me, it is just
lazy.
Additionally, Ms. Grasso made the following comment about
the harassing text messages sent by Mr. Davis in her testimony
to OAWP. I quote, ``The employee was feeling harassed, but she
was continuing to text him. That is kind of weird, but it does
not mean it is okay. I am not saying that at all.''
Clearly, Ms. Grasso did not take the referenced
whistleblower's concerns seriously.
Since the whistleblowers are not here to respond for
themselves, here is what one of the whistleblowers told
committee staff about how they dealt with Mr. Davis'
harassment. I quote, ``The answer was, you know, I handled
Archie differently than I would anyone else with a hard no. You
know, anyone else I would not care how they took it, how they
felt. That was my soft no to let him down easy in my mind.''
The question was, ``Okay.''
Then the answer, ``In my mind?''
Question, ``Sorry, I was just going to say you wanted to
use a soft no because, again, you were afraid of what would
happen if you were more forceful, right?''
The answer, ``Absolutely.''
The whistleblower was afraid and felt trapped.
When further explaining what it was like being subject to
workplace harassment, one whistleblower made the following
comment, and I quote, ``I was fearful to cross him, fearful of
retaliation at this point. Okay. He is the chief of staff. He
is in a position of power. Who is going to believe me?''
The whistleblower's words say it all. The whistleblower was
afraid and felt trapped. Yet Ms. Grasso and every senior leader
was aware of these allegations, did nothing. They turned their
backs. They failed to act. I repeat my previous comments that
as the father of daughters, this blatant dereliction of duty
makes me sick.
Further, VA has so far failed to fully comply with the
subpoenas this committee provided--committee approved by a vote
of 22 to 1. Until VA stops defying congressional authority, we
will not know exactly which senior leaders knew about these
allegations, when they knew it, and why they failed to act.
I want you all to read this quote from one of the
whistleblowers. ``Human Resources and Administration (HR&A)
took a blind eye. They turned their head because of these
relationships that they had with each other. Things were
allowed to be done that should not have been done. They all
knew each other, either in the military the Army, the Pentagon,
Gina Grasso, Mr. Mayo, and Harvey Johnson all worked together
in the Pentagon. They had this friendship, this alliance. Even
if you complained, they were not going to do anything.''
This is the environment that drove this whistleblower to
this committee for help. This is the environment that our
veterans are being served by. The very office that is supposed
to stop sexual harassment was full of sexual harassment.
I want you to read one final quote from one of the
whistleblowers. ``I never thought that all these years, even in
the military, I have seen a lot, I have never been in this
situation myself. It is always things happening to other
people. I never thought I would be in the hot seat.''
Every level of the VA failed these whistleblowers. As long
as I am chairman, this committee will not fail them. Let me say
that again. We will not fail them.
I am disappointed that Ms. Grasso and Mr. Johnson have
failed to testify today and provide their side of the story. I
am disappointed that the VA yet again submitted their judgment
over mine and did not send all the witnesses I invited to
appear today. This administration can ignore these
whistleblowers, partially ignore our subpoenas, send people
here to testify who just got on the job less than 4 weeks ago,
and try to hide and protect those who knew what happened. We
will find the truth no matter how long it takes. We are going
to continue to demand answers from the Department, pursue this
investigation as far as it goes.
Now I appreciate the documents VA provided to the
committee, but I fear there are too many questions that will
remain unanswered after today's hearing. One of the documents
that was provided to us did, however, expose some serious
allegations that will be addressed.
On the screen you will see an email from Ms. Grasso to
Secretary McDonough on October 29 stating she was sorry for not
meeting the appropriate standards and thanking him for allowing
her to have a gracious departure from VA. I hope the Secretary
can explain what she meant by that and why she was thanking him
for her gracious departure.
Emails over the next few days show that the Secretary is
working to provide a soft landing for Ms. Grasso. He even
offered to be very disciplined in ``how I talk about this and
how other senior leaders talk about your service at VA.'' I
hope the Secretary has a good explanation of why Ms. Grasso
announced her resignation the day after I called him about
these accusations, but I imagine he will be very disciplined.
This type of behavior by senior leaders is a sharp contrast
to the Secretary's annual statement to VA's workforce where he
has encouraged employees to come forward if they see or hear
about harassment. Review this one from last year where the
Secretary stated that when sexual harassment is ignored, it can
encourage such conduct to continue. This seems very appropriate
for the situation he now appears to find himself in.
Secretary McDonough is going to tell this committee that he
has no independent recollection of these sexual harassment
allegations until I raised them with him on November 13. If
that is true, it is a sorry excuse. Why did he not take action
to protect these brave whistleblowers sooner?
If he really does not remember learning about these
allegations, then there is someone on his staff who does. If
they do, why are they still on the staff? Why does it appear
that he was more interested in Ms. Grasso's future than the
safety of the employees?
Why did he and other VA officials only move the accused
senior leader to different position pending an investigation,
and did not do that until the day after I made the allegations
public? Why does the Secretary and the VA say they do not
tolerate sexual harassment when the evidence we have says the
opposite?
Put it simply, Secretary McDonough owes this committee
answers to the following basic questions. One, what did he
know? Two, when did he know it? Why on Earth did he or anyone
on senior leadership team not act sooner?
It is good that the Secretary McDonough is here to answer
these and other serious questions about his conduct. However,
if the goal is to be transparent and build trust with this
committee, we should not have received his testimony late last
night, filed with the lawyer with phrases like ``no independent
recollection.''
The questions I have are not political in nature. Now, let
me say that again. The questions I have are not political in
nature. This does not have to do with politics. They are
questions about one's judgment, morals, and their duty to do
what is right even when no one is looking. That is what I mean
and that is what it means to be a leader. Nothing more, nothing
less. That is the level of trust that veterans expect from us.
I also have questions about when other senior leaders at VA
knew about these allegations and why the entire chain of
command did nothing to stop them. If the Secretary does not
remember reading these allegations, I hope someone does. This
is an important question outside of this Secretary's testimony
because well after he is gone, after I am gone, after every one
of you are gone, we must ensure that our legacy is that no one
who tolerates sexual harassment or sexually harasses should be
serving our veterans, period.
I was planning on holding a business meeting after this
hearing to consider a subpoena resolution. The resolution would
require senior VA leaders, including the committee's ORMDI
investigation, to appear for transcript interviews with the
committee. In November and December, I wrote the Secretary to
request these interviews. After stonewalling for a while, VA
asked that I wait until their initial investigation was
complete. I did, and I agreed because VA committed to two
important things. First, to send me the results of the
investigation, which we have got; and second, after I review
the report, I could decide if I wanted to move forward with
interviews.
As I said before, serious questions still remain about when
senior leaders knew about these allegations and what they did
about them. I repeated my request for transcribed interviews
for a third time. I appreciate the Secretary, through one of
the lawyers, informed me yesterday afternoon that he would make
VA officials available for interview with the committee. It is
disappointing that it took multiple letters and months of
waiting. Nevertheless, this is a positive step.
However, Mr. Secretary, your staff has not specifically
agreed to any of the interviews or individuals I have requested
by name as of yet. Until you do so, I will still remain kind of
skeptical here. The Department does not get to pick and choose
when they comply to Congress' oversight, full stop.
With that, I recognize Ranking Member Takano for his
opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Takano. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr.
Secretary. I am pleased that you joined us today to offer
insight into how this investigation was handled at the highest
level of VA and where VA will go from here under your
leadership. Accountability starts and ends with you, and I look
forward to working with you to ensure that VA is a welcoming,
harassment-free environment for employees and veterans alike.
It is unfortunate that my majority colleagues continue
intentionally to mislead the public on the allegations and
findings of this investigation. The inherent tension of
sensitive and personal circumstances such as these is that
people tend to look at the situation from their own
perspective, from their own corner, and can only see what is in
their view. The Office of Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection has a responsibility to look at the full scope of
evidence and to provide objectivity to claims to identify the
facts. OAWP fulfilled that duty. My staff independently came to
similar conclusions as OAWP based on the hundreds of thousands
of pages of evidence reviewed, and I am going to walk through
those findings.
The evidence supports that there were two VA supervisors
who engaged in inappropriate conduct with subordinate
employees. I will repeat that again. The evidence supports that
there were two VA supervisors who engaged in inappropriate
conduct with supported employees.
The evidence supports that four VA supervisors failed to
take prompt and appropriate action to address claims of
misconduct. OAWP recommended discipline and additional training
for those supervisors. This type of misconduct can never be
tolerated in an organization, and VA must do everything they
can to restore employee confidence and morale at ORMDI.
Now, while OAWP substantiated some very serious allegations
brought forth in this investigation, it was unable to
corroborate a number of serious claims about the overall
climate at ORMDI. The evidence does not support that there is a
culture of ORMDI leadership purposefully ignoring claims of
harassment. The evidence does not support that supervisors
retaliated against employees for turning down sexual advances.
The evidence does not support that ORMDI's senior leaders
engaged in waste, mismanagement, or perjury. Finally, the
evidence does not support the existence of, to use the
majority's phrase, a systemic sexual cesspool at ORMDI.
The conspiracy that the majority has pushed is not
reflective of reality. It is not reflective of the facts. Facts
do matter. Nothing is more important than the truth. My
colleagues across the aisle are either being intentionally
reckless and cavalier with the truth or willfully blind as they
continue to push their narrative of widespread misconduct at
ORMDI.
The speech and debate clause may insulate my colleagues
from the accountability for the lies and half-truths that they
continue to spread about this investigation. The lives and
reputations that they have ruined should weigh heavily on their
consciences.
This investigation uncovered troubling allegations of
nepotism, tampering with congressionally mandated reports, and
actions by some employees who may not be contributing to the
mission of ORMDI. I am requesting the Department investigate
these claims more fully.
Mr. Chairman, I am asking that you commit to working with
me, to request documents that will further the committee's
investigations into these claims. We will proceed to examine
allegations of nepotism, tampering with congressionally
mandated reports, and actions by some employees who may not be
contributing to the mission of ORMDI, as what I hear the
chairman agreeing to also investigate.
I hope that the chairman will also pivot this committee
back to its core responsibilities of conducting oversight and
legislating when the issues warrant policy changes. Intertwined
in this investigation of misconduct is a structural issue that
we and Congress created for VA that has caused some lower level
employees to be concerned that VA is not complying with the
law. The situation is more nuanced than that.
When we passed the Cleland-Dole Act, a part of the
consolidated appropriations bill in late 2022, we included a
provision that was in direct conflict with the Elijah Cummings
Act, which was signed into law 2 years prior. We need to work
with VA to address this error so that ORMDI can be aligned in a
manner that is most effective to fulfill its mission.
There are other steps this committee should take to ensure
that, A, misconduct is prevented at VA; and B, in the
unfortunate circumstances when misconduct does occur, that
employees and supervisors know and trust the process to report
that misconduct and seek redress. Congressman Pappas' H.R.
6531, the Training VA Employees Act, would enable just that.
Though this bill faced almost unanimous Republican opposition
when offered as an amendment at last year's full committee
markup, it has the co-sponsorship of every Democrat on this
committee. I urge my colleagues across the aisle to join us in
making this important bill law.
Last month, this committee issued a subpoena for the first
time in nearly 8 years. The committee compelled the production
of documents despite the fact that VA was already producing
documents. The committee has received over a terabyte of
information from VA. Yet I was confused to see a press release
from the chairman last week stating that VA has not complied
with the subpoena. I do not in any way agree with that
assertion. It is my belief that VA has acted in good faith and
has provided information at a reasonable pace.
This committee is not a courtroom. We are not judges nor
are we juries. Oversight in this committee is not a trial.
Oversight is the examination of facts and policies. It is the
consideration of what is working and what is not working. In
the case of this committee, it is the assessment of what is
working for veterans.
That is the framing I will employ today as I listen to the
testimony and consider the evidence before us. I invite all of
my colleagues to do the same.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the ranking member for yielding back.
In regards to the ranking member's statement that I am
misleading the public, let me read from the report itself. When
you said no evidence of widespread sexual harassment, the
OAWP's report, the actual quote is, ``The mountain of evidence
and testimony revealed an office replete with misconduct,
including misconduct by organized leaders, which spawned an
environment which inappropriate conduct was rampant.'' That is
the report and exactly as the report is written.
Also, when questioning whether we have received, even in
the testimony that the Secretary is going to give, he will say
that not all of the things that we required in the subpoena
have yet been delivered.
With that, we do, and I want to thank the Secretary for
being here today. On our first panel, we have the Secretary,
Hon. Denis McDonough, Secretary of the Veterans Affairs. Mr.
Secretary, will the witness please stand and raise his right
hand?
[Witness sworn.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Let the record
reflect the witness answered in the affirmative.
Mr. Secretary, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DENIS MCDONOUGH

Mr. McDonough. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
distinguished members of the committee. Thank you so much for
the invitation to be here today. I am going to jump over
several paragraphs to just get to the meat of the issue here
because we obviously have some issues.
I understand, Mr. Chairman, and, as you know, I am
sympathetic to the view expressed by you and others that the VA
took too long to respond to your September 29, 2023, letter
about allegations of misconduct at ORMDI. You invited me here
this morning to discuss the Department's response to that
letter, and I welcome the opportunity to do so.
VA's success as a team depends on how we treat each other.
That means every person at VA, every person entering a VA
facility must feel safe. It means that every VA employee must
have a workplace free of harassment and discrimination. I take
this issue very seriously. I want to be crystal clear, VA does
not tolerate sexual harassment. My unwavering commitment is to
ensure that every employee works in a safe, welcoming, and
harassment-free environment.
Recently, ORMDI fell short of that. I assure veterans and
this committee that we have treated these allegations of
wrongdoing with seriousness. The 125-page OAWP report
demonstrates that we moved aggressively to investigate. VA will
take appropriate disciplinary action in response to this
investigation, as Assistant Secretary Law will describe more
fully in reaction to these learnings from ORMDI, VA is
strengthening its policies, procedures, personnel training, and
structure to improve its handling of sexual harassment
allegations and help eliminate sexual harassment in the future.
Mr. Chairman, you will recall on November 13, we spoke by
phone. You raised with me your concerns about allegations of
misconduct at ORMDI. In that telephone call, you also mentioned
that you had sent a letter to me on September 29 about
allegations of sexual harassment and misconduct at ORMDI and
expressed dismay that VA had not yet responded to that letter.
As I told you during that conversation, I had no knowledge
of having received it. It remains true today. I have no
independent recollection of reading the letter or being aware
of ORMDI allegations before our telephone conversation.
Consequently, the following timeline of events is based on the
research my staff has conducted and not on my personal
knowledge.
As is standard procedure with most congressional letters,
your September 29 letter was received by the Office of
congressional Legislative Affairs and forwarded to the VA
Executive Secretary. There, it was assigned to the relevant VA
organization responsible for the subject of the letter, in this
case, HR&A, because, as you have stated, the allegations of
sexual harassment in the ORMDI group itself fall squarely
within HR&A's purview.
After receiving your letter, HR&A personnel began drafting
a response focusing on addressing the eight questions in your
letter, including what government policies and regulations
govern VA supervisor-subordinate relationships or prohibit use
of personal communications devices for official business, how
many claims of sexual harassment within ORMDI had been brought,
and how many Administrative Investigation Boards (AIB)s or
fact-findings had been conducted involving ORMDI leadership.
Unfortunately, HR&A did not take any significant action beyond
compiling information to draft a response.
Weeks later, your September 29 letter was placed in
background materials that are made available in my daily
briefing book, which includes a tab for letters from Congress.
However, because of the large volume of materials that I have
provided every day, including numerous letters from Congress,
Federal partners, state officials, Veterans Service
Organizations (VSO)s, unions, and the like, I often do not get
a chance to review all those background materials. I have no
recollection of having received or reviewed a September 29
letter until you raised it with me on our November 13 phone
call. It also appears that on October 17, I received emails
from an employee raising allegations of sexual harassment at
ORMDI. I forwarded these allegations to our acting general
counsel since it involved a pending Equal Employment
Opportunity (EEO) action and copied two EEO-related addresses
at the U.S. Postal Service. That is to say, the incoming copied
those two addresses, I did not copy.
A few days later, the acting general counsel confirmed to
me that his attorneys were working with HR&A to address the
allegations. Although the documentary record shows that I
forward this employee's email to legal counsel, I have no
independent recollection of evidence. After the October 17,
2023, emails, there seemed to be considerable activity within
ORMDI and HR&A regarding the allegation.
A series of discussions and meetings are detailed in pages
54 through 58 of the OAWP report. According to the report,
during this time, HR&A and ORMDI leadership began discussing
detailing Davis out or convening an AIB to investigate the
allegations. Former Assistant Secretary Grosso noted in her
OAWP testimony that it was difficult to find an appropriate
official to conduct the AIB investigation. The detailing of
employees and establishment of the AIB did not occur until
November 13, 2023.
I am disappointed that HR&A did not move with more alacrity
in detailing out the alleged bad actors and launching an
investigation of the alleged misconduct. I also regret that I
do not recall seeing your September 29 letter. However, must be
said that I took to heart concerns you expressed in our
November 13 call.
We have moved with dispatch to address these concerns and
to respond to the committee investigation and since that call.
I am firmly committed to ensuring that department processes
congressional letters more efficiently, effectively going
forward.
Now, the committee also appears to be interested in the
sequence of events leading to former Assistant Secretary
Grasso's resignation. During September, I would come to the
decision that we needed a change in leadership at HR&A.
Operations, Security, and Preparedness (OSP) had begun planning
for Ms. Grasso's departure. At that time, I was unaware of the
allegations involving ORMDI.
At the end of the planning process, I had a conversation
with Ms. Grosso and later exchanged emails with her on October
29 and 30 about scheduling her departure and how I would
characterize it. As noted, I was not aware of the September 29
letter or any ORMDI allegations until you, Mr. Chairman,
brought them personally to my attention in November.
Although I had decided a change of leadership was needed, I
would like to emphasize that Ms. Grosso had a distinguished
career of public service. She served honorably for 32 years in
the United States Air Force, from which she retired as
lieutenant general and as the first female personnel chief in
Air Force history. During her career, she also served as the
chair of the Army and Air Force Exchange Services Board of
Directors and chair of the Commissary Agency's board. Command
positions include first Department of Defense (DOD) tri-service
base at Joint Base Maguire-Dix-Lakehurst. I appreciate her
service.
With that, I yield to your question.

[The Prepared Statement Of Denis McDonough Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony, and we will
proceed to questions. I will recognize myself before the
ranking member, knowing and understanding for as much time as I
may consume, but I will give you equal time, and then we will
go to 5 minutes after that for the members.
Mr. Secretary, so when did you first become aware of the
sexual harassment allegations there that we are discussing
today?
Mr. McDonough. As I just testified in our phone call.
The Chairman. Say that again. I am sorry.
Mr. McDonough. As I just testified in our phone call.
The Chairman. Okay. Who puts your briefings binder
together?
Mr. McDonough. My front office staff.
The Chairman. I sent you the allegations in that letter on
September 29. When that letter was put into your briefing book,
you were very specific with many dates in your testimony, but
not this one. Do you know what date that letter was put in?
Mr. McDonough. I do not know specifically. It is 17 or 18
October.
The Chairman. Okay. You also said in your testimony that
the reasons you do not remember my letter is that you often do
not review all the background material in your briefing book. A
chairman's letter, is that considered background material?
Mr. McDonough. No, it is important, it is an important
document.
The Chairman. Does your staff understand that?
Mr. McDonough. Well, yes. We have, you know, we have
updated our processes now to ensure that they do.
The Chairman. How much of your briefing book do you
typically read? You know, I mean, I am sure it is huge, but.
Mr. McDonough. I typically read the whole thing, but I do
not read the letters tab every day. I have just ignored it.
The Chairman. If one of your subordinates receives
allegation of sexual harassment and did not act on them and
then told you they did not--they do not have an independent
recollection of seeing them, how would you consider that
excuse?
Mr. McDonough. You know, it is a hypothetical. I am not
sure I really follow it.
The Chairman. Well, I am concerned because our job of
oversight, you see the frustration we are feeling. We send a
letter. I mean, you and I send a lot of letters back and forth.
We really do. But for not having a staff say, okay, this is
dead serious. You know, it is one thing if we are talking
about--this is the issue that has been given testimony after
testimony after testimony on how we would not do this. Yet your
staff did not say, Mr. Secretary, this letter from the chairman
is--and that is just me commenting. You do not have to comment
on that.
Mr. McDonough. Well, look, Mr. Chairman, it is my
responsibility to have seen the letter when it was presented,
and I regret that, obviously. You and I talk all the time by
phone, by text.
The Chairman. Sure, we do.
Mr. McDonough. We do exchange letters. I take that very
seriously.
The Chairman. When did the whistleblower contact you with
the evidence of sexual harassment?
Mr. McDonough. I received a text on either October 17 or
18. I forget the date.
The Chairman. Okay. It was text?
Mr. McDonough. I am sorry, an email.
The Chairman. Email, Okay. Did you look at the evidence
right then?
Mr. McDonough. I did not look at the attachment, no. It
would be fairly standard for me to not click on an attachment
of a document I was not expecting inasmuch as that is how
malware travels.
The Chairman. All the graphic stuff that we saw here that,
like I said, that we became so disgusted with, that was in
there, but you did not open it?
Mr. McDonough. It was an attachment. I have subsequently
read a set of documents, I assume to this day, but I do not
know, that that is what was attached to that email. You
characterize it to me on the phone.
The Chairman. On what date did your office respond to the
whistleblower and what did they tell them?
Mr. McDonough. I do not have an answer on the response to
the whistle--I do not--first of all, this was an employee. To
this day, I do not know who the whistleblower is, and I am not
seeking to find out. What I heard from this employee, I do
not--I cannot record to you today precisely what was
communicated back to that employee.
The Chairman. Okay. From what we have in our possession, on
November 2, one of the staff emailed and said they would follow
up on this particular email.
Mr. McDonough. Oh, email to the employee?
The Chairman. To the employee, yes. Then, obviously, the
answer for my next question would be, you do not know because I
was going to ask, do you remember if anyone followed up and you
would not know?
Mr. McDonough. I was assured that our team was working the
issue.
The Chairman. Okay. According to the whistleblower, there
was no follow up. My suggestion, because my next question was,
why did not your office follow up, my suggestion would be that
you find out why and make sure that--this is so serious and you
know that, and that is why this continues to be the question.
In your written testimony, you wrote that you copied the
Postal Service. Your verbal testimony contradicted it. Can you
clarify that for me? Which way did it go? I mean, you forwarded
it, but.
Mr. McDonough. The letter--email came to me.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. McDonough. I was among several people on the To line. I
do not know several, among people on the To line, including the
Postal Service inspectors who oversee ORMDI EEO complaints. It
was an EEO complaint. It appeared to me to have--you know, it
appears to that--in that email to be sent to the appropriate
organization that oversees EEO complaints for ORMDI.
Nevertheless, the documentary evidence suggests I forwarded it
on, as I said, to acting general counsel and then received
assurance that it was being done.
The Chairman. This is a tough question, but I am going to
ask you. Are you responsible for the failure?
Mr. McDonough. Look, I am responsible for everything that
happens at VA. I have said that to you in this room many times,
but that is the case.
The Chairman. I agree, the buck stops with you. I said that
in my statement, and like it does with my--and if something
happens to my staff. We still need to know who truly failed
downline from you. Are you holding that person responsible?
Mr. McDonough. Look, the person to be held responsible on
whether I saw your letter is me. That is on me. You know, we
are updating our procedures to ensure that we get everything in
a timely way, and I will do better on that. The person who
failed here is me.
The Chairman. I do thank you for being here today, and we
are going to continue with the questions.
I will yield back. Ranking Member, you are recognized.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, the evidence detailed in the OAWP report
supports that four individuals within VA, within ORMDI, were
engaged in misconduct or failed to act appropriately, and they
must be held accountable. Kind of following the chairman's
question about who below you needs to be held accountable, I
think this gets at this in a more thorough, exact way. My
question to you, Mr. Secretary, is when will discipline be
carried out for those individuals found to have committed
wrongdoing in this investigation?
Mr. McDonough. I want to be really careful here because I
cannot get involved in disciplinary action or the timing. I can
just tell you that we take it deadly seriously.
Mr. Takano. At your level, Mr. Secretary, you are at the
top. My question is you have to maintain a level of
independence from ORMDI.
Mr. McDonough. Well, I have to avoid any appearance that I
am trying to provide command influence on that.
Mr. Takano. Why is that?
Mr. McDonough. You know, the rules of how the Civil Service
and works protects the due process rights of the employees.
Mr. Takano. We are talking several layers below you. I do
not know five, six levels of management below you or however
many lines that are below you. There is an appeals process when
these sorts of accusations happen and they must make their way
up to you. When you say you have to maintain a sense of
impartiality, is that what is the principle?
Mr. McDonough. I think it is partially that, although, you
know, the structure of the decision-making is only part of the
issue. The other issue is I do not want to create an impression
that I am commanding a particular outcome.
Mr. Takano. I see. I see. You truly do want OAWP to have a
certain integrity to its processes when it investigates serious
allegations?
Mr. McDonough. You know, one of the points in my prepared
remarks that I, for purposes of time, skipped over is I think
the OAWP is a more effective organization now than it has been.
Its investigations are handled much, much more quickly. Its
disciplinary recommendations are acted on in the overwhelming
majority of instances. All of that is a function of its
professionalism and a function of our--and, by the way, its
relationship with you all on this committee, and a function of
our not letting it become what some thought it had appeared to
become, which is a political organization. I am going to make
sure that I maintain that posture.
Mr. Takano. Well, I will say that OAWP, the Office of
Whistleblower Protection at one time did seem to the committee
had a reputation for being a place that one would not want to
go to to lodge a complaint because they were fearful that that
office was being used to actually do the opposite. They were
not confident that that office would, one, protect them or,
two, investigate thoroughly or fairly. I can say for--would you
agree?
Mr. McDonough. That was surely a perception when I arrived,
yes.
Mr. Takano. Would we both agree, and I think all of us
would agree here, that for a department of 450,000 employees
that whistleblowers are an important part of----
Mr. McDonough. Vital. Absolutely vital.
Mr. Takano. To have an Office of Whistleblower Protection
is also--with integrity is also very important.
Mr. McDonough. Absolutely vital.
Mr. Takano. I would agree with you that the OAWP has come a
long distance and has provided a very important service in this
case.
Mr. Secretary, ORMDI is in desperate need of new leadership
that will instill confidence, trust, and discipline among its
employees. Have you begun the search and selection process for
a permanent deputy assistant secretary for ORMDI?
Mr. McDonough. We just recently filled the assistant
secretary job with a very experienced VA professional. I will
let you make your own judgments, but I have unending confidence
in her capability. She will testify before you forthwith. We
are allowing the assistant secretary to get up and running and
then to begin the search for the new ORMDI head.
Mr. Takano. Do you have any thoughts as to what went into
the process of selecting the current assistant secretary and
the leadership qualities you sought in this person and that you
would seek in others who would fill the remaining positions
that remain to be filled?
Mr. McDonough. My sense is you all experience this, and in
several minutes, but I am looking for somebody who is candid,
somebody who is transparent, somebody who is tough. Cassie Law
is all those things and she has great experience in VA from the
field to the headquarters.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Dr. Miller-Meeks, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank the
committee for having this hearing. I want to thank Secretary
McDonough for being here.
Secretary McDonough, let me just say that I do not consider
this to be a partisan or political process. I am of the age
where I experienced sexual harassment as a clerk in the
military, as a nurse in the military, as a physician. I went to
medical school when there were less than 20 percent of women in
medical school classes.
Mr. McDonough. We are lucky you did.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Even to this day, when I interview people
for jobs in my office, I do not ask their age, their marital
status, whether or not they have children because of all of the
training I have received. The lines are so tenuous on what is
acceptable and what is unacceptable. Do you know the role and
the mission of ORMDI?
Mr. McDonough. I do.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Can you tell me what it is?
Mr. McDonough. It is to protect the agency employees and
veterans from all forms of harassment.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Correct. Does the VA have a zero
tolerance policy for harassment?
Mr. McDonough. It does.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Let me specifically read to you at
VA.gov.ORMDI.SexualHarassment. ``Another form of harassment
prohibited by harassment prevention policy for Federal agencies
conduct of a sexual nature, includes physical conduct, visual
behavior seen leering, ogling, gestures, expressions, objects,
images, videos, intentional body exposure, behavior heard or
read, catcalls, whistles, hey, baby, jokes, teasing,
flirtations, name calling, pressure for sex, sex favors,
emails, text messages, graphics, notes, Internet content.
Of what you have seen here today, have they fallen under
that category?
Mr. McDonough. Certainly activity outlined in the OAWP
report does not--falls within that category, one. Two, you
know, as was in my submitted testimony, but I left it out for
purposes of time, I think that some of this behavior suggests a
real culture issue in ORMDI.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Yes. Culture starts at the top.
Mr. McDonough. Right.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. You have a top that is rotten and that is
very explicit in the emails, in the text messages, in the
whistleblower testimony. Do you believe in the pledge that you
took, the white ribbon pledge?
Mr. McDonough. I do.
Ms. Miller-Meeks [continuing]. to combat sexual harassment
at--then can you please explain to me how, once you are aware
of this from Ms. Grosso, ``Thanks, Gina. I appreciate your
quick response. How about you choose the last day that works
best for you and let us work on an announcement for you next
week,'' where she says to you, ``I am very sorry I did not
perform up to the appropriate standard.''
What the hell standard was she applying to? A Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) of a company would have to be resigned
for having consensual relations with an employee of either sex.
I find it that this is an office that is to prevent and address
sexual harassment, to train individuals in sexual harassment.
How is the rest of the organization supposed to respond when
those that are in that office cannot even bother to address an
employee's concerns? That employee comes to us, a Committee on
Veterans' Affairs, to complain about their organization, and
the response is, we will make sure that we have the right
message that goes across, so we do not damn your reputation and
make sure you have a soft fall?
You know, the American people are so upset and angry that
no one in the Federal Government is held accountable. I am held
accountable every single 2 years. Every 2 years, I am held
accountable. My name is on the ballot.
You are hiring a person to take over this position who is a
long-term VA employee. I will tell you I could care less if
they are a long-term VA employee. What I want is someone who
can recognize that there may be sexual harassment and does a
proper investigation. If Ms. Grosso did not know how to do a
proper investigation, as per her emails, then she darn sure has
counsel available to her to do that.
I find the conduct of this office deplorable. It is not
heartening. It is not encouraging to all of the employees who
work in the VA system, who work their tails off to help our
veterans of which I am a fellow veteran. This should be taken
seriously. It should not be thought of as political, and the VA
should address this matter immediately. All of those people
apologize, not be given jobs. Elsewhere, there should be
appropriate discipline.
As I said, if I were in the private sector, as my job as a
physician or a nurse, I would not be allowed to conduct myself
in this manner. There would be repercussions, and there would
be consequences.
With that, I yield.
Mr. McDonough. Dr. Miller-Meeks, I very much appreciate the
comments and the question. I just want to underscore that my
decision to relieve Assistant Secretary Grosso presaged,
predated my understanding about what was happening in ORMDI. In
my career, I have relieved many leaders. I have never thought
it was useful to embarrass those leaders, let alone somebody
who served the country, like you, as honorably as Gina Grosso
did. I just wanted to respond directly to your questions.
The Chairman. Representative Brownley, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Nice to see you, Mr.
Secretary. Thanks for being here.
Mr. McDonough. Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Mr. Secretary, as your testimony made very,
very clear, but I feel like we cannot say it enough that every
VA employee deserves to work in a harassment-free environment.
Mr. McDonough. Amen.
Ms. Brownley. I certainly agree with OAWP's findings and
recommendations for discipline, and I hope VA will act
expeditiously to carry out the recommended discipline.
Mr. Chairman, I have a few things that I wanted to get off
of my chest. At our last meeting, I voted with you on your
proposal to subpoena more documents. Now I know of OAWP's
findings and conclusions that seem to be quite the contrary
from what was stated in that meeting, and I feel somewhat
misled.
It seems to me that as the majority has carried out the
investigation, I think they have tried to perhaps paint a
picture and paint themselves as a party for women. Carefully
crafted remarks may sound like they support women, but I need
to point out that their voting records and actions paint a
different story. Let me just explain.
Earlier this Congress, the majority let the authority for
the Women's Veterans Task Force I have long championed quietly
expire. The task force served a critical role in making sure
members were hearing directly from women veterans about the
specific challenges they face. Women veterans deserve regular
member level engagement so we can improve the care and services
they receive at the VA, and I will continue to advocate for the
reauthorization of the task force.
It seems to me that you and your colleagues have been
somewhat on a crusade to restrict the reproductive healthcare
for our Nation's women's veterans. Since January 2023, Mr.
Chairman, you have sent six letters to the VA demanding
sensitive information about the abortion care veterans have
received through the VA, invading their privacy and
scrutinizing the decisions they make with their healthcare
providers.
I also want to state that six of the eight Republicans on
this committee who were serving in Congress in 2022 voted
against the last legislative package that reauthorized the
Violence Against Women Act. I know this bill is outside the
committee's jurisdiction, but I must point out this bill
because the Violence Against Women Act mandates the protections
for survivors of domestic violence and for individuals who have
experienced sexual assault and harassment in the workplace,
exactly the topic we are discussing today.
I hope we are not here for cynical reasons or political
reasons to try and portray that the majority on this committee
is for women and the minority is not. If this investigation is
about protecting women, what about all of the other women who
were wrongly accused of engaging in inappropriate sexual
relations with an ORMDI senior leader?
The majority has publicized and named names and publicized
these allegations, which seem to be wholly unsubstantiated
based on the report, and I think we need to make the record
clear. I know now that on the January 11 meeting, your staff
had evidence in hand to refute these allegations. OAWP
conducted interviews with all six of the women who were alleged
victims of sexual harassment, and each and every one of them
denied having any sexual or inappropriate relationship with
their boss. They were also shocked and embarrassed to find out
such rumors were being spread around their office.
Members of this committee were forced to vote one way or
the other to subpoena additional documents. While failing to
present, I believe, the full picture from all of the evidence,
it seems you already had.
At that meeting I trusted that the truth was being
presented, but I feel like it was not, that I was misled and
that we were all misled. As I said, at the January 11 meeting,
we always must seek the truth. I just had to get that off my
chest.
Now, Mr. Secretary, I wanted to ask you, I know in the
OAWP's report, something stood out to me that the OAWP did not
specifically substantiate that two of the alleged perpetrators,
if you will, committed sexual harassment. They did not say
sexual harassment. What they said was they engaged in
inappropriate conduct of a sexual nature.
I think, you know, we have been talking about--oh, my time
is up. I had a very important question to ask, but I will ask
the next panel the same question.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
The Chairman. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just cannot believe
that people are trying to turn this into a political
discussion. This has nothing to do with politics. I promise
you, I would be in the same exact manner if it were on the
Republican side or in the majority. This is about women. This
is about an individual who was sexually harassed and the VA
ignored it. This has nothing to do with politics.
I take great umbrage at the insinuation that this is a
witch hunt because of the administration that is in power right
now. That is not why we are here.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for coming. Do you believe
Chairman Bost has been fair to you in this investigation?
Mr. McDonough. I think that committee's always been fair.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Do you believe this is a political
motivated witch hunt?
Mr. McDonough. I am staying out of the political things.
Mr. Murphy. No, no, I know. I ask you are a political
appointee.
Mr. McDonough. I think you guys are asking very important
questions. I have made clear to you time and again that I
believe your oversight makes us a more effective organization.
Mr. Murphy. Do you believe this committee has oversight
over the VA?
Mr. McDonough. Even if I did not believe it, you do have
oversight.
Mr. Murphy. We do have constitutional oversight, yes, we
do.
Mr. McDonough. Correct. It is outlined in Article I, which
they should have made Article III.
Mr. Murphy. I was not cranky before I start this, but, I
mean, this is not a political witch hunt. All right. Let me get
back to my questions.
Can you recall any other whistleblower allegations
regarding sexual harassment within the VA itself?
Mr. McDonough. I think there is two things that give me a
positive answer to the question. One is oftentimes I do not
know what the difference between a whistleblower and an
employee is.
Mr. Murphy. Well, let me ask you this then separately. Do
you have a recollection, a direct recollection, of any
employees ever making sexual harassment complaints at the VA
against other employees?
Mr. McDonough. I think I remember Inspector General (IG)
reports on such activity. Yes, I think I have some
recollection.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Then I feel it extremely odd then,
if it is so minor, that such a horrendous accusation would be
made against another employee at the VA, that your staff would
not elevate that to a discussion, rather than sticking
something in a binder where you say you read all the letters,
normally you do all that, but all of a sudden this is not--it
has just turned into the ether.
Mr. McDonough. Look, I understand that, and I wish I did
not have to say what I have said, but what I have told you is
the truth.
Mr. Murphy. Have you had a discussion with your staff as to
why this was not a communication rather than something just
stuck in a binder?
Mr. McDonough. We have definitely changed our process to
make sure that we handle incoming letters with even greater----
Mr. Murphy. I mean, even in this specific Department where
this is the Department that is supposed to investigate this,
that this is not about getting enough, you know, hospital beds
at a VA, this, that and the other stuff. This is an absolute
serious allegation that goes on that we should be not approved
or not disciplined in any part of government or in business for
that matter.
Mr. McDonough. It should not be tolerated anywhere. You are
absolutely right about that. I think what I tried to spell out
in my testimony was that there was moments when it seemed it
was getting traction. Then----
Mr. Murphy. Well, let me ask this. What do you say to the
whistleblower's comment that this type of activity is
commonplace at the VA?
Mr. McDonough. I say to all of our employees that my
commitment to you is that you work in a safe environment.
Mr. Murphy. You know, I believe you. I absolutely believe
you and I believe you have that personal opinion. Unless that
opinion is put in action----
Mr. McDonough. Understand.
Mr. Murphy. Let me ask you, with Ms. Grasso, did you ask
for her resignation or did she offer it?
Mr. McDonough. I told the assistant secretary that I would
lost confidence in her.
Mr. Murphy. Did you have a personal conversation with her
regarding this or you had somebody else?
Mr. McDonough. Regarding?
Mr. Murphy. Ms. Grasso and her employment?
Mr. McDonough. Yes, I had a personal conversation.
Mr. Murphy. Did you personally, point blank, ask her to
resign?
Mr. McDonough. I did.
Mr. Murphy. I would have. I mean, my goodness. When we have
talked about a soft landing, what is a soft landing?
Mr. McDonough. I do not know that I used the word soft
landing. I am not sure. As I said----
Mr. Murphy. I thought that was in an email.
Mr. McDonough. I do not know that I used that language, you
know, so.
Mr. Murphy. Anyway, you know, I get it. If somebody is
getting service, I get this. I am not trying to come down--I am
coming down on the action, not the person.
Mr. McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. If she has done service to the VA, yes, but you
know what? We all are captains of all our ships. When we do
something this egregious, when we turn the blind eye, there
needs to be discipline, not just basically pushing away the
problem. That is what has happened here. I hope that particular
behavior of not making it vacate, poof, go, appear, disappear,
regardless of which party is in power, does not occur in this
government.
Mr. McDonough. I think this is why the OAWP report and our
commitment in the context of that report and the commitment
that I have reinstated here today to you to ensure that that
report informs disciplinary actions is so important.
Mr. Murphy. I am over my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, good to
see you.
Let me begin by saying that we are all deeply troubled to
hear about these allegations. As you said, our public servants
at VA deserve a safe work environment. I think we are all
committed to partnering to conduct the oversight that is
needed. My hope is that we remember our responsibility to seek
the truth and to do so objectively. Leave politics at the door.
I want to thank our Democratic committee staff. They have
worked day and night and through several weekends to index
every single piece of the hundreds of thousands of pages of
evidence VA has provided in response to the majority's
extensive document requests. Thousands of pages of documents
were identified as responsive to the subpoena this committee
issued in January, and this investigation has shown us that
there is important oversight work that this committee needs to
undertake related to the ORMDI realignment.
It is clear that we need to work with you, Mr. Secretary,
to address the issues related to organizational alignment of
ORMDI within the agency. It is important for all my colleagues
to understand that there is a conflict in current law. The
Elijah Cummings Act of 2020 requires the Equal Employment
Opportunity functions to report directly to the Secretary,
while the Cleland-Dole bill we passed in late 2022 requires EEO
functions to report to the deputy secretary.
Additionally, a single senator was able to push through a
problematic provision, it happens quite a bit around here, in
the Cleland-Dole law that capped the number of EEO counselors
at VA. This has led to other structural issues that prevent VA
from fully complying with congressional mandates to realign its
EEO functions.
To the extent that you need help with any of this, Mr.
Secretary, we are ready to assist. Along these lines, Mr.
Secretary, what steps has VA taken or are you taking to realign
ORMDI?
Mr. McDonough. Well, I want to just--Assistant Secretary
Law will be in a position to talk in more detail about this,
but we have looked at and teed up a variety of options to
undertake this. We are on the crux of a challenge, meaning
there is competing statutory requirements. This would be one of
the things that Assistant Secretary Law will be in a position
to talk about.
I do want to just say that Assistant Secretary Law, from
the moment she started in this job, has been taking corrective
action on our procedures, on our processes, on our structure as
it relates to ORMDI and EEO, and requiring each of us across
the agency to do a standdown on the issues that each of you has
raised around sexual harassment in a safe work environment for
all employees.
Where we can take action, we are taking aggressive action
informed by this horrendous, objectionable set of actions that
we are all discussing.
Mr. Levin. Fair to say, Mr. Secretary, that in addition to
the formal review of realignment processes within ORMDI, you
will commit to providing the results of this review to this
committee?
Mr. McDonough. Yes, fair to say.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Secretary, under the current structure, the
Assistant Secretary of Human Resources and Administration,
Operations, Security, and Preparedness, quite a title, oversees
both EEO complaints and personnel decisions. It seems VA is
constrained by the number of assistant secretaries that it has.
Do you think it is worth considering a reorganization of
assistant secretaries to make sure oversight and responsibility
is equitably distributed for HR and investigations?
Mr. McDonough. I think that we should have that
conversation with you all, and I think Cassie would be in a
position to have a little bit of it now. I guess I also just
want to underscore that I do not think that these structural
challenges, as important as they are and as important as it is
that we resolve them, does not obviate my failing in this
instance to make sure that we got going on this much more
quickly than we did. That said, we are on top of it now.
Mr. Levin. Appreciate it. I hope we use this moment to
figure out what we can do better in terms of the structure that
VA uses to ensure the best working environment for everybody at
the VA. Specifically, when we have a challenge where we have
got two existing statutes that are in direct contradiction to
one another, I hope we can all agree to work together in a
collaborative way to fix it, and hopefully the Senate does not
mess it up as they did this past time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Mr. Franklin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you for your time here with us today.
I know you have a lot of directives that are under your
purview, and so you may not be familiar with this one
specifically, the VA Directive 5979 is the harassment
prevention policy. Within that, it says, ``VA Directive 5979
requires immediate and appropriate action to be taken by
management when notified of hostile conduct that is or has a
potential to become severe or pervasive to the point that it
constitutes a legal claim of sexual or nonsexual harassment.''
It goes on to say that it requires ``VA administration,
staff officer, managers, and supervisors to immediately begin
to address,'' it says specifically, ``within 5 business days
any incident of inappropriate or harassing behavior.''
Then it further goes on to say that, ``In the cases of
alleged sexual harassment, VA managers are required to conduct
initial intervention measures to separate the person who brings
forth the allegation from the person accused of sexual
harassment within 1 business day of a sexual harassment
allegation.''
I was not around for when a couple of these things got put
in the Cummings Act that preceded me in 2020. That particular
measure required that the person responsible for EEO report
directly to the head of the Federal agency. That was not VA-
specific. That is all Federal agencies. I suspect that part of
that is because there has been a history of the word not
getting to the person at the top who is ultimately responsible.
As you say, the buck stops with you.
Then subsequently, in 2022, there was the Cleland-Dole
Veterans Benefits and Health Care Improvement Act that we have
discussed here. That does create a conflict because it says
this EEO person should report to the deputy secretary,
Secretary.
I think it has become a red herring here. We are saying
because there is conflict, we cannot do anything. Well, in
reality, in your agency, the solution to not really knowing how
to deal with the conflict is to comply with neither. In fact,
you know, within the 125-page report there is a graphic that
lists the chain of command. It is kind of hard to read, and I
had to kind of map it out for myself. Between you and the
person who either is supposed to report to you or to your
deputy secretary, there is also the former position held by Ms.
Grasso, the assistant secretary for HRA and OSP, which very
specifically is not supposed to be in that chain of command for
reasons potentially of being tainted. The principal deputy
assistant secretary of HRA and OSP, which in this case was held
by Mr. Mayo. Then finally you get to the deputy assistant
secretary of ORMDI, in this case, in the allegations we are
talking about here, Mr. Harvey Johnson.
He was four levels removed from you, according to Cummings,
three levels removed from the deputy secretary under the other
act. In either case, there is no way that your agency could be
complying with your own directive that it is going to be a
sexual harassment allegation is going to be dealt with within a
day. Do you agree with that assessment or not?
Mr. McDonough. I just tried to say to Mr. Levin that I
believe that these issues about reporting on EEO are important
structural questions, but I do not believe that they obviate us
from responsibility or forgive my leadership failings in not
ensuring that that person in question was detailed out more
quickly, and I said that in my opening remarks as well. I
regret that greatly.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. Thank you, sir. I reclaim my time, but
thank you for that.
You know, I did find it interesting in going back through
some of the testimony that we have received. When asked about
VA's noncompliance with Cleland-Dole in his OAWP interview, Mr.
Mayo, who go back to my roster here of who is who, principal
deputy assistant secretary for HRA and OSP, was asked about
noncompliance, and his response was, this is to the OAWP
interview, what is the political risk? It is not like we are
the only agency that does not comply with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
That is the only time, candidly, in all of this, the word
``political'' has come up. This is not political from my view,
and I really hope my colleagues do not take it that way. It is
never been brought up from our side over here. Someone in your
chain of command is viewing the situation of sexual harassment
through the lens of political risk.
Do you see it that way? Is the Department choosing to not
follow Cleland-Dole because they do not see a political risk in
failing to do so?
Mr. McDonough. Yes, I cannot speak for Jeff in that regard.
Mr. Franklin. For yourself. I mean, is there----
Mr. McDonough. I am not here--I do not think there is a
political job. I am not here for a political undertaking. I
just acknowledge to you that these are my leadership failings
and I own them.
Mr. Franklin. I would hope so. But in reading your letter
from last night that you sent us over, it reads like a dog ate
my homework. You have got every excuse under the sun for why--
--
Mr. McDonough. I did not make any excuse. I accept the
responsibility, as I just said again today.
Mr. Franklin. Well, we have a few that went longer,
Mr. Chairman. Could I have just a few more seconds?
Mr. Secretary, in your statement, you say, ``I understand
and, as you know, I am sympathetic to the view expressed by you
and others that the VA took too long.'' Did the VA take too
long or not?
Mr. McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Franklin. You probably did not read this. Is this
written by your attorneys? That is sure what it reads like.
Mr. McDonough. I wrote it. I wrote it. I said in the
testimony, I reiterate again, I regret how long it took. Not
only do I regret it, but I accept responsibility for it.
Mr. Franklin. When the letters were sent to you from the
chairman, you had no knowledge of receiving the letter. Later,
when it was placed in background materials, you were not sure
if it was ever there. You do not recall ever reading it. I
mean, on and on and on.
Sir, I would submit that you are too insulated from the
problem, and we have passed laws as Congress to put the source
closer to you so that you are aware of those things. I get that
you have 400,000 employees that you are responsible for. We all
have over 800,000 bosses every day.
Mr. McDonough. I hear you. I have not made any
representations about any of the issues you just raised. I want
to make sure that I run a flat organization where employees can
get to me.
Mr. Franklin. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for indulging
extra time. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Deluzio.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary, good
morning.
Mr. McDonough. Yes, sir.
Mr. Deluzio. Or good afternoon now.
I first want to echo the Ranking Member's remarks about the
seriousness of OAWP's findings. I think you agree, and like my
colleagues, urge you and VA leadership to swiftly carry out
discipline for those implicated. However, I am deeply concerned
about some of the responsibility I have seen leading up to
today, ignoring due process that in any other form that lacks
protection of speech and debate laws could likely open up folks
to civil liability. The allegations OAWP substantiated are
serious ones, and VA is and must be dealing with them at the
highest levels, as you are here today, and our oversight there
is critical.
OAWP investigated 33 allegations they did not substantiate.
Many of those were ones the majority made publicly without
sufficient factual evidence to back them up. Baseless
allegations of improper relationships can ruin folks' lives.
Relying on rumors presented by some employees while an
investigation is still underway, I do not think is appropriate.
Yet, the majority insisted on putting on a public spectacle,
degrading some of those folks again, while the investigation
was not yet complete.
To be sure, there are serious problems here that the VA
must address. The Democratic committee staff reviewed the
interviews that OAWP conducted under oath, thousands of pieces
of evidence, and came to the same conclusion as OAWP: the
allegation that ORMDI is riddled with systemic sexual
misconduct just is not backed up by the facts.
I am disappointed to see some colleagues pushing that
narrative. Reputations of many faithful VA employees can be
tarnished for many without the evidence there to back up the
accusations.
With that, Mr. Secretary, I will ask you a pretty basic
question. Do you have the authorities you need to swiftly carry
out discipline recommended by OAWP in this case?
Mr. McDonough. I do.
Mr. Deluzio. All right. Thank you. I have concerns about
the majority's Restore VA Accountability Act, which I fear can
serve as another attempt to gut due process under the guise of
wanting more accountability. The latter goal, accountability,
is something I think we all share as part of our oversight
goal. If the Restore VA Accountability Act had been enacted,
would that have changed anything about the authorities that you
already have or need?
Mr. McDonough. It is such a hypothetical, so let me answer
the question this way, which is my experience in leading the
Department for the last 3-plus years is that it is most
effective when we can deal with the employees with clear,
established rules rather than finding ourselves when we take
disciplinary action before administrative bodies or Federal
Courts. I worry, and I have had this communication in public
and in private with the chairman and with the ranking member
and with many other members of the committee, so I feel
comfortable stating it here because they are not going to be
hearing it for the first time, I would like the ability to make
sure that we can manage the Department pursuant to clear rules
so that we can hold our employees accountable.
Changes over the last several years complicated our ability
to carry out disciplinary action and more often got us before,
as I said, administrative bodies or Federal Courts rather than
in a position to resolve the issue for our employees or for the
veterans.
Mr. Deluzio. Take it back to the initial query here. Do you
have the authorities you need to mete out whatever discipline
is recommended by the court?
Mr. McDonough. I believe we do, and we have taken important
disciplinary action. You know, one of the members of this
committee raised some very serious issues, allegations with me
about Montana. We took those deadly seriously and we acted
with--based on the authorities we had. You will get a--you have
a front row seat to see how we do on this one, and I
acknowledge that. I think the jury's out, as the chairman said,
I get that. We are not hiding anything here. We are going to
get this done.
Mr. Deluzio. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Representative Van Orden.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be frank, I
had no intention of addressing this in this manner. Mr.
Secretary, I will be with you in a moment. You know, I am just
not going to sit here and listen to members of this committee,
particularly the ranking member, these spurious, inflammatory,
disingenuous, and blatantly politicized comments that can very
easily be construed to be defending the gross misconduct by
senior leaders in the VA and have a chilling effect on people
who may be sexually harassed as we speak, wholly inappropriate.
To attempt to justify sexual harassment because it was
reported by a lower level employee is offensive. I used to be
the lower level employee, sir. I started at the bottom cleaning
toilets on a tugboat in the Navy. For you to say that, that a
lower level employee should not be able to report these things
is the reason that Congress' approval rating is just above a
root canal, so knock it off, you.
Seems like the lunatics have taken over the asylum. You
know, I have tremendous personal respect for you. I do. I know
that you have an incredibly difficult job. I got to tell you
what, man. Leaders have to protect those we have been given the
privilege, just as we as Members of Congress have to protect
those that we have been given constitutional authority and
oversight, to make sure that our employees, who are--excuse me,
our constituents and our fellow veterans are protected from the
acts. It is just crystal clear. No one is debating whether or
not this stuff took place, and it is horrendous.
I have to say that I believe that this is a systemic issue
in the Veterans Affairs Administration, but also,
unfortunately, a divided Capitol. You are the second member of
the Cabinet who has had some very significant issues with
something that could be very readily addressed. They are called
commander's critical information requirements.
Just as the Secretary of Defense failed to notify the
President that he would be hospitalized for a very reasonable
reason and the cancer, and I do wish him well, if you had
established procedures like getting a letter from the chairman
of the committee that is responsible for writing the paychecks
for your people, essentially, that should go the top of your
list, I think a lot of this could have been avoided.
I have had the privilege of meeting thousands of men and
women throughout my career in the Navy, and I have always made
sure that these things that rise to this level of importance,
like people being sexual harassed or being discriminated
against in any way, I have never tolerated that in my presence.
Sir, if you do not tolerate these things in your presence, I
would encourage you to elevate these types of issues to an
immediate report.
You are the commander, the captain of your ship, and if
these things are important to you, which I believe they are, I
would hope that you would stress this to your staff. If they
are not meeting your standard, then you get rid of them. If you
are incapable of meeting your own standard, then maybe you
should think about doing something else, and I would hope that
that would not be the case. I do have confidence in you. I want
every single veteran to go to the VA to get healthcare, mental
healthcare, so that they can thrive as citizens.
I have one question for you and that is in regards to the
subpoena you were issued. Has the VA been fully compliant with
that subpoena to the best of your knowledge?
Mr. McDonough. Yes. We are being compliant, but we have not
yet provided all the documents that have been asked for. That
is not a function of us withholding the documents. It is a
function of us getting through all the documents.
Mr. Van Orden. Well, give an approximate timeline.
Mr. McDonough. We are providing thousands of documents a
week, so we are, you know--and we have been since I made a
commitment to the chairman to get him those documents.
I get that you are not going to take the heat off us until
we get them to you. I understand.
Mr. Van Orden. Very well. I would encourage you to elevate
this to the level commiserate with how seriously we are taking
this as a committee. Thank you for your time.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. McDonough. Thank you.
The Chairman. Representative Cherfilus-McCormick, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I stated at the last business meeting last month, I am
incredibly concerned about the committee's maintaining the
anonymity of the victim of the unwanted contact from a
supervisor. The victim requested anonymity and the victim
deserves anonymity.
We have already heard from other employees at VA that they
were guessing who was involved based on the press conference
and the public letters from the majority. The way this has been
handled, like a trial in a court of public opinion, has been
very reckless.
Mr. Secretary, what safeguards does the VA have in place to
protect individuals who decide to report harassment, sexual or
otherwise, and misconduct at the VA?
Mr. McDonough. I think this would be an important question
to explore with the Acting Assistant Secretary Gipe, but we
both have established procedures on protecting the identity of
our employees. Then the law that you all passed to create the
Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection gives us
additional authorities to protect our employees.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What is being done to reassure
employees that their concerns will be taken seriously and that
they will be handled fairly and objectively?
Mr. McDonough. One of the reasons I accepted the chairman's
invitation to appear today is to underscore to our employees by
appearing today how seriously I personally take the
allegations. That is one example of our effort to try to
communicate directly to our employees, that not only do we
badly need their candor and their transparent reaction to what
they are experiencing, but we are committed to protecting them
when they do speak.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. After this experience, do you have
any recommendations that you would support to make sure that
these situations or situations that rise to this level are
handled?
Mr. McDonough. I think, you know, I do not have a
particular response on that as it relates to the protection of
the employees. I think it will be important for us to get a
sense of where employees are.
I will say that I am concerned about workplace safety. I am
concerned also about the fact that ORMDI, in light of the
details out, in light of the challenges there, I have been
worried that our employees, especially in this moment, where,
for example, anti-Semitism and Islamophobia appear to be on the
rise, that there may be employees who feel that they are
experiencing such things and are not in a position to have an
advocate at ORMDI or otherwise to be heard.
I did ask OAWP and one of our deputy chiefs of staff to do
a public--to do a hard look at all of our reporting streams to
make sure to identify if there is evidence of increased
feelings of unsafety or disrespect for our employees. We will
periodically do that. If we need to address that through a
climate review, a formal climate review, we will.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Ciscomani, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman Bost, for your
leadership on this effort to bring accountability to all tiers
of leadership in the administration.
Mr. McDonough, good to see you.
Mr. McDonough. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you for being here with us today.
You know, as a husband and a father of six children,
including three girls, these reports fill me with absolute
disgust, I think, and that is a sentiment that can be expressed
by the rest of the people in this room as well, to hear about
the egregious acts and cultural rot perpetrated by senior staff
within the Office of Resolution Management, Diversity, and
Inclusion. Of all offices, that in particular is quite
shocking. As I have learned more through this process, it is
even more disturbing.
I hope, Mr. Secretary, that you will be direct and
forthcoming here in your responses to my questions today, not
only required, obviously by oath, but also the well-being of
those victims, your own team, your own employees in mind as
well, and to have a back-and-forth, direct conversation on
this.
My question is something where I read here in all the
information and the testimony. You know, Ms. Grosso stated in
her Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
report that she took so long to start an investigation because
she wanted to find someone who was the same race and gender as
the victim to run the investigation. Now, as a Hispanic male
myself, and the father of three young Hispanic daughters, I
want to know if it is the VA policy that they would need to
wait an indefinite amount of time and, God forbid, possibly
continue to endure harassment for an investigator to be
available who fits a specific demographic checkbox.
Mr. McDonough. That is not VA policy.
Mr. Ciscomani. Can you expand on the reason for her to do
that, for that to be the reasoning in that? If it is not VA
policy, then why was the assistant secretary that you
appointed, why was she doing it?
Mr. McDonough. I do not know. That is a question for her. I
have not talked to her about that, and I do not know the
answer.
Mr. Ciscomani. This is not something that you would say has
happened at any other time within your supervision of this?
Mr. McDonough. Not that I am aware of, no.
Mr. Ciscomani. You know, I think you have been up front
about this and acknowledging some of the missteps in this whole
process. How do you feel about this particular response of
hers?
I know that she did it. You cannot answer why she did it.
You just told me that. As her supervisor and the one who
appointed her, what is your take on that response?
Mr. McDonough. I said in my opening remarks, and I have
said several times since, that I think it was a mistake that it
took so long for the AIB to be stood up. I think it was a
mistake that it took so long for the employees in question to
be detailed out of their responsibility.
You know, I think it turns out that a decision I made
subsequently, which I think Assistant Secretary Law will be in
a position to testify about, which is to take the investigation
out of the chain of command of HR&A entirely----
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, let me reclaim my time here for just a
moment.
Mr. McDonough [continuing]. was the right decision.
Mr. Ciscomani. It was the time, but also the focus on race
that really jumped out at me on this one. My colleagues are
covering different areas, and I will focus on this one. How
often does race play a part in how VA runs investigations? It
seemed that this is the reason why it was prolonged, this case.
You think it was a mistake of how long it took. It is not
just the fact that it took so long. It is the reason that it
took so long, which was a race-focused decision on this, so
because of, according to Ms. Grosso, it was more important to
focus on race than to helping the victim.
Mr. McDonough. Yes. What we are trying to get to in the
investigation is the truth. The most important thing is the
truth, which will inform our decisions about accountability.
Again, I just cannot comment about what Assistant Secretary
Grosso was thinking at the time.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, and my point of asking these questions
is not just to--obviously, she is not here, unfortunately, to
answer. She abruptly resigned and we know the story there.
However, I am trying to get some sense of this is prevalent
among the entire organization because one of your highest
members in this organization, this is how she acknowledged it
was making these decisions, based on race and how to help the
victim or not. That is very troubling to me, not only for
minority groups, but for everyone that is involved in this.
How is your senior leadership making decisions on whether
to help someone or not? When that is based on race, that is
everything that we stand against and that is everything that
the men and women that served this Nation fought for, to
protect for all of us. I find that very troubling.
I want to make sure that this is not happening anywhere
else and that there is some serious accountability on this
particular issue, on using race to determine if a case gets
investigated promptly or not.
Mr. McDonough. Look, I understand. I am not rebutting the
notion.
Mr. Ciscomani. I would like, in my few seconds left here
that I am already over, just a commitment from you and an
assurance that this is not an institutional issue.
Mr. McDonough. Sure.
Mr. Ciscomani. That you will do all that you can to make
sure that this never happens again.
Mr. McDonough. The purpose of our investigations is the
truth. Truth informs our disciplinary action and forms
accountability. That is the kind of operation we want to run.
That is what I----
Mr. Ciscomani. Mr. Secretary I think the truth is on paper.
We have seen the truth. We have seen the reports on that. I
think the truth is evident.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Ciscomani. What we need now is a commitment that this
will never happen again.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Ramirez, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman. I want to start by
recognizing how deeply traumatizing this hearing has to be for
anyone listening who has suffered from the pain of sexual
harassment, who knows what it is like to have experienced a
misconduct or violence and the revictimization of this
particular investigation. I say this over and over, pain should
never be used as a political ammunition.
I have to say I am deeply troubled how many of my
colleagues across the aisle have gone about this investigation.
I believe that the approach my colleagues are following will
cause lasting harm on how, as a Nation, we address the very
real threat of sexual violence and harassment in the workplace.
Exploiting pain for political points is not going to get us
closer to addressing the failures in Federal policy that
address the sexual harassment, not in our agencies, not in our
halls of Congress, and certainly not even in our offices.
Sexual harassment and sexual violence is absolutely
unacceptable and it must be addressed with policy solutions. I
know this, to do so, the people need to trust that our agencies
and us in Congress are working seriously to pursue solutions
every day, not theatrics. You see, trust is important, and once
it is broken, it is not easily repaired.
Secretary, I want to come back to something you said a
couple of minutes ago, and let me ask you this specific
question around it. Are there conflicting laws that have made
it difficult for the VA and the ORMDI to effectively regain and
maintain the trust of VA employees?
Mr. McDonough. I think that there are competing
requirements on the EEO chain of command, and we can address
those. I want to just hasten one more time to say that none of
those obviate our responsibility to ensure that our employees,
when they speak, they are heard; that when they feel that they
are being mistreated or they are working in an unsafe work
environment, that they do not get support. That is my biggest
failing as a leader in this instance, that this employee felt
that way. I am bound and determined to make sure that does not
happen again.
Ms. Ramirez. I want to follow up on that. Tell me a little
bit about what you are personally doing to ensure that the
trust is restored in not just ORMDI, but the organization who
has a mission of serving other VA employees.
Mr. McDonough. Well, I thought the appointment of a leader
like Assistant Secretary Law into this position with her
experience of fighting aggressively for her fellow career
employees at VA was an important indication of that.
Second, I have encouraged our employees to feel that they
can reach me. I am gratified to know that when this employee
reached me, that, at least in retrospect, that we appear to
have gotten that rolling. I think that there is important
learnings there, as the chairman pointed out, that we have to
make sure that we close the loop back with that employee,
whether that employee is a whistleblower or not, which I still
hasten to say I do not know the identity of the whistleblower.
Then third, I just want to make sure that I am spending
time in the field with our employees so that they recognize
that I am a leader who is approachable, including if they have
concerns.
Last, I accepted the chairman's invitation to come before
the committee today because I thought it was important to
communicate to employees that I hold myself responsible for
these failure and that they see me so do, and that they
recognize that I consider their outreaches to me and their
communications to me to be of vital importance. This is another
opportunity for me to be able to communicate.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Secretary. I agree, it is important
that you are here and that employees see that you are here and
holding you feel accountable and responsible for the agency. It
is such an important matter.
With that, Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentlewoman yields back.
I think for the record, we should be very, very clear, the
whistleblower and vics that were involved in this, everything
that has been done has been done to make sure that we keep
their names as low profile as possible at their request.
Everything that has been done, that has been brought out has
been approved by them specifically, so they know the importance
of why it was that this needed to come to this level. That is
why we had the executive session. That is why we have done
everything we are supposed to do. No one has been misled in any
way, shape, or form. I think it is interesting with a lot of
the questions that come up, that there is a statement like that
because everything has been above board. This is not political.
It is strictly so that we can work to make sure that this never
happens again.
With that, Mr. Crane, you are recognized.
Mr. Takano. Chairman, might I respond?
The Chairman. Yes. Yes, you can respond. Yes, sir.
Mr. Takano. I think the concern on our part has to do with
the fact that the names of the accused were also made public in
previous hearings. It does not take much detective work to
deduce who the other players are in this whole circumstance.
You know, confidentiality was compromised at the previous
hearing.
I have had concerns all along, my own statements at the
business meeting, that we consider the subpoena, not--things
were--that we should have waited for the OAWP report. But, you
know, that is where our concern is coming from.
The Chairman. The concern as far as the people accused,
they were all invited to come well within our meetings' rules
and well within--because the thing is, this is not a low level
area of the VA. This was high level. We can sit here and it
amazes me, and trust me when I say it is not partisan, but,
folks, I do not care whether it is a Democrat, I do not care if
it is a Republican. If at the higher level, you have people
that are sexually harassing and abusing the power to the level
that this investigation found out, this is vitally important to
have this hearing today.
I do not see where this is your side of the aisle or our
side of the aisle. I do not. I do not at all. I see it as this
is and must be dealt with so that a correction can occur in the
agency to see this never happen again.
I respectfully say to you that we have handled this with
the proper legal moves on everything that we did and trying to
make sure that the victims are not overexposed, but the people
who are the accused, actually, that it is made public what is
going on, so that we can clear cure the problem in the future.
I just think that quite often some things that have been said
in the questioning are concerning to me.
Sure, I yield.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you for that. I think, you know, where
I struggle with all of this is the way in which----
Mr. Self. Order.
The Chairman. I did yield. Yes, go ahead.
Ms. Brownley. The way in which these facts have been
presented is inconsistent with what the OAWP's report.
The Chairman. They back it up completely.
Ms. Brownley. It does not match up. Now, there is some----
The Chairman. They back it up completely.
Ms. Brownley. Wait, wait. There is consistency, but there
is a lot of inconsistency to it. I just feel as though we need
to have all of the facts on the table. That is where I am
struggling.
The Chairman. We have had all the facts on the table. We
have.
Ms. Brownley. Well, you have had the report perhaps for a
long time. I have just----
The Chairman. Your staff got it like we did.
Ms. Brownley. What, months ago? No. Yesterday? Two weeks
ago?
The Chairman. That is when we got the report.
Ms. Brownley. Okay. Okay, regardless of timing here, it is
still what is in that report and what has been somewhat
presented, it is inconsistent. That is where, you know, I
certainly felt misled from the first hearing that we had up
until, you know--and then receiving the report and getting, you
know, a fuller picture of what had happened.
The Chairman. Reclaiming my time. We will be able to talk
to others on the next panel. Okay. We have been very consistent
in the sharing of information between our staffs and between
our members, and no one has been given false information. This
has been taken very seriously by both staff, and I think that
it has been very consistent on giving the proper information of
the information we had at each given time.
With that, Mr. Crane, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate you showing
up today, Mr. Secretary. I also appreciate you taking ownership
and accountability for the failures.
You know, I have known you for a little bit. Though you and
I do not always see eye to eye on every single thing, you have
taken the time to come out to my district, tour around, meet
veterans in my district, and also look at the facilities that
we are using to give them medical treatment. In no time in
knowing you for the brief time that I have do I think if you
are the type of man or the type of leader that would take
allegations like this and just blow them off. You seem like the
type of guy that would take these very serious.
That being said, my big concern here is that your staff did
not feel it important enough to make sure that this very
serious issue was not just put in a binder that you might or
might not read, but was clearly communicated to you and
discussed to get your guidance on how you wanted to proceed
with it. Now you said here today that you have improved your
internal processes to make sure that this does not happen
again. Is that correct? Has anybody on your staff been
reprimanded for this or are you just taking ownership of it and
making sure that the process changes?
Mr. McDonough. Ownership of it, making sure that the
process--now we are changing a whole bunch of things, and I am
happy to tick through those things, but for not seeing the
chairman's letter when it was in my book, that is on me and
nobody else. That is on me.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir. Obviously, that seems pretty
disrespectful, you know, just the way that this has unfolded
seems, I am sure, very disrespectful to the chairman. But
also----
Mr. McDonough. That is one of the things that really
bothers me about it, and I saw no other way to address it than
to just come clean in front of them about it.
Mr. Crane. Yes, sir. It also seems disrespectful to, I
think, those of us on this committee, regardless of what party
we are a part of. I would hope there is a little over 20 of us
on this committee, sir, that if any one of us took the time and
we felt there was an issue important enough to send you or your
staff a letter, we would hope that that would not just be put
in a binder and that would be brought to you so that you can
see it.
Mr. McDonough. You have got my commitment on that.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Landsman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Landsman. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Secretary, thank
you for being here and your honesty and candor, integrity.
The committee has done this investigation, and obviously we
have to focus, as I know you are committed to, on what was
found through this investigation and do so in a way that
ensures that the misconduct that was substantiated is prevented
from happening again. Clearly we all agree on that. This may be
redundant, and I think you have talked a little bit about some
of this, but it is worth walking through again, sort of the
steps that you have taken or are going to take in that vein.
The Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
mentioned in the report that some senior leaders within Human
Resources Administration could have responded more quickly to
the employee allegations. Right? The time lag was a few days, I
think, but it still hurt affected employees negatively.
Timeliness is hugely important.
How are you, just walk us through, how you are engaging
with the senior leaders across the VA to ensure that they know
exactly what to do when confronted with these situations. If
they do not, where do they get the information? Then how are
you holding folks accountable? Again, all in the vein of making
sure that this does not happen again.
Mr. McDonough. Yes. Thank you very much for the question.
I just want to say again that I really appreciate the steps
that our assistant secretary for HR&A, Cassie Law, has taken.
From the moment she walked in the door to that job, she
announced, and is requiring each of us, including the Office of
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, to conduct a standdown on
sexual harassment. That means that we take dedicated time in
each component on refreshing our training and our understanding
of sexual harassment.
One cannot read the report--well, I will come back to that
question. The second thing we are doing, again at the direction
of our assistant secretary, is we are reviewing all of the
training that we provide on sexual harassment, and we are
ensuring that that training, where it is lacking, is updated.
Third, it is quite remarkable to me to have learned, and I
think, in retrospect, maybe should have known this, that there
are no anti-fraternization policies or requirement--reporting
requirements at VA. That is a failing. We will update those
fraternization policies.
Four, we are hiring new personnel, as I have just talked
about.
Five, we are restructuring, again, consistent as we have
talked with Mr. Levin and as Mr. Franklin and Mr. Van Orden
have both underscored, we will work with you on the same, on
the restructuring.
Ultimately, we will take disciplinary action. I think that
disciplinary action is extraordinarily important.
I will just say one last thing. I think that the OAWP
report is very helpful. Again, I want to avoid commenting about
it too much for fear of undercutting its good work. One cannot
read it and not be struck by the fact that we do need to
refresh these questions about what is sexual harassment and
what, for example, is acceptable behavior about sexting. I
think that OAWP has done us a good service in making sure that
those facts are all out there in a way that will force us to
confront them.
Mr. Landsman. Thank you. I appreciate your candor and the
way in which you laid out those six items from the standdown
meetings and work, the reviewing of all training, the anti-
fraternization policies, ensuring that you will have them, the
new personnel, the restructuring, and obviously the discipline.
I mean, very comprehensive, and I think that is going to be
very helpful to the committee. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. McDonough. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Luttrell, you are recognized.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, good
to see you, sir. How are you?
Mr. McDonough. Good.
Mr. Luttrell. Pretty valuable note today from your
statement, what you said today, I would create a folder in the
front of your box that says VA chairman on it.
Mr. McDonough. I understand.
Mr. Luttrell. Just saying.
Mr. McDonough. Yes.
Mr. Luttrell. The VA is strengthening its policies,
procedures, personal training, and structures to approve the
handling of sexual harassment allegations and help eliminate
sexual harassment in the future. A lot to unpack here.
There are two individuals that are involved in this
hearing, and I actually have their performance appraisals, both
of which, and these are in leadership positions, both of which
are their ratings are exceptional. I mean, they are one out of
five, they are both fives. Assigning the specific individual
that I think oversees this was Ms. Grosso, correct?
Mr. McDonough. Correct.
Mr. Luttrell. If the incoming--Ms. Law is coming in to step
up what is not effective and efficient, what does that look
like? When I read the VA policy online, and I hate to use the
word ``bulletproof,'' but I know your leadership style from the
past year working with you. I am just curious, how does that
work when you have leadership that is, in my opinion, was the
direct result of the problem? Is it actually the policy that is
not working correctly, or is it our inability to effectively
weed out those individuals that are taking advantage of the
subordinates?
Mr. McDonough. Yes, I think the policy is the start but not
the end. It is, you know, necessary, but insufficient. The
execution of the policy and then the accountability to the
policy is the lifeblood of a well-performing organization. I
think that you are right, the policies are well drafted. I
think we have to refresh our--I think the idea behind the
standdown that Assistant Secretary Law has directed is to make
sure that we refresh those policies and then attach them in
real life to real examples, and then we hold people to account
for it.
I will say that I just signed off on the performance
appraisals for 2023, and I did communicate back to the agency
that I find that the ratings are inflated as a general matter
and that we have to----
Mr. Luttrell. That is troublesome.
Mr. McDonough. Well, I think that over time, unfortunately,
that there is just not a history of being 100 percent candid in
the written evaluations.
Mr. Luttrell. Do the individuals themselves write their own
evaluations and send them up to their superiors for signature?
Mr. McDonough. In this particular instance, I cannot know
for sure. I know that that does happen.
Mr. Luttrell. It does happen.
Mr. McDonough. Yes. In this particular instance, I do not
know for sure.
Mr. Luttrell. I caught something you said earlier and I was
trying to make heads or tails of it, but did you receive an
email from the whistleblower on this complaint and that there
was a tab that was not opened?
Mr. McDonough. Correct? I do not know that I received an
email from an employee. Whether that employee is the
whistleblower, I do not know.
Mr. Luttrell. Did it fall in this window?
Mr. McDonough. It did.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay.
Mr. McDonough. It did. There is an attachment. Now, this is
all refreshed.
Mr. Luttrell. Do you remember the day that that hit?
Mr. McDonough. I said earlier, it is the 17th or the 18th.
I know this now only because I have seen the document.
Mr. Luttrell. October, November timeframe?
Mr. McDonough. Sorry, October 17, 18. Again, now I may be
corrected and maybe I did open it, it, however, is my practice
to not open attachments from emails.
Mr. Luttrell. I understand you got security.
Mr. McDonough. Yes, from somebody that I am not expecting
an email from.
Mr. Luttrell. You said that you had a loss of confidence in
Ms. Grosso.
Mr. McDonough. Correct.
Mr. Luttrell. You engaged with her on a specific day. What
day did that fall on?
Mr. McDonough. I do not--I can get you the exact date.
Mr. Luttrell. I mean, I think what I am trying to get to
is, is it in proximity to the whistleblower before or after? If
your loss of confidence was in any way in that timeframe, I
believe that should have raised a red flag with you. Hey, if
the leadership in this particular department, I have a loss of
confidence and I am receiving information that is directly
correlated to that department, maybe I should dig a little
deeper.
Mr. McDonough. Yes, I think that is fair. You know, I have
tried to, in preparation for today, to go back, to refresh my
memory on the reception of that email, and I just cannot.
I do recall the period around which, in September, I did
lose confidence in the assistant secretary, and it was related
to a range of issues. These sets of issues, namely the
allegations of ORMDI, did not factor into the decision.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, sir. I think just at that specific
level, if things start to unwind, to me, it seems like the
depth of which the iceberg floats could be catastrophic,
which----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Luttrell. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. McDonough. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. McGarvey.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here today, Mr. Secretary.
One of OAWP's findings related to an improper personal
relationship between a supervisor and subordinate. I want to be
clear, it is an abuse of power when a supervisor engages or
attempts to engage romantically with a subordinate employee.
There is an inherent power dynamic at play.
Mr. McDonough. I agree with that.
Mr. McGarvey. Even if both parties allegedly agree to any
type of relationship.
Mr. McDonough. I agree with that.
Mr. McGarvey. We need a process in place to guide these
situations, to protect the balance of power, and to set clear
rules for what is acceptable in the workplace. Just to be
clear, we need to root out harassment in all its forms. Having
clear and stringent guidelines in place is absolutely critical
to that mission.
My understanding is that the VA does not have a policy in
place to discourage this behavior, to guide an employee who may
engage in a relationship with another employee. The Office of
Personnel Management also does not have a policy guiding
agencies on this issue.
Mr. Secretary, my question for you is, is the VA
considering issuing any policies related to interpersonal
relationships between employees, such as an anti-fraternization
policy? If so, when can we expect that policy to go into
effect?
Mr. McDonough. Yes, this is one of the findings of the OAWP
report. I am embarrassed to admit that I did not realize that
we did not have anti-fraternization policies. I would have
assumed that we did. I consider those basically very important
policies. OAWP found that we do not have them and we are
developing them. I cannot give you a specific timeline. I am
happy to report back to the committee. I do not have a specific
timeline that I prepared for today, but I will make sure that I
communicate back to the chairman, the ranking member, and to
you on that question.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Self, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I want to explore leadership at the highest
level. You testified to one of my colleagues across the aisle
that this testimony was not for this committee. It is for your
employees, I believe that is right. You took the time to let us
know four times in three and a half pages of your written
testimony that you were not responsible because you did not
read the chairman's letter.
I want to start with the soft landing, the gracious exit
for the assistant secretary, a former three star general who
was making at the time, between pension and your salary there,
$350,000-odd. You have told this committee that the truth is
the most important thing here. Why did you not--and I have got
a lot to cover here, so a short answer would be helpful, why
did you not hold her rather than accepting her resignation? She
could have helped us find the truth. Now she is beyond
sanction. You allowed her to leave for some soft landing so
that she would not help us find the truth.
Mr. McDonough. I think I will say four things. One, I
testified earlier that my testimony here is important for the
committee and for our employees, one.
Two, I communicated the sequence of events as clearly as I
could, as you pointed out, three times in four pages, so that I
could make sure that the committee understood what informed my
decision-making.
Three, the question about this language, soft landing,
maybe I did use that language. I do not see that in the email
that I have. I do not know that I ever used that word. It looks
like the chairman saying, I did not use that word. Not
consistent with what I was trying to communicate before.
I have relieved a lot of senior people in my jobs over the
years. It has never been useful to embarrass them, ever. Nobody
is confused about why she is not in the job.
Mr. Self. Okay, then you were the White House Chief of
Staff in 2014. Is that correct?
Mr. McDonough. Yes, sir?
Mr. Self. It is not a matter of party, because both
Presidents are of the same party. You were the White House
Chief of Staff. Your deputy, Rob Neighbors, published a report
on the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) scandal. He said
there were significant, chronic system failures in a corrosive
culture inside the VHA.
Now, as the White House chief of staff, I am sure that you
were very aware of that scandal in 2014. We move forward to
2023, and a lot of us that have served in the military
understand the term ``loss of confidence.'' The loss of
confidence also often means that a commanding officer gets
relieved. I have no doubt the fact that you are here speaking
to your employees through this hearing, that many of them are
questioning your ability to leave.
General Shinseki, at the time, a retired Army four star,
said this about that scandal then. He was the Secretary of VA
in 2014. ``That breach of integrity is irresponsible. It is
indefensible and unacceptable to me.'' He said that he could
not defend what happened because it was indefensible, but that
he would take responsibility for it, and he would, and he
resigned.
What is the difference between you and Secretary Shinseki
given these two scandals? Are you saying that this scandal is
not as important? It does not rate as highly as the scandal in
2014, because as the White House Chief of Staff, you would have
been intimately familiar with a cabinet-level Secretary
resigning.
Mr. McDonough. Yes. The differences between me and General
Secretary Chief of Staff Shinseki are manifold. His courage,
his service to the country, his integrity, are all things that
I could only aspire to. I would never compare myself to Rick
Shinseki, who I consider a national hero.
What is the difference between these two instances? I am a
sinner. There is no question that I have failed in this
instance, and I am learning from that failing, and we are
taking concrete steps to address it. That is what I think is
the difference.
Mr. Self. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Just for the record, you never used the term ``soft
landing.'' Where the conversation was is when actually Ms.
Grosso, in her email said, gracious departure. You did not use
that term. She actually used a different word in that.
With that, Representative Pius, you are recognized--Pappas.
Mr. Pappas. You got it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Pappas.
Mr. Pappas. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
thank you.
Mr. McDonough. Sure.
Mr. Pappas. I appreciate your candor today and your
openness in addressing these allegations. Clearly, sexual
harassment, no matter where it is or what form it takes, it is
completely unacceptable. This is totally true about workplace
sexual harassment, which we are facing here.
In a professional environment, every employee should feel
secure and safe. If they experience harassment, they should
feel confident that there are internal processes available to
address their situation, to hold others accountable, and to
reestablish a safe and professional workplace.
Last July, at this committee's markup of the Restore VA
Accountability Act, I offered an amendment to the bill which
would have required VA to provide additional training to
supervisors to foster a healthier work environment at VA.
Unfortunately, it was defeated. That training could have helped
prevent the kind of inappropriate conduct the committee and
OAWP uncovered at ORMDI.
In light of the issues this investigation uncovered, I hope
my colleagues will join me in supporting H.R. 6531, the Train
VA Employees Act. It is bipartisan legislation. I have
introduced it with Representative Van Orden, which strengthened
supervisory training on performance management, prohibited
personnel practices, and addressing reports of harassment and
retaliation, among other things.
Mr. Secretary, you talked a great deal about the standdown,
about the refreshing of policies, about refining training, and
I think those are all critically important. I do not know if
you can shed any light on timelines for any of that or if that
is still in the development stage at this point.
Mr. McDonough. You know, I think I could, but I think I
would more obfuscate than I would be clear. I think Assistant
Secretary Law, who is on the next panel, is in a position to
spell out specific timelines. I am sorry, I just do not have
them at my fingertips, and I am worried I would give you the
wrong answer.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Well, we look forward to more information
on that, and I think this is a vital thing that Congress can
continue to look at in partnership with VA. We appreciate your
leadership there.
Mr. Secretary, we are potentially facing another cliff here
in March and the potential of a government shutdown. This is
not new in this building. We have seen this story play out many
times before, especially over the last year.
I am wondering if you can tell us what impacts are on VA
and organizations like OAWP. What happens when we are facing
the threat of a shutdown and we do not have regular
appropriations?
Mr. McDonough. Yes. OAWP would stop functioning in the way
it does now. There would be no intake or investigations. The
assistant secretary and one staffer will remain to monitor
veteran safety cases and otherwise, it is roughly 150 Full-Time
Equivalent (FTE) would be furloughed.
I think it is worth reaching out to the IG on the same
question, because we obviously really rely on the IG to be an
aggressive set of eyes and ears for us on accountability and
investigation. I think he may have further information to
enlighten this.
At HR&A, the functions in HR&A that support VHA, the health
administration, would remain because VHA has advanced
appropriation. The other functions at HR&A would be furloughed.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you for those comments. Since I brought
up OAWP, you know that I have been a frequent critic of OAWP.
Mr. McDonough. You were very much in my mind when I was
answering the questions about OAWP.
Mr. Pappas. That goes back 5 years during my time on the
Oversight and Investigations (O&I) Subcommittee. I think your
comments are appropriate, that it is a more effective
organization and it has matured and come a long way. Clearly,
there is more work to do.
I will note that the OAWP investigation began in September,
prior to the letter coming over from the committee to your
office. I am wondering if you can offer any more comments on
the findings of the investigation or if you want to stay away
from that. I guess my question would be if you are confident in
the findings of their investigation and anything else you want
to add about OAWP today versus where it was several years ago.
Mr. McDonough. I am confident that in the investigation, I
think it is a good piece of work. I will stop there.
I did note that the referral was made to OAWP in mid-
September. I think that is--or mid-October, I believe. I think
that is an important fact, but probably insufficient.
Also important, you know, they make some characterizations
there about who a senior leader is. They have a jurisdiction on
senior leaders, but importantly, that the employee reached out
to be, I cannot remember the exact timing here to say that they
were concerned about not OAWP, but the AIB that was set, the
Accountability Investigative Board, that was set up to look at
this case was still within the chain of command at HR&A. Out of
that outreach, we made the decision to refer the entire thing
to OAWP. I think that was an important decision.
Last, this is an important tool that you gave us. This was
in my prepared comments, and I went over them. I discarded them
for purposes of time. The OAWP is an important tool that you
gave VA, but that tool has not always been used the way I think
you all intended.
I think now, after very good work by our former assistant
secretary and now by our acting assistant secretary, it is a
more credible organization whose investigations are done in a
more timely way and whose disciplinary actions as a result are
more promptly imposed.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Rosendale.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary McDonough, thank you so much for being here
today. I have always known you to be transparent, forthright,
and, quite frankly, attentive to both your position and this
committee. I do appreciate you being in here today.
I do not think anyone can deny that harassment took place
at this point. We do need to provide the oversight on the
process to make sure that we can eliminate this conduct in the
future and identify where the breakdown was and this lack of
communications so that it did not get to you earlier so that we
could start working on it. I think that is what----
Mr. McDonough. Mr. Luttrell.
Mr. Rosendale. Representative Luttrell, yes, that several
were getting at. My questions are going to try to identify that
breakdown.
Do you know when Deputy Secretary Bradsher first was made
aware of the allegations against ORMDI?
Mr. McDonough. I do not.
Mr. Rosendale. Is there any way that we can get that
information? Are there any documents to support that?
Mr. McDonough. You know, the chairman made some comments at
the end of his opening remarks about wanting to talk to other
employees. I think we have had back-and-forth on that. We will
keep digging on all the document requests and you will make
your own conclusions about that. We will make sure that we
are--you know, as we work out the arrangements, we will have
our people.
Mr. Rosendale. The same with Chief of Staff Kimberly
Jackson. Again, when was she first made aware of the
allegations or information about this?
Mr. McDonough. Fair question.
Mr. Rosendale. You do not----
Mr. McDonough. I do not have that, but I will make sure
that we get it.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. You testified that, ``During
September, I had come to the decision that we need a change in
leadership at HR&A OSP and had begun planning for Ms. Grosso's
departure.'' We had a lot of conversations about the
harassment, but then I just heard you speaking with Mr.
Luttrell.
What I am trying to do is nail down what specifically led
you to make this decision----
Mr. McDonough. Right.
Mr. Rosendale [continuing]. because, in your words, the
cause to lose your confidence. Then you told Mr. Luttrell that
it was not in relationship to these particular charges or
allegations.
My question is, what specifically then did lead you to lose
confidence?
Mr. McDonough. Yes. If you will remember that in September
we were dealing with an issue around critical skills
incentives. It is an issue that we have talked at length with
the committee about. That was among the issues I was concerned
with.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. What did you mean when you said that,
Ms. Grosso, over email, ``You have my commitment to be very
disciplined in how I talk about this and how other senior
leaders talk about your service at the VA.''
Mr. McDonough. What I mean by that is I felt and still feel
that it is never helpful to embarrass a senior leader, a public
employee. In this instance, particularly one who had served the
country over 30--like so many of you over many decades,
honorably. That is what I meant when I said that.
Mr. Rosendale. As long as--again, this is the case, and we
are not just relocating people because you and I have had that
conversation as well, to basically give them another location
to possibly potentially perpetuate the same kind of a problem
that has already existed. That is never good as well. My
understanding----
Mr. McDonough. She was a political appointee, so she, you
know, she served at the pleasure.
Mr. Rosendale. She emailed you on October 29, 30, regarding
her resignation, apologized for not performing up at the
standard. What was she referring to in her email, not
performing up the standard?
Mr. McDonough. I do not know. I would have to ask her about
it. You know, as I said, I communicated I had lost confidence.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. What is the process reviewing a
program, this is going to get into the fiscal end of things
now, and its effectiveness before you request a budget
increase?
Mr. McDonough. One of the things that we have stood up at
VA is I was actually struck when I arrived that there is
relatively few places to have kind of enterprise-wide looks at
programmatically. Each of the independent administrations makes
individual determinations, but we stood up something called the
IRC, and I am not going to remember what it is called now. It
is maybe the Internal Resources Council. This is one of our sub
policymaking groups, and we are doing regular reviews of
resource outlays that are resource investments.
Those inform deliberation at the next three higher levels.
The Integrated Policy Council, which is a, you know, policy
level, policymaking level body across VA that then informs any
deliberation at the deputy secretary level, which is the VA
operations work.
Mr. Rosendale. I am out of time, so I am going to cut real
quick. Are they the ones developing some kind of matrix so that
you can actually measure the effectiveness of either a program
or an agency?
Mr. McDonough. Every program has programmatic goals and
then key performance indicators, KPIs. You know those are run,
in some instances, by the program themselves. Those are, you
know, then double-checked by things like the Independent Review
Commission (IRC), and then ultimately, by congressional
oversight, by the IG, and by other performance standards.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, just real quick, I
just want to mention in my opening statement, I said your
lawyers have a list of individuals we are requesting to
interview as part of the committee's investigation. I just want
to know, can we get a commitment by next week? We can kind of
get an answer on those individuals, on whether we can have
access to them.
Mr. McDonough. Yes, I think it is useful to have this
conversation in this setting. You know, among--so, just to give
you an example, among the things we would like to work out is
one of the persons on the list is our general counsel. A
transcribed interview of a general counsel is a very rare
issue, especially as it relates to the fact that that person
provides privileged legal counsel to me and to others.
I do not see any problem on timing. I just want to--I guess
I need your assurance that we can set this up and work out the
modalities of this consistent with how this----
The Chairman. Everything we want to do, we want to be legal
and above board.
Mr. McDonough. Yes. I also just want to make sure that, you
know, it is pursuant to a set of rules that we all agree to.
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. McDonough. You know, you have got my commitment on
that. Let me just restate the commitment that I think you have
had since the day of that conversation in November, which is we
want to get to the bottom of this and we are cooperating. We
will continue cooperating. We take this very seriously.
The Chairman. I want to thank you for being here today.
Mr. McDonough. Thank you.
The Chairman. I know this has been a long day.
Mr. McDonough. I got real work to do now.
The Chairman. Yes. The witness is excused, and the second
panel, we are going to call them up, but we do thank you for
being here, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. McDonough. I did not mean that. This is real work, I
did not mean that.
The Chairman. I know that. I know that.
Mr. McDonough. I did not mean to be pejorative. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. You are great. No problem.
All right. If we can call the meeting back to order.
On our second panel, we have Ms. Cassandra Law, the
assistant secretary for human resources and administration,
operations, security and preparedness. We also have Mr. Bruce
Gipe, the acting secretary--assistant secretary for Office of
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection. Will the witnesses
please rise and stand and raise their right hand?
[Witnesses sworn.]
The Chairman. Well, thank you for letting the record
reflect that the witnesses have now answered in the
affirmative.
Ms. Law, you are recognized for 5 minutes to provide your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF CASSANDRA LAW

Ms. Law. Thank you, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano,
and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today and for your long-standing support
of veterans and their families.
Testifying with me today is Bruce Gipe, the acting
assistant secretary for the Office of Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection, the office that led the comprehensive
internal investigation into the allegations of wrongdoing at
the Office of Resolution, Management, Diversity, and
Inclusion--ORMDI.
My father, grandfather, and great-great-grandfather were
all veterans. My father was also a physician who served as an
academic and clinical leader over his 33 years of service to
VA. He instilled in me a reverence for our Nation's veterans
and the importance of VA's mission.
Thirty-five years ago, I was fortunate to secure a job
working at the best mission in Federal Government, serving
veterans, their families, caregivers, and survivors at VA. My
first job was helping veterans improve their health and well-
being through recreation therapy at VA Palo Alto. I spent years
providing direct care to veterans before serving in numerous
other roles throughout VA. Today, I am honored to be working as
VA's assistant secretary for human resources and
administration, operations, security, and preparedness.
Ensuring a harassment-free environment is a personal issue
for me. Harassing or discriminatory conduct leads to a waste of
human potential, is inconsistent with the core values of VA,
and hinders our ability to accomplish our mission. I am
squarely focused on these issues, and I will not tolerate
sexual harassment or assault on my watch.
On my first day, I sent a memorandum to the acting general
counsel directing an immediate review of all harassment
prevention training materials. I want to be certain that we are
being effective in training our employees on how to identify
and eliminate sexual harassment and assault. A task force has
been set up to review our current training, which will report
back to me in early March.
I directed all VA undersecretaries and assistant
secretaries to complete a workplace harassment standdown. Each
office was directed to develop a plan of action to be
implemented by April 30 to ensure that all employees fully
understand and adhere to VA's zero tolerance policy. I also
sent an email to all of our more than 400,000 teammates with a
clear message: I am here to support each of them and to make
certain that VA is a safe, welcoming, discrimination-free, and
harassment-free environment.
We are here today because we fell short of this goal at the
Office of Resolution, Management, Diversity, and Inclusion. As
set forth in the 125-page report that Assistant Secretary Gipe
can describe in more detail, VA's internal investigation found
multiple instances of sexual harassment and other misconduct
within ORMDI. The report also found failures by senior leaders
within the human resources organization in addressing
allegations of misconduct at ORMDI when they arose.
Consistent with the recommendations in the OAWP report, VA
is taking a number of steps to prevent sexual harassment in the
future. First, about disciplining the employees involved in
misconduct at ORMDI, I have some very recent news. While I
cannot go into much detail in a public session, I can share
that just yesterday, VA issued a notice of proposed removal to
one employee, and I have been informed there are additional
disciplinary and recoupment recommendations from OAWP's report
that VA will act on by the end of the month and hopefully
sooner.
A number of policy and structural changes are also now
underway. VA is in the process of creating an anti-
fraternization policy addressing romantic or sexual
relationships in the workplace. I expect this policy will
require the disclosure of any such relationships and prohibit
inappropriate supervisor-subordinate relationships.
As highlighted by the OAWP report, the current ORMDI
reporting structure is not in accordance with recent laws
passed by Congress. However, as the report also noted, these
laws impose conflicting obligations on VA. The Department is
working hard to determine the best way to modify ORMDI's
reporting structure in light of the conflicting statutory
mandates. I hope to come back to you in the very near future
with our proposed path forward.
VA is also working to fill the position of a permanent
deputy assistant secretary of ORMDI. Additionally, I am
exploring bringing in a consultant who can further assist me in
the important work of restructuring and retraining ORMDI. I am
focused on improving training and will bring outside expertise
to provide EEO and anti-harassment training to all ORMDI
employees in particular.
Last, I am committed to truly changing the culture and
eliminating sexual harassment and sexual assault at VA. I will
make sure that VA does whatever it needs to do to rebuild VA
employees' trust in ORMDI and create a safe, welcoming
harassment-free environment for veterans and our incredible
workforce.
Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and members of the
committee here today, thank you for allowing VA the opportunity
to testify, and I look forward to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Cassandra Law Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony. We will move
forward with questions, and I will recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Assistant Secretary Law, when were you first told that you
were expected to testify in this hearing?
Ms. Law. I was told about 2 weeks ago.
The Chairman. Were you appointed to this position
specifically for the hearing?
Ms. Law. No, sir.
The Chairman. Now that the OAWP has completed their
investigation and made recommendations, can you explain to the
American people and this committee, step by step, what happens
next and how long you think those steps will take?
Ms. Law. Could I clarify one point, sir? The steps that I
am taking with the report?
The Chairman. That is correct.
Ms. Law. Yes, sir. Absolutely. As in my oral testimony, I
had said the first two actions were to get our general counsel
to do a complete review of our training related to sexual
harassment, sexual assault, and what we call bystanders
training. They will be back to me in mid-March. I asked not
only for a review of the curriculum, but also suggestions on
improvements that we need to make.
Second, I referred to the national standdown, so that is
enterprise-wide, and asked for reports to come to me, plans of
action within 30 days, which I am on about day 19, so mid-next
week, to confirm that there are plans in place with milestones.
Then to have those actions completed by the end of April of
this year, so.
Then the hiring of a deputy assistant secretary for the
ORMDI is being finalized right now. I have taken some time to
rework the expectations. I wanted to be a little bit more clear
before I put that out for recruitment. That will go out very
soon. I will be happy to give the committee an update once it
is live. Of note, it will be all of governmentwide. This will
not be just a VA exploration for candidate. We are opening up
governmentwide to try to get the best and brightest.
Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. On the recommendations of the report, as far
as discipline and things like that, what do you see going
happening there?
Ms. Law. Yes, sir. The first action of the proposed
removal, which I just referenced, that occurred yesterday.
There are processes once that first action is taken, and so
that will need to play out. I do not have a specific timeline
on the other actions that are outlined in the OAWP report.
Again, I would be very happy to come back and update the
committee as we have those to implement.
The Chairman. Who decides the proposing and deciding
individuals are for implementing this? Who makes the final
recommendation and call?
Ms. Law. The VA chief of staff will be the final decision.
The Chairman. How long do you think it will take for VA to
decide whether or not to follow whichever recommendations they
follow?
Ms. Law. I do not have that information today, but as soon
as I do, I will get it right to you.
The Chairman. Okay. The next question would be null and
void, except for the fact I was just going to say, are you
happy with the--you do believe it is going to move fairly
quickly or not?
Ms. Law. Yes, sir, I do. The level of seriousness that this
series of events and today's hearing, the OAWP report and the
recommendations, are being taken incredibly seriously, and we
are moving forward with due diligence and prioritizing.
The Chairman. We thank you from this committee that you are
moving forward and that we are trying to straighten this
problem out.
Ms. Law. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. With that, I will yield to the ranking member
for questions.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Law, I thank you
for stepping into this role during this moment.
Something that struck me about the ORMDI is that the
majority of employees involved in this incident were working,
teleworking, and they were all geographically dispersed. Some
employees had not been face-to-face in person for a very long
time, maybe even years. In the case of the employees involved
here, they were not in person in the same office, were they?
Ms. Law. No, sir.
Mr. Takano. In a conventional work setting where people are
in person in the office, I can imagine a number of ways that
misconduct could occur. I do not want to belittle or assert
that misconduct cannot happen virtually, but I am interested in
hearing more about how this behavior emerges when employees are
teleworking full time and how it can be quickly dealt with.
Ms. Law. Thank you for that question, sir. It is a really
important issue, and it is one that I am looking into in the
revisions of our policies.
When we look at our workforce today and consider a post-
pandemic versus pre-pandemic environment, we have a lot of
telework, we have a lot of remote positions. In addition to
that, as is in the case with ORMDI, we have geographically
differently located offices. There are regional offices that
are located in different parts of the country, and then a core
office that is located in D.C. Having that really raises for me
the importance of clarifying in policy how, you know, we hear
of cyberbullying and we hear of different forms of interactions
that are not explicitly spelled out in our directives and in
our guidance of what you can and cannot do, of what is right
and what is wrong. Really taking, I think this highlights that.
Mr. Takano. You see you needed to update policies.
Ms. Law. Yes, sir.
Mr. Takano. You know, I just want to move on to Mr. Gipe.
Mr. Gipe, my colleagues are very clearly focused on the
timeline of when the allegations of wrongdoing were brought to
the attention of VA and when those allegations were acted upon.
When did OAWP initiate its investigation into these allegations
of wrongdoing, and did the chairman's September 29 letter to VA
prompt OAWP's investigation?
Mr. Gipe. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member
Takano.
We first received our first complaint on September 24, and
I believe Chairman Bost's first letter was on September 29, so
a few days later. They were close in time, but we received ours
a little bit sooner.
Mr. Takano. Did the OAWP's investigation begin before or
after Chairman Bost's letter arrived?
Mr. Gipe. It began before. When we get a complaint in,
usually within 3 to 5 days we have made an initial kind of cut
on it to decide if it is within our jurisdiction and if it is
going to go for an investigation or if it is a monitored
referral.
Mr. Takano. I see. What I am trying to clarify is that OAWP
was responding----
Mr. Gipe. Yes.
Mr. Takano [continuing]. to the complaint, and it was not
the chairman's letter that initiated the OAWP investigation.
Mr. Gipe. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. Is it customary for OAWP, when it begins an
investigation, to inform someone as high as the Secretary that
they are investigating?
Mr. Gipe. No. Usually, we will let the manager of the
person who is accused of wrongdoing let them know.
Mr. Takano. Okay. The immediate supervisor thereabouts.
There would have been no reason why the Secretary would have
known that this was even occurring?
Mr. Gipe. We would not have informed the Secretary.
Mr. Takano. The allegations against Mr. Richardson arose
from conduct that occurred in 2021 and 2022. Can you explain
what caused the delay in those allegations being investigated
and handled?
Mr. Gipe. Yes. I do not believe that an actual complaint
was filed until October 10th, in that case, 2023. What had
happened was there was some inappropriate behavior, which we
found in that situation. Another subordinate manager kind of
took steps to deal with that. We also found that subordinate
manager did not take enough steps, and we kind of made a
finding there. The first time it was actually a filing was
October 10th of 2023. There had been another EEO case that was
involved with an applicant back then in the 2022-timeframe.
That had kind of taken--the action was around that, and I think
that the actual inappropriate relationship or inappropriate
actions by that person had been stopped by that point. It
really was about this EEO suit after that. Then there was a
filing on October 10th, which we looked into.
Mr. Takano. The delay, just to clarify, the delay in
handling the investigation, investigating and handling was due
to Mr. Richardson's immediate supervisor not taking action?
Mr. Gipe. Correct. There were steps that should have been
taken. There were two things I would say. First of all, one of
the supervisors was supposed to do a fact finding, did not do
it. Did, however, say no contact. That is why I think that was
pretty successful ----
Mr. Takano. Was that no contact ever documented?
Mr. Gipe [continuing]. I would have to review the record.
It might have been verbal, but when there was a contact, they
went back and said, no contact.
Mr. Takano. Again, this immediate supervisor is an expert
in EEOC policies and should have known that a verbal directive
to not to have no contact is insufficient.
Mr. Gipe. Correct. Then the second part of that is that
person's next level supervisor, who is another person that we
made a recommendation against. He actually said, do not take it
any further up the line. He said, I am going to handle this
kind of the buck stops with me. He did not trust the next level
supervisor. He said, in a rather crass way to deal with it so--
--
Mr. Takano. In fact, actually, supervisors above that
level, at the level of Ms. Grosso, were not informed about what
was going on at this level?
Mr. Gipe. That is what our investigation showed.
Mr. Takano. All right, thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Representative Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman. Ms. Law, thank you for
being here and to answer some of our questions to both of you,
actually. Thank you for being here. I do want to direct my
questions to you, Ms. Law, if you could answer them for me. I
think we can all agree that the way that the Agency handled
this misconduct was a major misstep. The Secretary before you
right now acknowledged that mistakes were made and highlighted
a lot of the areas where the VA, himself and his leadership
team are addressing the issues that happened there. I
understand that you were not there when all this happened.
Obviously, you were not responsible for this. I do want to
just--if the answer to my questions would be something else,
then I was not there when that happened, that would appreciate
that, just to try to answer them in the best way possible,
because they are going to be more on the general sense of what
you saw when you came in. That is basically my first question
when I am looking at your testimony today, I want to know your
honest take on what the situation was like when you got
involved. What you would have done differently, and what
specific measures are being taken to not only improve the VA
sexual harassment policy, but also ensure this never happens
again. It never happening again is something that I just did a
question to the Secretary as well, which is the main objective
here, to make sure this does not happen again. What did you see
when you walked in, and what would you have done differently
had you been in that position?
Ms. Law. Well, I would like to start by saying I am in
complete agreement, and that is exactly what I want to. I
acknowledge that things were not done well. They were not done
timely. As I said in my opening, I am reviewing all of the
policies right now to get an understanding of what specifically
is included in our policy, what the expectations are for our
supervisors, how the chain of command loops back to follow up
on actions, as well as employees understanding their rights. I
think some of those issues are not clear, so I do not have a
complete answer for you now as I move forward and complete this
review of the policies. Your questions and the tone of your
questions, I believe the intent of your questions are what will
drive my actions.
Mr. Ciscomani. Okay, I will do one quick follow up here.
When we talk about the policies and the expectations of the
leadership, like you mentioned, in my mind, the policies are
one thing. From what I am reading here, people acted at
violating policy in some ways. In other ways, there was a
policy that now could be added and safeguard some of these
actions. At the end of the day, it was the people that decided
to violate these policies. We can have all these policies in
place, but if the people are not acting right and the
expectation is not there for the leadership, then really, it
will not make a difference there. When I look at things like
what happened here with Mr. Johnson continually awarding Mr.
Davis the highest overall job performance rating in every
single category, while both were allegedly sexually harassing
employees. That is troubling to me when you have people that
are applying the policies, that are the perpetrators,
allegedly, of what was happening there. We could have all the
right policy. If you can dive into your point there of holding
the leadership accountable, and making sure that the team, the
employees at every level understand their rights. That at
whatever level they are in, they have the opportunity and the
right to express if something is being done to them that should
not be. Again, policy is one thing, but talk to me about the
expectation from the leadership in spite of the policy being
there, because obviously, in this case, that did not work.
Ms. Law. Thank you. I would answer that with three
thoughts. I think three things that I saw as missing or lacking
and is something that these qualities are very important to me
personally. I believe it is what I will bring to HRAOSP, which
is that acronym for the very long name for my office that ORMDI
falls under, and that is communication. I think communication
needs to be more transparent and more frequent and more
expected as a part of daily operations. Then the second and
third are culture and trust. I think we have seen a degradation
of culture and trust throughout that office. It is a large
office. There is a lot of important work that they oversee and
do. We have shown, without question, that a lot of very poor,
bad, and disrespectful conduct has occurred. It is going to
take some absolute, intentional rebuilding of trust, and you
all will see that as it unfolds as I lean into my tenure in
this role. I look forward to continuing to update you on how we
are doing.
Mr. Ciscomani. I appreciate that and I look forward to
seeing how this unfolds and how we can solve these issues for
them to never happen again. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Law.
Thank you for being here. I had mentioned earlier in the
hearing, talking about the Women's Veterans Task Force and some
of the work that we did there. A lot of the work was the
foundation for the Deborah Sampson Bill that was passed that
had to do with a lot of different things around women veterans.
One importantly was around sexual harassment and determining
that there were policies, or lack of policies thereof within
the VA with regards to that. I just wanted to make a point that
what we are talking about today in this case is really about
employee to employee, but we have to keep eyes wide open with
veteran-upon-veteran in a VA medical center, perhaps also
employee-to-veteran in a particular setting, too. I just want
to raise that issue because it became clear through some of the
conversations, I have had with women veterans across the
country that these types of harassment, veteran-on-veteran or
employee-to-veteran, are occurring as well. I just wanted to
make that point. I also wanted to ask, I know that I misspoke
earlier about the OAWP report just coming out. I understand it
is the redacted report that has come out so that everyone who
is interested can actually read the report and come to their
own conclusions. I know the importance of this hearing is
really to move forward and ahead and to address the issues that
this report has brought about. I just want to make this point,
and I do not want to put you on the spot, but part of the
report was around the rumor mill and vicious rumors and people
talking about each other and making accusations about women
sleeping with their boss, et cetera, et cetera. This committee
has named names and made public various accusations. I think
from my vantage point is the OAWP report disputes some of those
allegations in that they interviewed all of these women, and
all of these women said, no, that is not what was happening. I
just want to know if you agree with me on that or disagree.
Again, I do not want to put anybody on the spot, and I do not
want to pursue a big argument here on the dais, but I would
just like your opinion.
Ms. Law. Thank you, ma'am. I would like to first begin by
backing up one step and thanking you for your leadership and
work on the Women's Veterans Task Force. I am familiar with
that report, and that collaborative effort brought a lot of
good information forward. Thank you very much. That was very
meaningful. I am in agreement. I would also like to allow my
colleague, Acting Assistant Secretary Gipe, to respond as well.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Mr. Gipe. What I would say is, I think it is unfortunate
that there were a lot of things that we looked at that were
based solely on rumor and innuendo. There is a part in our
report where we talk about the lack of appropriately addressing
harassment concerns led to a growth in a hostile and toxic work
environment and led to a dysfunctional office with rampant
gossiping and innuendo, leading to even more harassment
complaints. Obviously, some of the things we found wrongdoing,
and we called it out, and we made hard calls on those. Some of
them. Did they happen? Did they not happen? All I can tell you
is that the evidence was not there for us to find them. There
were rumors, there were innuendos. It is unfortunate that that
does not lead to a healthy culture and happy workforce. I would
hate for anybody who was the subject of one of those rumors to
feel like they had been kind of painted with that brush when it
was not true. That is not what we found.
Ms. Brownley. You are just saying that you did not have the
evidence to back up some of those allegations or accusations?
Mr. Gipe. I will tell you that when we wrote the report, we
tried to be very very careful. In some places, we would say we
found insufficient evidence to support this finding. In some
places, we literally said we found no evidence to support this,
because all we would have was the most blatant rumor that was
just based on a total speculation, and the reasons were not
solid at all. You will find throughout the report, especially
in the unsubstantiated parts where we say there was no evidence
at all.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you for that. I know I have run out of
time. I guess I am not going to be allowed to make my last
statement, so I will yield back.
The Chairman. Okay, you want time to yield? I will yield
you the time to make your last statement, to make it.
Ms. Brownley. Well, I was just going to say I know that I
have no more time, but I am still interested, and I would like
to follow up with you to get some understanding. In the report,
you describe some of what we have been calling sexual
harassment on the dais, inappropriate conduct of a sexual
nature, and I would like to understand the difference at some
point in time.
Mr. Gipe. I am happy to address that or to come visit with
you.
Ms. Brownley. It is up to you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Gipe. Okay. In very short, okay, so sexual harassment
is a very specific legal concept in Title VII. In the EEO
world, our jurisdiction is whistleblower retaliation and senior
leader misconduct. We were also reassigned misconduct by non-
senior leaders in this situation. We were careful because EEO
suits are still going on, and we did not want to make a finding
of sexual harassment because, a) it is not what we do, and b),
there are legal things going on, legal lawsuits going on. We
were careful to couch our findings in our jurisdictional
language, which is misconduct. We just note it kind of
colloquially, that it was misconduct of a sexual nature. I hope
that helps.
The Chairman. Representative Bergman. General Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In looking at both of
your bios, I am not going to use any military examples unless
you want me to, because it is not fair to use a comparison if
you all have not lived it. You are both successful, you have,
for lack of a better term, been through the ranks and moved up
in positions of responsibility. In the VA, just out of
curiosity, does the word command climate ever come up? If I was
to say command climate, could you say, well, it is corporate
climate, it is institutional climate? I do not want to use a
term that anybody wonders what I am talking about. If I say
command climate, basically it all starts at the top?
Ms. Law. Yes, from the top.
Mr. Bergman. From the top down. You are responsible at your
level and below you to lead. Be the example, all of that,
because we use climate surveys in different ways. What is the
cultural climate? What is the employee satisfaction climate?
All of these kinds of things.
Well, this is about command and leadership and taking
responsibility for your actions, but the actions of those under
your command. Having said that, I just like a commitment from
both of you that if you get yourself in a situation that is
just, let us just say, unfamiliar or uncomfortable, that you
will not hesitate to ask for help. If you do not have the
answer and nobody, that you will proactively seek guidance from
above.
Ms. Law. You absolutely have my commitment, and I feel as
though I have been given the ability to do so within the
department, within our structure, with the Secretary and the
Deputy Secretary, and the Chief of Staff. Yes, absolutely, I
will.
Mr. Gipe. You also have my commitment.
Mr. Bergman. Good. What we are talking about here is an
issue of within a command, if you will, within the structure of
the Veterans Administration. In the end, if you all and
everybody in the Veterans Administration are not doing the job
to the best of your ability, in the end, that is going to
trickle down in some way, shape or form to outcomes for the
veterans and their families. I am guessing you. Well, there has
been a lot of, I am sure, tense words and phrases and
interactions used over the last couple of hours.
If anyone under your command is not focused on the better
outcomes for the veterans and their families, then you already
have a command climate issue, and that has to be dealt with
sooner rather than later. In our office, we use a phrase at the
end of every meeting, bad news does not get better with time.
As soon as you see something say something, so we can keep a
brush fire from becoming a forest fire. That is exactly, we are
where we are today because of behavior but actions not taken at
a leadership role. We cannot go back and rewrite that script
that has happened. I am counting on all of you, just like my
colleagues are here to stand up for the right reason and
ultimately for the veterans. When it comes to telling your own
organization, by the way, your behavior is sub-standard, and
either you get a remedial period or you are gone. With that, I
yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Deluzio.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon. Mr.
Gipe, I would like to come back to you and issue around process
of investigations and the like. I will start with, please
explain how does OAWP ensure due process, fairness, accuracy in
investigations you conduct?
Mr. Gipe. It really starts from the first time somebody
files with us. One of the first things we do is make sure that
we have their consent, like, to what extent we can use their
name, so that we make sure we are protecting whistleblowers.
Then once we find out we have jurisdiction, we have trained, I
mean, if you look back at 2019 at the IG's report, we have put
training in place. We have made our investigations consistent
with the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and
Efficiency (CIGIE) standards so that we know that there is no
bias in our investigations. We put policies and procedures in
place. That is how we do it. Then we have also added a layer of
attorneys who review our work and make sure that we are legally
consistent.
Mr. Deluzio. If someone wants to have their confidentiality
protected, you can still pursue the investigation, right?
Mr. Gipe. Yes. Except, so almost always the answer is yes.
There are situations where if we have to keep, somebody might
choose to stay anonymous. There are situations where that might
keep us from taking the next steps we need to take. That is all
in our, like when somebody goes on and signs that information
is all there. We also have a whistleblower navigator to help
people in that situation navigate the situation and figure out
how we can best help them.
Mr. Deluzio. Explain to me, please, the process for
developing disciplinary recommendations. Then who enforces
those recommendations.
Mr. Gipe. Sure. We do our investigation, and at the end of
the investigation, we decide in-house the final disciplinary
recommendation is my call--the executive director for
investigations, the director of investigations, and our chief
attorney. We get together and we have a debate about what we
think the right level is. VA, I do not believe, has a table of
penalties. We look at case law, we look at similar cases within
VA. Then we come up with what we think that the best
recommendation would be.
Then when that is issued, it goes to, usually the
supervisor of the person who we are looking at. They have,
under statute, they have 60 days to propose or decide a
decision. If action is not taken within 60 days, then we are
required to report back to Congress that action has not been
taken.
Mr. Deluzio. Bringing it back to the allegations we have
been discussing in today's hearing, right, OAWP did recommend
discipline?
Mr. Gipe. We did recommend discipline.
Mr. Deluzio. You just answered my next question, 60 days
for relevant officials to take action there. Otherwise, you
would have to come back to us in Congress.
Mr. Gipe. Right. Sixty days is not how long I think it
would take. Sixty days is just when we would have to come back
to you and tell you if something did not happen.
Mr. Deluzio. Understood. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Mr. Rosendale, you are recognized.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you much, Mr. Chair. Thank the
witnesses for being here to address this obviously very bad
situation. The Office of Resolution Management Diversity and
Inclusion at the VA is responsible for preventing sexual
harassment and promoting diversity and inclusion within the VA.
It is deeply troubling that the office tasked with preventing
sexual harassment is instead facilitating harassment and
wasting resources on harmful Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
(DEI) initiatives. We heard Representative Ciscomani talking
about quotes from, the investigation would not take place until
they could find someone who was aligned both culturally and in
their gender to even begin the investigation.
In their Fiscal Year 2024 budget request, the VA requested
an increase of 360 full-time equivalent staff for the Office of
Resolution Management Diversity and Inclusion. The House passed
military construction, veteran affairs, and related agencies,
appropriations bill did not grant this increase. Unfortunately,
the Senate version did provide this increase in funds. Only in
the U.S. Senate would it be seen as a wise idea to increase
funding to an office that has a major sexual harassment
problem.
I believe the Office of Resolution Management Diversity and
Inclusion needs to be abolished. Their few legitimate HR
functions can be transferred to another office within the VA.
The additional money should go toward programs within the VA
that actually help the veterans.
Ms. Law, I understand that you were appointed to your
current position just last month and you have basically been
thrown right straight into the fire. However, your predecessor
left the office in a very bad position and you will need to
work diligently in the coming months to begin basic, to turn
things around. Given that you failed to do something as basic
as submitting your testimony on time, unfortunately, you have
not inspired much confidence to this point.
You testified that one of your top priorities is to ensure
a safe, welcoming, and harassment-free environment for veterans
and employees at the VA. Everybody on this committee agrees
with that goal. Do you think complying with EEOC guidance is
important to achieve your stated goal?
Ms. Law. Yes, sir, I do.
Mr. Rosendale. In an interview with OAWP, Jeffrey Mayo
acknowledged that the ORMDI is not compliant with EEOC
guidance, but stated that so are many other Federal agencies.
We are bad, but so is everybody else. I did not appreciate this
dismissive attitude of the EEOC's guidance.
Does this comment by Mr. Mayo inspire confidence in your
subordinate?
Ms. Law. Well, I do not know the full context of that
discussion or dialog. What I would say and what I would like to
add is that the funding that you referred to, the additional
staff, I think it was 380 FTE----
Mr. Rosendale. FTE.
Ms. Law [continuing]. full time equivalent, is part of the
department's efforts to come into compliance with the Cleland-
Dole Act. It has to do with realigning EEO. We have begun the
realignment of the program managers. There are about between
380 - 400 that still remain in VA----
Mr. Rosendale. Ms. Law, that is fine. Okay, that is fine.
380 extra FTE. If we are not supervising the ones that are
currently there, if the ones that are currently there are
participating in sexual harassment to this extent, exactly what
is 380 individuals, additional individuals there, how is that
going to resolve that problem?
Ms. Law. Well, they are different problems. So, it----
Mr. Rosendale. They are different problems.
Ms. Law. Yes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much. Please, while we are
talking about this problem, let us not have the discussion
about--I am trying to determine how do we resolve this problem.
Okay? How much in taxpayer dollars has the organization paid
out due to EEOC sanction fees in the past decade?
Ms. Law. I do not have that figure with me. I would be
happy to----
Mr. Rosendale. Do you have in the last five years?
Ms. Law [continuing]. happy to come back to the committee.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. I would like to see that broken down
in the last 10 years. Then I would like to see it broken down
on a year-by-year basis over that 10-year period too. We can
see what the trend line looks like. If it is getting worse, if
it is getting better.
The OAWP report pointed out that Harvey Johnson's handling
of the allegations against Archie Davis was particularly
egregious. Most notably, Johnson rated Davis exceptional in
every category, resulting in the highest possible rating.
As the current procedures are obviously not working, what
tangible steps are you taking to better train leaders at the VA
to spot misconduct by supervisors?
Ms. Law. Well, we are taking a couple of actions. I
reference the work that I am doing to look at our policies
right now because I want to strengthen them. I want the
expectations, roles, and responsibilities to be more clear.
More specifically to the scenario that you just gave with the
performance, you heard the Secretary in his testimony, also
note, he has gone back to all of the senior leaders saying, we
need to be tighter, we need to be more disciplined, we need to
more critically look at our assessment of our employees across
the enterprise. I will fold that into this new work as well.
I think it is important. You are right. When you look back
and you see the activities and the actions that this report has
uncovered and that the whistleblowers brought forward. Yes,
there is no excuse for that. I cannot say why an employee would
have a five on their performance evaluation.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. I am going to recognize the next
member here shortly. Mr. Gipe, for the record, because I think
there has been some two different statements made. Based on
your finding in the report. Do you believe that ORMDI had a
toxic culture?
Mr. Gipe. Yes. I mean, I think if you look, I think there
is a quote I can read you, which is, `` this failure of ORMDI's
senior leadership allowed the growth of a hostile, toxic work
environment and led to a dysfunctional office filled with
rampant gossiping and innuendo, leading to more harassment
complaints.''
The Chairman. Okay. I would put another quote in there,
that is also in there. `` The mountain of evidence and
testimony revealed an office replete with misconduct, including
misconduct by organizational leaders, which spawned in an
environment where inappropriate conduct was rampant.''
That is also in there. As we going with the testimony, I
felt like we were getting two different answers on what your
findings were, and I just wanted to clear that up for the
representative. Yes. Representative Ramirez.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman. You know, as we are here
in the second panel and thinking through where we are in this
moment, we know that as Members of the Committee, we have the
responsibility to ensure that the VA holds itself to the
highest standards of accountability and transparency and that
you have the means to carry out due process.
I have a couple questions here. Ms. Law, we have heard many
comments about the responsibilities that senior leaders within
ORMDI had in responding to these sexual harassment claims. What
responsibility do first and second line managers have in
addressing claims of harassment that are brought to them?
Ms. Law. Thank you. Well, in terms of harassment, there is
a duty and obligation to take action to acknowledge the
complaint within 2 days and then within--let me just clarify my
notes here, within 5 days to begin to address any incident,
that includes any incident of inappropriate or harassing
behavior. You may have heard that reference to where that could
be, separating the parties, establishing a no contact order.
That needs to occur within 5 days and then within 30 days to
have the investigation be completed. That is 30 days from the
receipt of the harassment complaint. That is according to the
VA Directive, which is 5979, the Harassment Prevention Program.
That is also one of the directives that I am looking at as part
of the review of all of the directives and guidance that we
have in the department, to make sure that we are as clear as
possible, and perhaps go a step further so that there is no
question as to what actions are necessary.
Ms. Ramirez. Got it. Thank you, Ms. Law. Mr.--I want to
make sure I pronounce that correctly, Gipe? Oh, see, I was
going to say, Gipe, I am really glad you corrected me. I am a
stickler, as the Chairman knows, for good correction in
spelling and pronunciation of names. In this case, you found
that there were failures to report of this middle level of
management as well. What led you to make the conclusion that
they failed?
Mr. Gipe. The one particular situation that we called out
was where the person acknowledged that there was a
responsibility to start a fact-finding. The person's manager
told them and expected that they were starting a fact-finding,
but they said that they were not going to start a fact-finding.
One reason we called that situation out is because it was
intentional. It was not like, oh, I took 5 or 6 days and it
should have been three. It was intentional. That is the one we
called out.
Ms. Ramirez. What were some of the recommendations that you
provided to the VA regarding these managers?
Mr. Gipe. We recommended one manager who was very high
level be removed. One who had already retired, we recommended
clawing back bonuses, yearly performance based awards, and also
annotating SF-50, the document you get when you leave, to show
that the person had retired while under investigation, and that
the investigation substantiated the conduct that was being
investigated.
Two suspensions, and then as Assistant Secretary Law, we
mentioned, we recommend some very specific changes to the
structure of ORMDI, the 5979, which we think leaves holes and
in some places left managers not clear exactly what to do.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you. No, that is helpful. You gave me
some concrete specifics, which I appreciate. Thank you.
Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. McGarvey.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Law.
From our staff's review of the materials provided to the
Committee, there seems to be some frustration among ORMDI staff
around processes like travel authorizations, travel
reimbursements, and training opportunities. When mistakes are
made in carrying out these processes, or when there is too wide
of a latitude for managers to subjectively decide approval,
employees, I think, could understandably see a delayed
reimbursement or non-approval for training as a form of
retaliation. It sounds like the lack of understanding of
procedures and the lack of consistent adherence to procedures
has really hurt employee morale within ORMDI. How do you plan
to work with ORMDI leadership to ensure that employees
understand the appropriate procedures for requesting travel,
submitting reimbursements, and securing funding for training,
so they can identify when non-adherence by supervisors may
occur?
Ms. Law. Thank you for that. I think this is one of those
cases to reference the Secretary's testimony where earlier that
it begins with the policy, but it does not end with the policy.
When you look at travel for Federal civilian employees, the
statutory language is very clear. What we are supposed to do,
the guidelines, how you approve what is acceptable. While we
are still going to look at our policies that govern that, the
how to, it is equally important is how it is communicated and
how often and how frequent.
Earlier, I was mentioning that, I think that when you talk
about culture, and you talk about trust and you talk about
changing the environment, it is my belief, over my career,
which is just over 35 years now, all with VA, I have found that
the more you engage directly with people and you are genuine
and you present the facts as the way they are, and you have
repeated continued dialog, it is easier for those regulations,
and policy, and statutes to sink in and to make sense. If they
do not, you ask questions and you work it out. That is my
approach, sir.
Mr. McGarvey. The problems still exist. Even with what you
just said, does the VA actually have any plans to try and
identify the subjective judgments of supervisors or even the
appearance of these arbitrary decisions? If the statutes are
clear, there is still a problem.
Ms. Law. Well, again, I am reviewing what we have in our
system now for how we communicate what those responsibilities
are. I can provide additional updates as we move forward. I
would be happy to be very transparent with the committee in
what I am trying to do and how I am implementing change.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you.
Ms. Law. It is an important topic.
Mr. McGarvey. Yes. I actually thought it was an easy
question, and so----
Ms. Law. There are also layers of approval, so that plays
into that as well.
Mr. McGarvey. Like I said, that was not meant to be a trick
question at all. We definitely would like an answer. Also, in
the course of this investigation, it is come to the Committee's
attention that there may be issues with how ORMDI employees are
required to file their own EEO Complaints of discrimination.
There seems to be opacity and inherent issues with the process
of filing with the US Postal Service. We know that the ORMDI
employees deserve the same ease of access to the EEO process as
their VA peers. Ms. Law, have you all conducted a review of
this process, and if not, do you plan to?
Ms. Law. That is part of my assessment of the environment.
Absolutely, we do have an interagency agreement with the US
Postal Service that can look at the ORMDI related harassment
and EEO Complaints. I would like to look at the interagency
agreement itself, to make sure that the statement of work
really outlines what we want, and what we need from them, and
the level of specificity and clarity, and then also to, of
course, support it. As part of the OAWP non-disciplinary
recommendations, I am also conducting a review of the last 2
years of all complaints that went over, so that we can do an
assessment of what went over and were they properly addressed.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Representative Budzinski. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Budzinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Law,
and thank you, Mr. Gipe, for being here today to discuss these
important matters with the Committee. Appreciate your time. Ms.
Law, I was glad to hear that you recently initiated guidance
instructing leaders across the VA enterprise to conduct stand-
downs sexual harassment. Can I ask what guidance will be
included in these trainings, and will it include further
instruction on how and when to conduct fact-finding
requirements for reporting disclosures made to supervisors and/
or how to file complaints internally and externally within the
VA?
Ms. Law. Thank you. The stand-down itself will not
necessarily address the specifics of how to, and how to
implement directive, and how to follow the guidelines. That
will be more in line with my review of the policies and the
directives and guidelines to make sure. I think your point is a
great one, that there is not full clarity there. We want to
make sure that everyone understands how and when and the timing
to do so. The second part--I am sorry, the second part of your
question?
Ms. Budzinski. I was just asking about reporting
requirements for reporting disclosures made to supervisors and/
or how to file complaints internally or externally with the VA.
Ms. Law. Yes. That was the more in the line of handbooks.
The first question that you asked about the stand-downs, those
action plans are due to me next week, so I will be doing a
review. We very intentionally gave some leeway, rather than one
standard format of here is a training, and please take it. We
did develop a playbook that had a lot of options that people
could consider to increase the dialog and communication around
this. Thank you.
Ms. Budzinski. Yes. Will you share information regarding
these stand-downs of the Committee, as soon as the materials,
it sounds like, are being prepared?
Ms. Law. I would be happy to.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay. That would be great. I have a question
for Mr. Gipe. As many Members have spoken today, OAWP seems to
have demonstrated serious improvement since its stand up in
2017. How many days is the average investigation within OAWP?
Mr. Gipe. Thank you for that question. It is one I am very
happy to answer. 2 years ago, our average investigations were
taking about 250 days. For last fiscal year, the average case
took 82 days. Which usually, if we have recommendations, those
are going to be ones that take longer, and ones that we shut
down earlier take shorter. It was an average of 82 days. More
importantly, since the beginning of Fiscal Year 2023, in all
but one case that we have made a recommendation, there is been
some action, some disciplinary action by management in every
single case, save one. Our reports are only coming out faster,
but they are being implemented, and they are making a real
impact directly on Veterans and on Veteran patient care and
safety.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay. What steps has OAWP taken to decrease
the time complainants wait for a complete investigation, while
still maintaining thorough and efficient review standards?
Mr. Gipe. It is been really comprehensive. We have, like I
mentioned earlier, we put in place CIGIE standards. We put in
policies and procedures. We have done some hiring. We have an
attorney division in place, and we have done more active
management of case processing. We have also, because of our
procedures, we have made sure that we are not duplicating work
that happens in another forum.
We are moving cases forward. We are getting rid of those
cases that might be at Office of Special Counsel (OSC) or in
some other forum, and we are putting our firepower on the
important cases and taking care of them.
Ms. Budzinski. Great, thank you. Thank you, and I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. That concludes our questioning.
Does the Ms. Budzinski have any closing remarks for the ranking
member? Okay, hearing, none.
First off, I want to thank both the majority and minority
staff for the hard work that they have done in this. I want to
let you know that I am continued to be concerned about the
Biden and VA, giving what we heard today. The investigation is
far from over. Under the leadership, this Committee will find
the truth, no matter how long it takes.
Senior VA leaders, including the Secretary, we were glad to
have him here, have previously told us that they have all the
necessary legal authority to quickly and appropriately
discipline the employees. This is despite the fact that the
Biden Administration is no longer using the streamlined
disciplinary authorities granted under the 2017 VA
Accountability Act championed by former President Trump. Based
on this case, they should probably start.
This is why I will continue to push forward with our
efforts to restore the provisions in the VA Accountability Act
through my bill, H.R. 42.78. The bill was favorably reported
out of the Committee on a party line vote, and I will continue
to advocate for the passage of this important bill. Bad people
have no business serving our Veterans. Period. I ask unanimous
consent that all Members shall have 5 legislative days in which
to revise and extend their remarks and include any extraneous
material. Hearing no objection, so ordered. This hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:11 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Denis McDonough

Good morning, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and
distinguished Members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today.
Later this morning you will be hearing from Cassandra Law, VA's
Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Administration/Operations,
Security, and Preparedness (HRA/OSP), and Bruce Gipe, the Acting
Assistant Secretary for the Office of Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection (OAWP). Acting Assistant Secretary Gipe will describe for
the Committee the results of OAWP's comprehensive internal
investigation into the allegations of wrongdoing at the Office of
Resolution Management, Diversity, and Inclusion (ORMDI). OAWP's
investigation substantiated some of the allegations raised about sexual
harassment at ORMDI and made disciplinary and non-disciplinary
recommendations.
Assistant Secretary Gipe will walk you through the OAWP's findings
and recommendations in detail. Assistant Secretary Law will describe
the steps she has initiated to address the problems identified in the
OAWP report, problems which in my view suggest a troubled culture at
ORMDI. In her first full day in her new position, Assistant Secretary
Law ordered a stand-down to address sexual harassment and directed a
study of VA's existing anti-harassment training, and she is continuing
to focus on combating sexual harassment by developing new policies
addressing supervisor-subordinate relationships and working on a plan
to modify ORMDI's reporting structure, along with other initiatives.
Throughout my testimony I will be careful to avoid appearing to
prejudge the outcomes that may result from the OAWP report. But I think
it is important to underscore to the Committee that we have had a goal
of strengthening the OAWP - a tool you gave VA in 2017 - and that work
has resulted generally in a more effective OAWP and thus a more
accountable VA workforce. For example, OAWP's investigations are now
being completed in an average of 81 days, and since the beginning of
fiscal year 2023 all but one of its disciplinary recommendations have
been implemented in some form by VA components, except in cases of
retirement or resignation prior to disciplinary action.
Mr. Chairman, I understand, and as you know am sympathetic to, the
view expressed by you and others that VA took too long to respond to
your September 29, 2023, letter about allegations of misconduct within
ORMDI. You invited me here this morning to discuss the Department's
response to that letter, and I welcome the opportunity to do so.

Commitment to a Harassment-Free Environment

VA's success as a team depends on how we treat each other. That
means every person entering a VA facility must feel safe. And it means
that every VA employee must have a workplace free of harassment and
discrimination.
I take this issue very seriously and I want to be crystal clear -
VA does not tolerate sexual harassment. My unwavering commitment is to
ensure that every employee works in a safe, welcoming, and harassment-
free environment. Recently ORMDI fell short of that goal.
I assure Veterans and this Committee that we have treated these
allegations of wrongdoing at ORMDI with seriousness. The 125-page OAWP
report demonstrates that we moved to aggressively investigate them. VA
will take appropriate disciplinary action in response to this
investigation. And as Assistant Secretary Law will describe more fully,
in reaction to these learnings from ORMDI, VA is strengthening its
policies, procedures, personnel, training, and structure to improve its
handling of sexual harassment allegations and help eliminate sexual
harassment in the future.

Response to Chairman Bost's Letter Dated September 29, 2023

Mr. Chairman, as you recall, on November 13, 2023, we spoke by
telephone, and you raised with me your concerns about allegations of
misconduct at ORMDI. In that telephone call, you also mentioned that
you had sent a letter to me on September 29, about allegations of
sexual harassment and misconduct at ORMDI and expressed dismay that VA
had not yet responded to that letter. As I told you during that
conversation, I had no knowledge of having received your letter. That
remains true today - I have no independent recollection of reading the
letter or being aware of ORMDI allegations before our telephone
conversation. Consequently, the following timeline of events is based
on the research of my staff and not my personal knowledge.
As is standard procedure with most Congressional letters, your
September 29, 2023 letter was received by the VA Office of
Congressional and Legislative Affairs (OCLA) and forwarded to the VA
Executive Secretariat. There, it was assigned to the relevant VA
organization responsible for the subject of the letter: in this case
HR&A/OSP because allegations of sexual harassment and the ORMDI group
itself fall squarely within HR&A's purview. After receiving your
letter, HR&A personnel began drafting a response, focusing on
addressing the eight questions in your letter, including what
government policies and regulations govern VA supervisor-subordinate
relationships or prohibit use of personal communication devices for
official business, how many claims of sexual harassment within ORMDI
had been brought, and how many AIBs or fact-findings had been conducted
involving ORMDI leadership. Unfortunately, HR&A did not take any
significant action beyond compiling information to draft a response to
your letter.
Weeks later, your September 29, 2023 letter was placed in
background materials that are made available in my daily briefing book
which includes a tab for letters, including from Congress. However,
because of the large volume of materials that I am provided every day -
including numerous letters from Congress, federal partners, state
officials, Veteran Service Organizations, unions, and the like - I
often do not get the chance to review all of these background
materials. I have no recollection of having reviewed the September 29,
2023 letter until you raised it with me in our November 13 phone call.
It also appears that on October 17, 2023, I received emails from an
employee raising allegations of sexual harassment at ORMDI. I forwarded
these allegations to VA's Acting General Counsel for his attention
since it involved a pending EEO action and copied two EEO-related
addresses at the U.S. Postal Service (the group that handles
investigations of ORMDI). A few days later, the Acting General Counsel
confirmed that his attorneys were working with HR&A to address the
allegations of sexual harassment within ORMDI. Although the documentary
record shows that I forwarded this employee's email to legal counsel, I
have no independent recollection of having done so.
After the October 17, 2023 emails, there seemed to be considerable
activity within ORMDI and HR&A regarding these allegations of
misconduct. The series of discussions and meetings are detailed on
pages 54 through 58 of the OAWP report. According to the report, during
this time period HR&A and ORMDI leadership began discussing detailing
Davis out of ORMDI and convening an AIB to investigate the allegations.
Former Assistant Secretary Grosso noted in her testimony that it was
difficult to find an appropriate official to conduct the AIB
investigation. The detailing of employees and establishment of the AIB
did not occur until November 13, 2023.
I am disappointed that HR&A did not move with more alacrity in
detailing out the alleged bad actors and launching an investigation of
the alleged misconduct at ORMDI. I also regret that I do not recall
seeing your September 29, 2023 letter earlier. However, it must be said
that I took to heart your concerns in our November 13th call, and we
have moved with dispatch to address these concerns and respond to the
Committee's investigation since that call. I am firmly committed to
ensuring the Department processes congressional letters more
efficiently and effectively moving forward.

Resignation of AS Grosso

The Committee appears to be interested in the sequence of events
leading to former Assistant Secretary Gina Grosso's resignation. During
September I had come to the decision that we needed a change in
leadership at HR&A/OSP and had begun planning for Ms. Grosso's
departure. At that time I was unaware of any of the allegations
involving ORMDI. At the end of the planning process, I had a
conversation with Ms. Grosso and later exchanged emails with her on
October 29 and 30, 2023, about scheduling her departure and how I would
characterize it. As noted above, I was not aware of the September 29,
2023 letter or any ORMDI allegations until the Chairman brought them to
my attention in our November 13, 2023 telephone call.
Although I had decided that a change of leadership was needed, I
would like to emphasize that Ms. Grosso has had a distinguished career
of public service. She served honorably for 32 years in the U.S. Air
Force, from which she retired as a Lieutenant General and as the first
female personnel chief in Air Force history. During her career she also
served as Chair of the Army and Air Force Exchange Service's Board of
Directors, and Chair of the Defense Commissary Agency's Board. Her
command positions include the first DOD tri-service base at Joint Base
McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, NJ. I appreciate Ms. Grosso's long service to
our country.

* * *

I want to conclude by underscoring two points. First, we respect
the role of congressional oversight and believe it makes us better. For
that reason, VA has been fully transparent and cooperative in
responding to the Committee's requests for information. VA has provided
the Committee with the full results of OAWP's internal investigation,
which includes the OAWP 125-page report as well as the more than 40
sworn witness interview transcripts and more than 150 exhibits cited in
the OAWP report. In addition, the Department has produced more than
55,000 documents collected in the OAWP internal investigation. In this
past week alone, VA produced an additional 5,700 documents to the
Committee. VA has devoted substantial resources, including hundreds of
attorney hours, to producing documents in response to the subpoena. And
VA is continuing to review potentially responsive documents collected
by OAWP and other documents and will continue to produce them to the
Committee on a rolling basis.
Second, eliminating sexual harassment is a critical priority for
us. As Assistant Secretary Law will explain, she has begun taking
important steps to change the culture at HR&A and challenging the rest
of VA to rededicate ourselves to a safe workplace. We are committed to
learning from the past problems at ORMDI and ensuring a safe,
welcoming, and harassment-free environment for all who come to VA.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
______

Prepared Statement of Cassandra Law

Good morning, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and
distinguished Members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to provide testimony and for your longstanding support of Veterans and
their families. I am honored to be testifying as VA's Assistant
Secretary for Human Resources and Administration/Operations, Security,
and Preparedness (HRA/OSP). Also testifying today is Bruce Gipe, the
Acting Assistant Secretary for the Office of Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection (OAWP), the office that led the comprehensive
internal investigation into the allegations of wrongdoing and
misconduct at the Office of Resolution Management, Diversity and
Inclusion (ORMDI).
I grew up with a keen awareness of and respect for VA. My father
was a physician and served as both an academic and clinical leader for
Veterans Affairs for over 33 years. He instilled in me the importance
of the VA mission; a reverence for our Nation's Veterans; and the
significance of leading with intent, inclusion, and integrity -
qualities that drive my leadership style to this day. Thirty-five years
ago, I was fortunate to secure a job working on the best mission there
is in the Federal Government: serving Veterans, their families,
caregivers, and survivors through the Department of Veterans Affairs.
My first job at VA was providing care to Veterans on the front line to
improve their health and well-being through recreation therapy at VA
Palo Alto. I was so proud to come into work every day to serve those
who served our country, as my father had as I was growing-up, - and to
help them get the health care they earned and deserved. I spent years
providing direct care to Veterans in a wide variety of clinical
settings, before moving on to serve in numerous roles throughout VA.
Ensuring a harassment free environment is a personal issue for me.
I have seen the costs to individuals and institutions when employees
are subject to improper, abusive conduct in the workplace. It is a
waste of human potential, inconsistent with the core values of the VA
and hinders our ability to accomplish our mission.
That is why one of my top priorities in my new role as Assistant
Secretary is to ensure we are cultivating a safe, welcoming, and
harassment-free environment for Veterans and employees at VA. Like all
appointees and new members to the senior executive service, and as new
VA employees across the country are encouraged to do, the first thing I
did upon being sworn in as Assistant Secretary on January 19, 2024 was
take the White Ribbon VA pledge to never commit, excuse, or stay silent
about sexual harassment, sexual assault, or domestic violence against
others. Anything less is unacceptable and does not meet my personal
standard.
I immediately followed up on my first full day as Assistant
Secretary by directing an immediate review of all harassment prevention
training materials. I want to be certain we are being as effective as
possible in training our employees on how to identify and eliminate
sexual harassment and assault. To that end, I created a task force to
review our current training, and it will report back to me in the
coming weeks with recommended steps to maximize the effectiveness of
VA's training program.
Also on my first full day, I directed all Under Secretaries,
Assistant Secretaries, and other senior officials to complete a
workplace harassment stand-down. To implement this stand-down, each VA
Administration and staff office was directed to develop a plan of
action and milestones to ensure that employees at all levels fully
understand and adhere to VA's zero-tolerance policy. All stand-downs
are required to be completed by April 30, 2024, or within 30 days of
completing bargaining requirements. This intentional focused review
will reinforce the importance and concepts of the mandatory training VA
uses to educate our workforce on the prevention of sexual harassment
and sexual assault and bystander training.
On the day I sworn in, I sent a message to the entire team of
400,000+ teammates at VA with a clear message: I am here to support
each and every one of you and to make certain that VA is a safe,
welcoming, discrimination-free, and harassment-free environment.

ORMDI Allegations

OAWP Investigation

In 2017, Congress established OAWP so VA would have an office of
highly specialized employees to investigate allegations of senior
leader misconduct and whistleblower retaliation by supervisors. Since
then, OAWP has made significant strides in fulfilling Congress's intent
and upholding the core values at VA. These improvements include more
timely investigations and higher quality investigative reports and
disciplinary recommendations. Following these improvements, OAWP's
disciplinary recommendations were accepted by management in nearly all
cases over the last 2 years. As an indication of its improved
reputation and greater trust from employees, OAWP has received more
complaints over the last few years compared to the years initially
following its creation, while the number of VA-related complaints
received by Office of Special Counsel has decreased.
On September 24, 2023, OAWP received allegations against several
senior leaders in ORMDI, and immediately initiated an investigation.
OAWP was given a deadline by the Chief of Staff for completion of its
investigation by January 28, 2024 - an expedited schedule given the
number of allegations raised in the matter and the importance we
attached to it.
OAWP conducted an independent and exhaustive investigation. During
the course of the investigation, OAWP conducted over 40 interviews, and
obtained and searched through thousands of electronic messages. The
result was a 125-page final report that carefully evaluated each of the
allegations and cross-allegations by ORMDI personnel, finding merit in
many of the claims of misconduct, finding other allegations not to be
substantiated by the evidence, and recommending a number of strong
disciplinary and non-disciplinary actions.

OAWP Findings

OAWP's investigation substantiated multiple allegations raised
against certain officials in ORMDI. The specific OAWP findings included
the following:

An ORMDI official engaged in a variety of misconduct,
including inappropriate conduct of a sexual nature with a subordinate
employee; inappropriate personal relationship with a subordinate
employee; using inappropriate and unprofessional language in the
workplace; failing to investigate or stop sexual harassment brought to
his attention; inappropriately blind copying employees and non-
employees on emails without a valid reason; and generally contributing
to a hostile, toxic, and unprofessional work environment.

An ORMDI supervisor engaged in inappropriate conduct of a
sexual nature.

An ORMDI supervisor intentionally declined to take action
to address sexual harassment allegations against a subordinate
employee, and then ignored a direct order to initiate a factfinding
into those allegations.

OAWP's investigation also found that senior leaders at ORMDI and
HRA/OSP engaged in poor management and failed to take immediate and
appropriate action to address the harassment concerns brought to their
attention. In particular, OAWP found:

An ORMDI senior leader engaged in misconduct in failing
to take action to stop the sexual harassment he was notified of, and
failed to properly supervise an ORMDI official, allowing the harassment
to continue.

An HRA/OSP senior leader failed to ensure a senior leader
took prompt and appropriate action when notified of the allegations
against an ORMDI official.

It should also be noted that OAWP's investigation did not
substantiate many of the allegations raised by complainants, as they
were not supported in the witness testimony or documentary evidence.

OAWP Recommendations

OAWP recommended disciplinary action for several employees.
Specifically, OAWP recommended that:

One ORMDI employee be removed from Federal service and
have bonuses recouped;

Bonuses be recouped from a senior ORMDI official who
retired during the investigation;

Two ORMDI supervisors receive no less than a suspension;
and

A senior HRA/OSP official and a senior ORMDI official
receive training on management's obligations when responding to sexual
harassment complaints.

OAWP also made a number of non-disciplinary recommendations. These
included changes to VA's reporting structure for ORMDI, policies for
workplace personal relationships, and anti-harassment training.

Corrective Actions

Based on the OAWP findings and recommendations, VA is taking
several actions to address the serious problems at ORMDI identified by
OAWP and reinvigorate VA's efforts to create a respectful and
harassment-free environment.

Disciplinary Actions

VA is carefully considering the OAWP report and expects to make a
decision in the coming weeks about what, if any, disciplinary action to
propose for the individuals named in the report.

Policy Changes

VA is creating an anti-fraternization policy to address romantic or
sexual relationships in the workplace, including between supervisors
and subordinates. While the development of the new policy is still in
process, I expect it will require disclosure of any such relationships
and prohibit inappropriate supervisor-subordinate relationships.
We also are reviewing and modifying Directive and Handbook 5979,
Harassment Prevention Program Procedures, to further clarify
management's obligations when they receive allegations of harassment.
The expectation for leaders - as is clearly stated in the Directive and
Handbook - is that they act swiftly any time an allegation of
harassment is brought forward. In addition to the clear obligation in
policy, VA will update the Directive and Handbook to provide further
guidance and examples to illustrate this obligation of managers to act
swiftly any time an allegation of harassment is brought forward.

Restructuring

The OAWP report highlighted that the current ORMDI reporting
structure is not in accordance with recent laws passed by Congress.
However, as OAWP also noted, the Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee
Anti-Discrimination Act of 2020 (Cummings Act) and the Joseph Maxwell
Cleland and Robert Joseph Dole Memorial Veterans Benefits and Health
Care Improvement Act of 2022 (Cleland-Dole Act) impose contradictory
requirements on VA. Not mentioned in the report is the fact these
requirements further conflict with other existing statutory
requirements regarding VA's leadership structure. The Department
recognizes that the reporting of ORMDI needs to be restructured, and we
are exploring the best way to do that moving forward in light of the
conflicting statutory mandates. We are working diligently on arriving
at this decision and hope to further engage with the Committee in the
near future with our thoughts regarding the best path forward.

Personnel

VA is working to fill the position of a permanent Deputy Assistant
Secretary of ORMDI. Additionally, I also am exploring bringing in a
consultant who can assist me in the important work of restructuring and
retraining of ORMDI.

Training

We plan to bring in outside expertise to provide EEO and anti-
harassment training to all ORMDI employees. The training will be
interactive and comprehensive. As briefly referenced earlier, at my
direction, a task force is reviewing the effectiveness of VA's current
anti-harassment training and will report back with recommendations by
early March. In addition, ORMDI management will receive additional
training on managerial responsibilities whenever harassment is alleged
including within the ORMDI organization.

U.S. Postal Service (USPS) Fact-findings

VA contracts with USPS to perform EEO, and discrimination and
harassment claims filed by ORMDI employees or others considered to have
a conflict of interest. At the suggestion of OAWP, we will review all
USPS fact-findings from the past two years to ensure all issues raised
have been properly addressed.

Conclusion

I want to close by emphasizing again that this effort is of vital
and personal importance for me. I have dedicated my entire career in
service to VA, and I am committed to ensuring we are cultivating a
safe, welcoming, and harassment-free environment. The stand-down and
training materials review that I ordered are just the first step. As
discussed above, VA is making changes in policies, reporting structure,
personnel, training, and reviewing USPS fact-findings, among other
actions. The bottom line is that I will make sure that VA does whatever
it needs to do to rebuild VA employees' trust in ORMDI and create a
safe, welcoming, and harassment-free environment for Veterans and our
incredible workforce at VA.
Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for allowing VA the opportunity to testify today.

[all]
