- VA'S FEDERAL SUPREMACY INITIATIVE: PUTTING VETERANS FIRST?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA'S FEDERAL SUPREMACY INITIATIVE:
PUTTING VETERANS FIRST?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-767                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa, Chairwoman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       JULIA BROWNLEY, California,
American Samoa                       Ranking Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               MIKE LEVIN, California
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin             Pennsylvania
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Chairwoman...............     1
The Honorable Julia Brownley, Ranking Member.....................     2

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Dr. Jesse Ehrenfeld, MD, President, American Medical Association.     3

Dr. Paul Barney, OD, American Optometric Association.............     5

Ms. Janet Setnor, MSN, CRNA, Col (Ret) USAFR, NC, President
Elect, American Association of Nurse Anesthesiology............     7

Dr. Stephen D. McLeod, MD, Chief Executive Officer, American
Academy of Ophthalmology.......................................     8

Dr. Ron Harter, MD, FASA, President-Elect, American Society of
Anesthesiologists..............................................    10

Panel 2

Dr. Erica Scavella, MD, FACP, FACHE, Assistant Under Secretary
for Health for Clinical Services, Chief Medical Officer,
Veterans Health Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs.    23

Accompanied by:

Dr. M. Christopher Saslo, DNS, ARNP-BC, FAANP, Assistant
Under Secretary for Health for Patient Care Services,
Chief Nursing Officer, Veterans Health Administration,
Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Ethan Kalett, Executive Director Office of Regulations
Appeals in Policy, Veterans Health Administration,
Department of Veterans Affairs

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Dr. Jesse Ehrenfeld, MD Prepared Statement.......................    43
Dr. Paul Barney, OD Prepared Statement...........................    51
Ms. Janet Setnor, MSN, CRNA, Col (Ret) USAFR, NC Prepared
Statement......................................................    59
Dr. Stephen D. McLeod, MD Prepared Statement.....................    72
Dr. Ron Harter, MD, FASA Prepared Statement......................    86
Dr. Erica Scavella, MD, FACP, FACHE Prepared Statement...........    94

Statements For The Record

The American Legion..............................................    97
National Conference of State Legislatures........................   117
American Nurses Association......................................   132

APPENDIX--continued

Nursing Community Coalition......................................   133
American Academy of Family Physicians............................   136
Jewish War Veterans of the USA...................................   141
American Society of Retina Specialists...........................   144
American Association of Nurse Practitioners......................   145
Blinded Veterans Associations....................................   149
Fleet Reserve Association........................................   151
American Pharmacists Association.................................   152
VA Document For the Record, Briefings and Engagements............   157

VA'S FEDERAL SUPREMACY INITIATIVE: PUTTING VETERANS FIRST?

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mariannette
Miller-Meeks [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Miller-Meeks, Radewagen, Bergman,
Murphy, Van Orden, Luttrell, Kiggans, Brownley, Levin, Deluzio,
Budzinski, and Landsman.
Also present: Representative Davis.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Good morning. I now call the hearing of
the Subcommittee on Health Oversight to order.
I would like to start out by asking that Representative
Scott be allowed to join our Subcommittee and be allowed to sit
at the dais in order to participate in today's hearing
proceedings.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
You may sit.
I never had an opportunity to do that, so.
As a 24-year Army veteran physician and a former nurse, I
strongly believe that veterans deserve the utmost quality in
care. I actually met my husband Kurt, who was an Licensed
Practical Nurse (LPN) at the time, while we were both serving
at Walter Reed.
Having served in these positions both as a student nurse
married to an LPN who became a Bachelor of Science Nursing
(BSN) nurse and a nurse and a doctor, and then the former
director of the Iowa Department of Public Health which had a
lot to do with licensure and scope of practice, I believe I
have a deep understanding of providing safe and effective care
and it remains one of my top priorities in Congress and to
ensure that veterans receive the same quality of care as those
seeking care in private hospitals.
The VA issued an interim final rule known as the Federal
Supremacy initiative in 2020. Through this initiative, VA is
working on establishing national standards for over 50
healthcare occupations regardless of state scope of practice
laws. VA has stated standardizing a set of practices that
healthcare providers can perform within the Federal VA system
would help when needing to transfer care workers between
different VA medical centers depending on where care is needed
most.
Well, I do not argue that this might provide some greater
uniformity within the VA, VA clinicians of all types were able
to move quickly throughout the VA system during the pandemic
when critical needs arose in certain localities.
Although this interim rule was published approximately 2
years ago, VA has not yet considered or opened up a comment
period for majority of healthcare occupations. It remains a
concern to me and many other members on this Committee that the
VA has not been clear and as engaged about some clinical
specialties, specifically specialties that require a
significant investment in training and practice to ensure
patient safety and board certification.
It is imperative that the VA is transparent about this
process and standards to avoid confusion among providers and
patients, especially when there are wide variations in state
licensure laws.
During today's hearing, I look forward to examining the
process and development of these standards. Additionally, I am
eager to better understand how these standards will affect
patient care in the future.
I want to be clear. I am not here to play one profession
against the other. I have the utmost respect for every
clinician who devotes their life to the care of patients and
especially of veterans.
With that I yield to the Ranking Member Brownley for her
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JULIA BROWNLEY, RANKING MEMBER

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Chairwoman Miller-Meeks. Thank you
for holding today's hearing to examine VA's ongoing National
Standards of Practice (NSP) initiative.
As the chairwoman just said, let me also say, because I
want to be clear as well at the outset of this hearing, that I
hold the utmost respect for all of the dedicated healthcare
professionals who work at VA medical facilities nationwide
including all the physicians, nurse practitioners, physician
assistants (PA), Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists
(CRNAs), optometrists, and other healthcare providers. They
show unwavering commitment day in and day out to caring for
veterans, and their contributions to VA healthcare systems are
invaluable.
However, as we embark on this examination of VA's National
Standards of Practice initiative, it is imperative that we
consider the unique needs of veterans, many of whom have
extreme and complex needs and unique medical conditions
resulting from their service. Ensuring that veterans receive
the highest level of care demands a thorough evaluation of the
roles, responsibilities, and training of all healthcare
providers within the VA system.
I firmly believe that physicians with their extensive
medical training and clinical experience play a pivotal role in
providing comprehensive care for veterans, particularly when it
comes to complex medical conditions, surgical procedures, and
advanced treatments.
My own son is a physician, so I have observed firsthand the
tens of thousands of hours of intense study and training it
takes to become a physician. Veterans like all Americans
deserve access to the full spectrum of medical expertise
available to address their healthcare needs.
Throughout this hearing I look forward to engaging in a
constructive and fact-based dialog to better understand the
implications of VA's National Standards of Practice initiative
on the quality of care provided to veterans. Together we must
ensure that veterans receive the highest standard of care and
that their healthcare needs are met by providers with the
appropriate qualifications and expertise. I look forward to
continuing the discussion we began at a closed-door roundtable
this past April where we heard from each of the organizations
represented on our first panel of witnesses today. At that
time, stakeholders representing physician groups expressed
frustration about what they viewed as a lack of transparency
and engagement by VA. They said they had sent letters that had
gone unanswered and that they had not had meaningful
opportunities to engage with Veterans Health Administration
(VHA) officials involved in the National Standards of Practice
initiative. I have heard that the VA has made a greater effort
to engage these groups in the ensuing months and that is
something I hope to hear more about today.
One thing I brought up at the roundtable which I still do
not feel has been thoroughly addressed by VA is why, given all
of the other priorities competing for the attention of senior
leadership, the department has chosen to undertake this
initiative. We are already approaching 3 years since the start
of the National Standards of Practice initiative without VA
having finalized standards for any of the 51 occupations yet.
If there was truly an urgent need to undertake this process one
would think more progress would have been made by now. I hope
today's hearing will shed more light on VA's justification for
undertaking this long, drawn out process to develop a National
Standards of Practice.
I thank all of our witnesses and colleagues for their
participation and candor in this crucial discussion.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Ranking Member Brownley.
I would now like to introduce the witnesses.
On our first panel we have Dr. Jesse Ehrenfeld, president
of the American Medical Association (AMA); Dr. Paul Barney with
the American Optometric Association; Ms. Janet Setnor,
president elect of the American Association of Nurse
Anesthesiology (AANA); Dr. Stephen McLeod, chief executive
officer of the American Academy of Ophthalmology; and Dr. Ron
Harter, president elect of the American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA).
Dr. Ehrenfeld, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JESSE EHRENFELD

Dr. Ehrenfeld. Good morning, Chairwoman Meeks, Ranking
Member Brownley, members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
having me here today.
My name is Dr. Jesse Ehrenfeld. I am a practicing physician
and president of the American Medical Association. I am a
former Navy commander. I have a background in military
medicine. I am on the faculty of the Uniformed Services
University deployed to Kandahar, Afghanistan during OBF.
I can choose to get my own healthcare pretty much anywhere.
For the past 7 years I have chosen to get all of my medical
care at the VA because I believe in the VA, its people, and
what it can offer.
The implementation of these National Standards of Practice
is a very personal issue. This project concerns me because I
believe that our Nation's veterans, my shipmates, will receive
lower quality of care of this project is implemented. In
medicine, our goal is to match the expertise of the person
delivering the care to the needs of the patient receiving the
care. It is why their busiest down reach facilities which
handle the most complex injuries in battle the Department of
Defense (DOD) sends physicians to lead care teams. It is why
today when a patient having cardiothoracic surgery at the VA,
they receive their care from physicians who lead the care team.
However, the Supremacy Project will make it next to
impossible for the VA to match the most qualified clinician
with the needs of the veterans, potentially allowing
nonphysicians to perform procedures that are beyond their scope
of knowledge and state licensure.
This is concerning because expanding the scope of practice
for nonphysician practitioners increases costs and jeopardizes
patient safety.
The VA Evidence Based Synthesis Program found that there
was no evidence to support the safe implementation of nurse-
only models of anesthesia care. A study in the National Bureau
of Economic Research compared the productivity of independently
practicing nurse practitioners and physicians in a VA emergency
department. The study found that nurse practitioners use more
resources and result in worse health outcomes than physicians.
For this reason, physician-led teams are the gold standard
in medicine, which is further illustrated by the fact that 45
states do not allow nurse anesthetists to practice independent,
and 42 states do not allow optometrists to perform eye laser
surgery.
If this project moves forward, models of care that are
rarely used in the private sector will be formalized across the
VA. This will make the VA an outlier in the medical community,
erode public trust in the system, and lead to worse health
outcomes for our veterans. The nonphysicians, such as nurse
anesthetists, pharmacists, optometrists, physician assistants
are integral members of the care team. The skills acumen
obtained by physicians throughout their extensive education and
training makes them uniquely qualified to oversee and supervise
veterans care.
To ensure our veterans receive the care that they have
earned, physicians need to remain as leaders of the care team.
If there are universal standards for each profession then the
most vigorous state scope requirements should be implemented.
In closing, I want to recognize and thank all those who
have served, especially practitioners who brought their skills
and their training to the battlefield. As the administration
and Congress consider the implementation of this project, it is
imperative to remember four points. There are important
distinctions between care provided in battle and that of
routine planned care provided to veterans that typically have
comorbidities due to age and service-connected disabilities.
Though I choose to get my care at the VA, there are many
veterans that must receive their care at the VA because they
have no other option. We must ensure that they receive the best
care possible, that of physician-led team-based care. As
leaders of a care team, physician representation on all the VA
workers, not just the physician workers, should be mandatory.
Finally, it is unclear why this project is needed. The VA
originally rationalized that they needed this project because
of privileging issues with the new EHR. In follow-up meetings
the VA then stated the project was needed to move personnel
around the system. These shifting rationales do not make sense
and do not align with how good medicine is practiced.
As we all work together to ensure that the VA is the best
healthcare system it can be, let us truly consider the
implications of the Federal Supremacy Project and the negative
impact it will have on our veterans.
Thank you so much for having me here and I look forward to
your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jesse Ehrenfeld Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Dr. Ehrenfeld.
Dr. Barney, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PAUL BARNEY

Dr. Barney. Thank you and good morning.
My name is Dr. Paul Barney, and I am here today
representing the American Optometric Association.
I live and practice in Anchorage, Alaska, where I have
served as a center director for the Pacific Cataract and Laser
Institute for nearly 25 years. I believe that I bring a
valuable perspective to today's discussions as I am a
practicing Doctor of Optometry who routinely provides laser and
other surgical care to my patients.
I did part of my training at an Army hospital and at a VA
outpatient clinic. As an adjunct professor at two U.S.
optometry schools, I am involved in training the next
generation of frontline eye doctors. As a lecturer, I help keep
my colleagues on the cutting edge of patient care.
I also understand what it is like to live in a community
faced with a shortage of medical doctors and other providers.
Roughly 40 percent of counties or county equivalents in the
U.S. have access to a Doctor of Optometry but not an
ophthalmologist. That number is expected to grow.
America's Doctor of Optometry are stepping up to fill that
gap. Optometry's training and abilities have continued to
advance alongside the evolution of technology. Today's rigorous
4-year optometry school curricula focuses exclusively on the
study of ocular health and vision care. Laser and surgical
education, both didactic and hands on is embedded and is a key
part of optometric education at both the optometry school level
and the post-doctoral level. In fact, contrary to what
detractors say, laser and surgical care has been and continues
to be taught at each and every school and college of optometry
in the country.
Doctors of Optometry are licensed to practice by their
state and their scope of practice is set by the state's laws
and regulations. The trend for the past 50 years has been for
states to increase optometric scope of practice. In no case has
their scope of practice been reduced.
In 10 states, doctors of optometry are authorized to use
lasers to treat ocular conditions. In one state, Oklahoma,
optometrists have been providing laser eye care for nearly 30
years. State regulators cite that this authority has led to an
increase in access to care particularly in the states
underserved in rural areas. Those state officials also report
little or no patient complaints have resulted from this
increase in scope of care.
Further, malpractice rates for doctors of optometry in
states with the authority to provide laser eye care and other
contemporary procedures are roughly identical to rates in
states without that authority which highlights the safety and
efficacy of this care provided by optometrists.
Aside from in-house care at VA, all Federal health programs
recognize, cover, and pay for doctors of optometry to provide
laser and other surgical procedures covered under the state's
scope of practice. Medicare, Medicaid, and the Indian Health
Service all cover and pay for the full range of services
authorized under an optometrist's state scope of practice.
Similarly, all major private payers cover and pay for laser
eye care and other surgical procedures included in an
optometrist's state's scope of practice. The VA's own Community
Care program recognizes that injections, lasers, and eye
surgery can be provided by an optometrist based on the
licensure of the provider.
Eye and vision care ranks as the third most requested
service by veterans. Doctors of optometry provide roughly
three-quarters of all eye and vision care in the VA. With
optometrists often being the only eye care provider at many VA
facilities what the department decides to include or exclude
from the Optometry National Standards of Practice will have an
outsized impact on access and timeliness of care, which will
affect patient outcomes and veteran quality of life for years
to come.
The veteran service organization, American Veterans
(AMVETS) has repeatedly urged the VA to ensure that any VA
policy ensure veteran access to the full range of care that
both ophthalmologists and optometrists are authorized to
perform, including lasers and other surgical procedures. AMVETS
has shared concerns that if the VA does not get it right, its
members may not have the same access or choices that other
citizens in their states enjoy.
At a time when the VA is struggling to meet veteran demand
for eye care, it is important that the VA cut through the noise
and do what is right for veterans by advancing an optometry NSP
that recognizes and ensures veteran access to the full range of
care including laser eye care and other surgical procedures
that doctors of optometry are trained, licensed, and fully
capable of providing. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Paul Barney Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Dr. Barney.
Ms. Setnor, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JANET SETNOR

Ms. Setnor. Good morning, Chairwoman Miller-Meeks, Ranking
Member Brownley, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the invitation today to speak on veterans' care.
I am Jan Setnor. I am a colonel retired from the United
States Air Force Reserves with 26 years of service as a CRNA, a
flight nurse, and a senior staff member for the Air Force
Surgeon General.
As a CRNA who has served as both the anesthesia element
team lead over both physician anesthesiologists and CRNAs in
the largest in-country medical facility in Afghanistan and a
sole anesthesia provider for the Special Forces Operating Base,
I know firsthand that unrivaled anesthesia care is provided by
CRNAs without duplicative or unnecessary supervision. I have
practiced independently in the most difficult circumstances
while serving in the military.
CRNAs work without supervision in the Army, the Navy, the
Air Force, and in countless facilities across the country. If
CRNAs are called upon to competently and safely deliver
anesthesia in the battlefield without supervision, it is
reprehensible to restrict that care to our veterans here at
home.
As a practicing CRNA, I am frustrated that my profession is
constantly having to defend its value purely for political and
self-serving financial reasons when many peer reviewed studies
have proven CRNA care is safe, effective, and par with other
providers. In fact, the VA in its 2016 final rules stated that
CRNAs provide high quality care. Additionally, 90 percent of
veteran households in a survey stated that they support
allowing access to CRNAs within the VA.
CRNAs also grow weary of hearing the physician
anesthesiologists' false narrative that the VA is planning to
replace all anesthesiologists with CRNAs or that CRNA education
is inadequate. These are outright falsehoods. The AANA
maintains that both anesthesiologists and CRNAs should be
available to provide direct patient services and that VA
facilities should be allowed to choose their most suitable
anesthesia delivery model.
There has been too much political influence on nonphysician
scope of practice decisions. The AMA and physician groups have
a vested financial interest in limiting the scope of practice
for other providers. According to their own website, the AMA
has spent over $3.5 million to impede Advanced Practice
Registered Nurses (APRNs) from practicing to the top of their
education and training.
I would be remiss if I did not address the Hattiesburg
article currently being shared with Congress by our medical
colleagues.
This study (1) Reviews only nurse practitioners and
physician assistants in emergency room settings; (2) Does not
include or even apply to CRNAs; (3) Does not look at CRNA or
optometrist practice and has no relevance to the national
standards for our profession.
Yet, our medical colleagues dishonestly tried to
extrapolate from this deeply flawed study and draw fallacious
conclusions regarding supervision.
However, the VA's strategic plan released last year
highlighted in a study showing full practice authority for
other APRNs has had a very positive effect on wait times for
the veterans.
Removing barriers to care, including removal of wasteful
and financially motivated supervision requirements is not
controversial and is supported by many organizations that do
not have a vested or self-serving financial interest in
maintaining this antiquated status quo. These include two past
administrations, the Bipartisan Policy Center, the AARP, the
National Rural Association, the Brookings Institute, and the
Americans for Prosperity among others.
The men and women who have selflessly served our Nation
deserve timely and quality care. All scientific evidence and
multiple independent groups have concluded that that is CRNA
care.
In conclusion, I would like to commend Chairwoman Miller-
Meeks' Iowa VA facilities for setting the standard of what a
great collaborative, full practice CRNA physician
anesthesiologist practice looks like. It is noteworthy that
Iowa was the first state in the Nation to opt out of physician
supervision for anesthesia care. In both Iowa City and Des
Moines facilities, all CRNAs practice independently to the full
extent of their education and training; thus, enabling the
physician anesthesiologist to do their own cases. This
decreases wait times, increases access to quality care, and
improves patient safety and satisfaction. All providers do high
acuity, complex cases and all take call independent of each
other. Both facilities consistently rank amongst the most
highly rated of VA facilities and they invite you to come and
shadow them at any time you wish to see this in progress.
Thank you very much for your time. I appreciate it.

[The Prepared Statement Of Janet Setnor Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Ms. Setnor.
Dr. McLeod, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN MCLEOD

Dr. McLeod. Good morning, Chairwoman Miller-Meeks, Ranking
Member Brownley, and members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Dr. Stephen McLeod. I am the chief executive
officer of the American Academy of Ophthalmology. I have served
in this role since 2022. Prior to that I was chair of the
Department of Ophthalmology at the University of California San
Francisco, 17 years, and served as a staff ophthalmologist at
the San Francisco VA Medical Center.
I am here today on behalf of the American Academy of
Ophthalmology to voice our deep concern that veterans will be
put at risk if the VA adopts national standards that allow
optometrists to perform surgery.
First let me say that we strongly believe that optometrists
are vital members of the eye care team. During my tenure at
University of California San Francisco (UCSF) I actively
developed these collaborative team-based models and continue to
support them as a national model of care. However, our efforts
recognize the different training, skill, and expertise of each
team member. I must emphasize that as medical doctors with
extensive surgical training, indeed many thousands of hours
devoted specifically to eye surgery, only ophthalmologists
possess the expertise and the experience required to perform
eye surgery and to address the potential complications that
might arise.
The VA must exercise extraordinary caution when it comes to
setting standards for allowing eye surgery. Eye tissue is
extremely delicate and unforgiving. The surgery is considered
amongst the most technically challenging and damage is simply
impossible in cases to repair.
Currently, the vast majority of states, 41, do not allow
optometrists to perform laser surgery. There are a handful of
states representing a small fraction of the U.S. population
that allow other surgical procedures but even within these
states, optometrists scopes of practice vary considerably.
Optometrists are restricted from performing surgery in most
states in the VA system for a reason. Optometrists are not
trained to safely perform surgical procedures. Optometry
training primarily focuses on the correction of refractive
error, glasses and contact lenses, and on primary eye care.
While the curriculum includes some didactic education on
surgical topics, meaningful hands-on surgical training is not
included.
In states where optometrists have been granted limited
surgical privileges, training often consists of a condensed 32-
hour certification course conducted at a hotel venue, not a
clinical facility. There is no hands-on patient surgical
experience which is obviously a crucial component for
competent, safe, and successful eye surgery. An optometrist
trained under these circumstances may, in fact, attempt their
first, unsupervised laser cases having never used the equipment
on a human eye.
There is also evidence that suggests that patients who
receive surgical procedures from optometrists experience poor
outcomes. A 2016 study published in the Journal of the American
Medical Association of Ophthalmology, found that there was
nearly triple the likelihood of repeat laser treatment in the
same eye when the surgery was performed by optometrists
compared to same surgery done by ophthalmologists.
Now, the stated goal of the VA Supremacy initiative is to
develop national standards that ensure that our veterans
receive the same high quality care regardless of where they
enter the system. Extending surgical privileges to a subset of
providers with vastly inferior training based only on location
violates both fundamental principles--quality and consistency
regardless of entry point.
To compound this further, it is possible that the VA would
grant optometrists licensed in one state the privilege to
perform surgery nationwide, potentially overriding state
specific laws and expanding risks to patients across the VA.
For example, an optometrist licensed in Oklahoma could be
allowed to perform laser surgery in Iowa even though Iowa, like
40 other states, for safety reasons prohibits optometrists from
performing laser surgery.
As I conclude, I will share my own state's experience.
Nearly a year ago, California Governor Newsom vetoed Assembly
Bill 2236 which would have allowed optometrists to perform
surgical procedures. In his message the Governor stated, and I
quote, ``I am not convinced that the education and training
required is sufficient to prepare optometrists to perform the
surgical procedures identified. This bill would allow
optometrists to perform advanced surgical procedures with less
than 1 year of training.''
We cannot allow our Nation's veterans to receive complex
surgical procedures from those who simply do not have the
training and expertise to perform them. All of our Nation's
veterans need and deserve the highest level of care, and that
means regardless of site, only surgeons should perform
surgeries.''
Thank you again for the invitation today. I look forward to
your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Stephen McLeod Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Dr. McLeod.
Dr. Harter, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RON HARTER

Dr. Harter. Good morning. Thank you, Chairwoman Miller-
Meeks and Ranking Member Brownley. I am here on behalf of the
56,000 members of the American Society of Anesthesiologists.
We strongly believe that VA's proposed move to a nurse-only
model of anesthesia care is a solution in search of a problem.
A solution that could risk veterans lives, especially toxic
exposed veterans.
There is no shortage of anesthesiologists in VA. As of
yesterday there were only 22 position vacancies for
anesthesiologists in VA out of 1,000 total positions. The
average vacancy rate for anesthesiologists this year is just 2
percent, well below the national average.
VA has the right anesthesia policy in place right now. It
is consistent with what every top-rated civilian hospital
provides, what 45 states requires, and what VA reaffirmed in
2016 after years of thorough review.
VA is going to tell you that there is no evidence from
impartial, independent studies to indicate the full practice
authority for CRNAs leads to either improved or adverse
outcomes.
A lack of evidence is not the same as a demonstration of
safety. VA has not met the burden of proof to show evidence
that CRNA-only care is safe. Congressional action is required.
VA addressed this burden of proof question in 2014 when VA's
own researchers conducted the Quality Enhancement Research
Initiative (QUERI) study that specifically questioned whether
more complex surgeries can be safely managed by CRNAs providing
anesthesia alone.
Without meeting this burden of proof, VA is risking the
health and lives of veterans with its proposed policy. VA has
an ethical obligation to meet its burden of proof that it will
not harm veterans before putting in place a new policy that not
one top-rated civilian hospital allows.
This issue cannot be fully addressed without consideration
of The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise
to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act Veterans. It makes
no sense for VA to spend billions of dollars to treat PACT Act
veterans with respiratory disease and then fail to provide them
with the same level of anesthesia care delivered at all leading
civilian hospitals.
This Committee and its members were instrumental in the
passage of the PACT Act. Toxic-exposed PACT Act veterans have
acquired lung disease that typically increases the risk of
anesthesia.
These veterans have the right to ask this question. Since
the passage of the PACT Act, has VA conducted an independent
study of the increased risks of anesthesia on toxic-exposed
veterans.
Anesthesiologists and CRNAs are not interchangeable. Using
basic common sense, there are 100 anesthesiologist members of
ASA who were CRNAs before they made the decision to go to
medical school for 4 years, and then 4 years of residency. Why
would they spend years of their life doing that if there was
nothing more for them to learn. They decided to pursue those
additional years of rigorous medical education and training to
prepare them to make the split second decisions that can mean
the difference between life and death.
I have spent most of my career teaching and training
medical students and residents in the medical specialty of
anesthesiology. Although nurse anesthetists are truly
outstanding advanced practice nurses, they are not
anesthesiologists. CRNAs are educated and trained to work with
anesthesiologists as a member of a team, not to practice
medicine.
In fact, with one exception, every CRNA training program is
located in a state that requires a CRNA to work with a
physician in the delivery of anesthesia care. Any claim that
CRNAs are trained to practice without physician supervision is
not accurate.
Despite various nursing organizations suggesting the CRNA-
only model is commonplace. The CRNA-only model is rare. Only 5
states permit the CRNA-only model of care, and even in those
states it is used infrequently. All other states require
physician involvement with CRNAs, whether it be supervision,
direction, collaboration, or other state-specific terms.
Whatever the terminology, CRNAs in 45 states must work with a
physician.
Finally, I was pleased to read the American Legion's
statement and respect them for seeking veterans' thoughts about
this important issue. They found that 91 percent of respondents
support the physician-delivered and physician-led anesthesia
care team model. Nearly three-quarters believe that dismantling
or altering this model will subject veterans to a lower
standard of care than civilians receive.
Chairwoman Miller-Meeks, Ranking Member Brownley, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for your time and
attention to this issue which is critical to our veterans.
I welcome your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Ron Harter In The Appendix]

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Harter. We will now
proceed to questioning.
As has been my custom, I will delay my question to the end.
Before I go to the first questioner, the first member, I
just want to say to all of our witnesses, for those who have
served, thank you for your service. To those who serve our
veterans at a VA facility, thank you for serving our veterans.
With that, the chair now recognizes Representative Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. I am recognized?
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Members of the military do not get to excited about a lot
of things, but what we do get excited about negatively is we
use the term in the Pentagon, ``protecting rice bowls.'' You
all know what that means. You have got your little rice bowl of
appropriations and all those things that you do. That is human
nature. You all are not alone in that.
When I started as a Marine, I started in rice paddies. If
you get the drift in the late `60's, early `70's. I really was
not concerned about rice bowls, and I would suggest there are
veterans of today who served in places like Iraq and
Afghanistan, they are not interested in rice bowls. They are
interested in what they observed in the desert and experienced
in the mountains and all of that in different ways.
One of the challenges we have as a Committee is to separate
what is a rice bowl that is being protected for the right
reasons or not. I thank both sides of the aisle on this
Subcommittee especially to make sure that we are doing the
right thing for the right reason, for the veterans in all cases
regardless of which rice bowl it may fall in.
Having said that, Dr. Barney, am I correct to understand
that under Medicare, Medicaid, and Indian Health Service, all
cover and pay for the full range of services authorized under
an optometrist state scope of practice, and in addition, all
major private payers cover and pay for those services including
laser eye care and other contemporary procedures included in an
optometrist's state scope of practice?
Dr. Barney. Yes. That is correct.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. With all of that being true, would it be
correct to say that VA is currently an outlier among all
private payers and other Federal programs? Could you speak to
the impact that this could have on our veterans' access to, in
this particular case, eye care?
Dr. Barney. Yes. I think that would be a correct statement,
especially if you consider VA's Community Care Program. The
Community Care Program does pay for laser procedures provided
by an optometrist outside the VA facility itself. If there is a
restrictive optometry NSP, I would foresee a scenario where a
veteran would not be able to get access to laser eye care by an
optometrist within the facility but it could go outside the
facility and receive that care. To me that seems like not a
very wise use of VA funds and resources.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you.
Ms. Setnor, can you discuss the role that nurse
anesthetists play in rural and remote areas, in this case like
Michigan's 1st District, which is not only rural, it is really,
really remote?
Ms. Setnor. CRNA's cover almost 100 percent of the rural
health medicine in most of the states. Several facilities are
now closing down because of an inability for access to have
these care models delivered. I could say that with certainty
that CRNAs practice independently in these settings.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Thank you.
Finally, Dr. Harter, can you point to any evidence that
shows VA is trying to replace anesthesiologists as you say the
ASA has claimed?
Dr. Harter. The move to remove physician supervision simply
would have that opportunity arise. That there could be VA
facilities that might for various reasons opt to not have
physician anesthesiologists if they are no longer required to
be present.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. We think that might be an outcome at
this point but nothing has occurred to this point to point to
the fact of a lower standard of care?
Dr. Harter. Well, we would be, I think, speculating as to
what might happen one way or another.
Mr. Bergman. Well, that is okay, because we have to, in all
cases now--I see I have got about 20 seconds left--we need to
make sure as best we can as Members of Congress that what is
being done at all bureaucratic levels within the Federal
Government, in this case especially Veterans Administration,
that it is being done for the right reasons with outcomes for
veterans in mind, not outcomes for the bureaucracy.
With that I yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Representative.
The chair wants to issue a sincere apology to Ranking
Member Brownley for going out of order.
I now recognize Ranking Member Brownley for any questions
she may have.
Ms. Brownley. No worries, Madam Chair. Not at all.
My first question really is to the physician groups that
are here testifying because I just want to get some clarity. At
our roundtable meeting that Dr. Miller-Meeks and I had back in
April, there was testimony there that said that the VA was not
really being transparent and/or responsive. I just want to get
some clarification. The VA says that they are reaching out so I
want to get some clarification from you, where you stand on
that issue.
Dr. Ehrenfeld.
Dr. Ehrenfeld. Thank you for the question. I really
appreciate it.
The VA has not involved the AMA in the development,
implementation, or decision-making around the Supremacy
Project. Since we became aware of this in 2021, we have made it
clear to the VA that we would love to be involved. We would
love transparency. I think that is how we separate out whether
this is a rice bowl or a rice paddy.
Ms. Brownley. Dr. McLeod.
Dr. McLeod. We have been somewhat frustrated by a
difficulty in really being able to get clarity. We do think
that it is moving in the right direction. You know, from our
perspective, an entire process that is looking at delivering
eye care within the VA where the eye care is going to be
delivered by optometrists and by ophthalmologists, that does
not bring both groups into the room at the same time to come up
with the most rational way of dealing with the patients' needs
is not in the best interest of the patients and that has not
happened.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Dr. Harter.
Dr. Harter. Much the same. We have requested to have
opportunity to have discussions about this specific to nurse
anesthesia practice under the proposed National Standards of
Practice and to this point have not had the opportunity to
provide that.
Ms. Brownley. Right. Dr. Barney, do you have anything to
say with respect to my question?
Dr. Barney. They have been communicative with us. We have
not been involved with all the details but they have been
communicative with us, so.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Ms. Setnor.
Ms. Setnor. Yes, ma'am. All your physicians have been
involved--had an opportunity to participate at various levels.
Ms. Brownley. I apologize on your name.
Ms. Setnor. No worries.
Ms. Brownley. I will get it right the next time. I promise.
You know, I have been on this Committee for 10 years. I am
not a doctor, so let me be clear about that. I will say it has
been the VA who convinced me early on that a team-based model
is the best model and the gold standard. I think someone
mentioned the gold standard in terms of healthcare. You know,
the VA has also asserted in its testimony and during recent
staff briefings that its National Standards of Practice
initiative will not eliminate nor change the department's
current team-based model of care. I do not know if everyone is
confused. I am a little confused because I hear testimony that
this is not the direction the VA is going in. The VA is saying
they are going to hold on to the model of care. I guess I want
to ask you what is your definition or what does a team-based
model of care mean? If we can be brief in the answers because I
think most will say it is physician-led. Some may not.
I will start again with Dr. Ehrenfeld.
Dr. Ehrenfeld. Thank you for the question. It is really
important. The AMA strongly supports physician-led team-based
care. Nobody should be practicing in a silo and that means
nobody should be practicing by themselves.
Ms. Brownley. Dr. Barney.
Dr. Barney. Yes. We support physician-led care. Keep in
mind that optometrists are physicians.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Ms. Setnor.
Ms. Setnor. Team-based care, in the Air Force if you look
at our statutes, it actually says that the team-based model is
actually the best but it also states that the team lead can
also be a CRNA as well as an anesthesiologist. It is the
experience and level that you are looking at.
As explained when I was deployed, we worked as a team.
Anesthesia is not a one-man sport. It takes a whole team to
conduct anesthesia in a facility. You need the surgeon. You
need our whole team to make it happen. In essence, it is a team
sport and either person can be team lead.
Ms. Brownley. Dr. McLeod.
Dr. McLeod. In our space some ambiguity has been lent to
the term ``physician,'' and so we will be specific. In our
space we believe that it should be an ophthalmologist-led team.
Ms. Brownley. Dr. Harter.
Dr. Harter. Not surprisingly, we also feel that it should
be physician-led care.
I do want to say, to make a distinction, we are not
advocating that it must be anesthesiologist-led care. There are
certainly settings, both in the private sector as well as
within the VA where currently the physician providing that
supervision is the operating surgeon. Any thoughts that this
will somehow create better access, reduce costs, et cetera,
they are able to do that model currently without removing any
need for physician oversight of the nurse anesthetist.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. My time is up but I do have more
questions. I am hoping that we may have another opportunity,
Madam Chair.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Ranking Member Brownley.
The chair now recognizes Dr. Murphy for his questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the
members. I want to thank you all of you guys for coming out and
dedicating your lives to the practice of taking care of people.
I do not see any greater cause personally and professionally. I
have done one for 35 years and I much prefer the title of
doctor rather than Congressman.
Do not take that the wrong way. Sorry, folks.
That said, being a doctor is in my DNA and these scope of
practice issues are always coming up. It is like playing whack-
a-mole sometimes. I call it scope creep. The term is I want to
practice to the highest level of my license. I absolutely
understand. I think it is imperative that folks understand
where that phrase comes from and what it means. Who gets to
determine what your license is, your peers? It is not someone
who does a procedure by training and has done it 10,000 times.
It is something that your peers say, hey, I think you should be
able to do this. When you say I want to practice to the level
of my license, it is really a misnomer as to what you are
saying. It is really saying I want to practice to the level of
what my friends and my colleagues say I can practice. It is not
practicing to the level of what people who have actually done
specific training in that field say you can do.
That said, there is overlap. There is obviously overlap. I
am a urologist and gynecologist. There is plenty of overlap.
There is plenty of overlap between differing fields. When it
comes to surgery, and it comes to keeping somebody alive under
anesthesia, the overlap really hits a wall. I worked with nurse
anesthetists. Have for 35 years. Have wonderful relationships
with them. Absolutely. When the proverbial hits the fan, I want
an anesthesiologist in the room. I have had many, many, many
circumstances because I am a cancer surgeon. I have done a lot
of cancer surgeries. When someone's like is at stake, I want
the person with the highest level of training to be there.
I wear glasses. Thank God for my optometrist or I would be
fumbling more than I actually fumble around anyway. That said,
I personally do not believe a weekend course, a couple week
course, it is fine when you know a narrow band of knowledge and
that is fantastic. You may know that. As we all know there are
complications that step outside here. There are complications
that step out here. Unless you know the depth and the breadth
of what is in that field of pathology, I do not fully feel you
know the disease process that you are working with.
The VA, talking with anesthesia, is not having a problem
getting anesthesiologists right now. Optometrists and
ophthalmologists may be a little bit different things. I
understand. I absolutely understand that you are all passionate
for wanting to take care of our veterans. Absolutely. There is
nobody in this room that is not passionate for wanting to take
care of our veterans. In my opinion, in my medical opinion,
there is a team concept and there has to be one quarterback.
One quarterback for a team. If not it is absolute anarchy. Yes,
there are some gray areas and there are some definite
partnerships between CRNAs and anesthesiologists without a
doubt. There are excellent partnerships between optometrists
and ophthalmologists. Absolutely. Some see post-op patients and
everything. When we use the scope creep and the term of
practicing to the highest ability of my license, it is a little
bit, and this may across the wrong way, it is a little bit
disingenuous because where you got that license from is really
not where the expertise lies.
I do not have any specific questions because I think you
guys know where I stand. I want everybody under the same tent
because the same tent is that which cares for our veterans.
Lessening in my opinion the quality of care because of a
perceived access issue really is not what our veterans deserve.
They are not what our veterans deserve. I do believe there can
be some common ground to help our VA achieve care for all of
our veterans but I do not believe in decreasing the quality of
care and the expertise of care.
With that, Ms. Chairman, I will yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Dr. Murphy.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Van Orden for 5 minutes.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Setnor, I understand that you served in Afghanistan.
What years was that or were those?
Ms. Setnor. 2008.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Ms. Setnor. I am not a doctor.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay, sorry, ma'am.
Ms. Setnor. You can call me colonel if you want.
Mr. Van Orden. I think that is what this is all about?
I will, Colonel. I will tell you what. I am going to praise
you publicly for the work that you did in secret because if you
were in Afghanistan in 2008, there is a 100 percent chance that
you are responsible for saving the lives of some of my Navy
Seal brothers. I want to thank you for that.
Ms. Setnor. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. Actions speak louder than words. I am from
the State of Wisconsin. Behind that door my staff has brought
you some cheddar cheese from the State of Wisconsin.
Ms. Setnor. Yay.
Mr. Van Orden. To quote the president, ``That is not a
joke.''
Doctor Ehrenfeld, do you consider yourself a subject matter
expert in the medical field?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Good. Do you consider the American Medical
Association the gold standard for medical expertise and advice?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. I am very proud of what the AMA is able to
represent in serving the needs of our patients and physicians.
Mr. Van Orden. That is not the question I asked you.
Do you consider the AMA the gold standard for medical
expertise and advice?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. I am not sure I can answer that, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Is smoking bad for you?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Is using class 1 narcotics for recreational
use bad for you?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. If you put an unprotected hand in fire will
it be burned?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Can a biological male become a biological
female?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. I am not sure I understand the question.
Mr. Van Orden. That is the problem, Doctor?
Can a biological male become a biological female?
Dr. Ehrenfeld. I am not sure where you are going with that,
sir.
Mr. Van Orden. That is even more troubling.
The issue is this. You know the answer to that question.
You are just not going to say it because you are playing
politics with medicine. So is your organization. That is not
just dangerous; it is terrifying. So for my opinion, you are
not a subject matter expert in the medical field or you are
exercising administrative cowardice because you know the answer
to that question, Commander.
Doctor Hartner----
Dr. Harter. Harter.
Mr. Van Orden. What is it again?
Dr. Harter. Harter.
Mr. Van Orden. Oh, sorry about that.
You submitted a 17-page biography and CV. You submitted
less than a single page of written testimony and yet you spoke
for 5 minutes. That is correct. That is all I got, man.
Dr. Harter. Our written testimony was several pages. I
cannot speak to the disconnect.
Mr. Van Orden. Oh, when did you give us the updated one?
Dr. Harter. I believe it was at the end of last week. I do
not know exactly. The 15th.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
My concern is this, sir. Can you positively demonstrate a
dearth of care for veterans due to a lack of anesthesiologists
in the VA?
Dr. Harter. With respect to wait times, et cetera?
Mr. Van Orden. Yes.
Dr. Harter. No. We are not aware of that being certainly
global. I cannot speak to every VA facility in the country
but----
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Dr. Harter. Again, our knowledge is that there are very few
vacancies for anesthesiologists within the VA system which
would suggest that staffing is appropriate throughout the
system.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. When my colleague General Bergman was
asking you about these things you said you were not going to
speculate on this and that; correct?
Dr. Harter. Correct.
Mr. Van Orden. If you cannot positively demonstrate to me
that there is a dearth of anesthesiologists or care, high
quality timely care for our veterans, if you cannot demonstrate
that to me concretely then you are speculating. It is in the
dictionary, dude.
Here is the thing. If you cannot demonstrate that our
veterans are getting high quality care in a timely manner, what
you are saying is meaningless. I would like to see from you on
paper a chart that shows me that our veterans are not getting
high quality, timely care, because that is the only reason that
we are all here. It has nothing to do with your 17 page
biography and CV, sir.
Dr. Harter. To be clear----
Mr. Van Orden. It is not about status. It is not about a
badge. It is about high quality, timely care to our veterans.
With that I yield back.
Dr. Harter. Can I respond?
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. If the chair so recognizes you.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Mr. Van Orden, you may respond, Dr.
Harter.
Dr. Harter. Just to be clear, our assertion is the current
state is that there is not a shortage of anesthesia providers.
Therefore, making significant changes to the scope of practice
of the nurse anesthetists, there is no compelling reason to do
that.
Is the question to show that there is currently a shortage
of anesthesia providers or to show that there is not?
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Representative Kiggans.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
I proudly represent Virginia's 2nd congressional district,
home to a large veteran population and active duty military as
well. I served in the Navy myself, too, for 10 years. I am also
a board certified adult geriatric primary care nurse
practitioner, and I have had the privilege of taking care of
some of greatest generation in many different care settings
with many different care teams. I consider myself possibly a
subject matter expert in this topic today.
I want to start with the three things that I think that we
can all agree with. I think that we can all agree that we have
a healthcare provider shortage. There is not enough of us,
right, to give the care that we need, especially in the VA
setting.
I think that we can all agree that no one practices in a
silo. I know you guys talked about that, and Ms. Setnor, you
talked about it being a team sport. I certainly think that
healthcare is a team sport no matter where you are. Even if you
are the only provider in a rural setting there is always
somebody you can call. You are going to text somebody or get an
answer to your question if you do not have that answer.
The third thing I think that we can agree on is that VA
healthcare has much room for improvement. I have been in
Congress for 9 months and have sat on this Committee proudly
and have listened time after time about veterans that come and
different care organizations that come and tell me that VA
healthcare is inadequate, 100 percent. We have got to do better
for our veterans in a lot of different areas.
I will tell you what is harmful for veterans. A couple of
you spoke about harming veterans. What harms veterans is when
we cannot give them the healthcare that they deserve.
I will get off my chest just ever so briefly with Dr.
Ehrenfeld about some of your comments about nonphysician
providers and advanced practice nurses. They were offensive to
me personally as someone who has worked with some of the
greatest geriatricians in the world to take care of very
vulnerable people. To even say that there is worse health
outcomes for a nurse practitioner. We practice differently. We
just do. I mean, we are educators. We are nurses. We do not
want to be doctors. That is where I think a lot of physicians
really get confused. We do not want to do open heart surgeries.
We do not want to take your place. We want to partner with you.
We need that recognition. We fight day in and day out. You talk
about that we have higher expenses because we order more tests.
Perhaps we are being more thorough. If you want to talk about
expenses. We are a cheap form of healthcare. Advanced practice
nurses, we have to fight for the pay that we get. We are not
compensated in my opinion as much as we need to be.
Be careful with the rhetoric that you use and the companies
that you use it in.
You talk about, you know, the VA and why this Committee and
why Congress is now weighing in on this issue, this Federal
issue. Well, that is our job; right? In Congress, we provide
oversight, especially for Federal healthcare which is the VA. I
know there are state standards. I sat in the State Senate for 3
years. We argued about autonomous practice for nurse
practitioners. During COVID, you know, it was 5 years. We had
to practice for 5 years before we could even apply to practice
independently. During COVID we switched it to two. After 2
years as a nurse practitioner, 2 years of experience I could
practice independently. During one of the most challenging
healthcare times in our country where we invited sick people to
come visit us, and we took care of them every day and we said
come see us if you do not feel good. We will take care of you.
With 2 years of experience. Then after COVID they wanted to
switch it back to five. How can you even? Why is it different
at different times?
I know Ms. Setnor, you talked about on the battlefield when
nurse anesthetists could perform the same duties. Why is it
different? Either we are going to do it one way or we are going
to do it another way.
I wanted to again talk about also kind of the eyes and ears
argument. I know we have the optometrists and ophthalmologists.
My dad is a Vietnam veteran. He was a Green Beret. He only uses
VA healthcare for two things. That is for glasses and for
hearing aids and so many of my patients the same. Glasses and
hearing aids are expensive.
If we do not expand these care teams, you know, I have been
a supporter of even supporting it to pharmacists. Simple
things. Now, within scope. I think there is a discussion to be
had about what is your scope of practice. We have got to
acknowledge that we need to expand our care teams because we
are struggling. Wait times, access to care, patient
satisfaction. No, we are not there. If we do not look at some
of the obvious answers that are in this room then we are
failing our veterans.
I want to yield my last few seconds to Ms. Setnor. If you
could please in your own view, how has expansion of full
practice authority for APRNs affected availability and quality
of care at the VA?
Ms. Setnor. Thank you for the question.
One thing I would like to clarify that Dr. Murphy kept
referring to was licensure. He never referred to our education
and training. The education and training of CRNAs is exemplary.
We are educated and trained to practice at the highest level.
We are airway experts. To take care of the PACT we can do that
easily.
As far as expansion of care, as I mentioned to Dr. Miller-
Meeks' facility in Iowa, they have the best team care model.
They work independently of each other and they take care of
very sick patients. They have high acuity and they are very
complex cases. They do it seamlessly. They have invited Members
of Congress to come and shadow them so that they can see the
work in progress.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. My time has expired. I will yield
back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Representative Kiggans.
Maybe we can silence some phones, although I like the song.
The chair now recognizes Representative Scott for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Well, thank you. Let me get the mic on. Thank
you very much.
First, I want to thank Chairwoman Miller-Meeks and Ranking
Member Brownley for allowing me to participate in this
incredibly important hearing. And for your support for our
fantastic veterans.
Let me just start by saying that for over a decade,
expanding three different administrations, I have called for
the VA to reject any proposal that removes the medical
expertise of physicians during intricate surgical procedures
with our veterans. I was very pleased that after years of
extensive review and study and at the urging of myself and
other Members of Congress, medical organizations, veterans, and
the veterans' family members that then-VA Secretary McDonald
put our veterans first.
Unfortunately, this current administration has put forth
this proposal yet again that would replace the current method
of anesthesia administration, meaning that complex surgeries
could be performed without the presence of trained
anesthesiologists. Ladies and gentlemen, we are talking about
these surgeries being applied to our precious veterans. Of all
groups it is our veterans that have battlefield wounds, that
have intricate problems. If there is anybody that needs to have
the best and most reliable anesthesiology care it is our
precious veterans who volunteer to put their lives on the line
on the battlefield for us. They need physicians that are
trained with the latest information, the best talent possible.
Now, I have great respect for our nurses. My daughter is a
nurse at Grady Hospital in Atlanta, Georgia. I love nurses.
They are not qualified to give the level of expertise when it
comes to anesthesiology. That is the most important part of
having surgery, putting our veterans to sleep so the surgery
can be performed with the best of care. Very importantly,
waking them up after a successful surgery. There is no more
important thing. Don't our veterans deserve the best? All of
our American citizens do. It would be a mockery and a hypocrisy
if we do not perform this for our veterans. Each of you, and
each of you on the panel, if we have to have surgery would not
we want to make sure we have a trained physician conducting
that basic talent that they have?
If I may, I would like to ask a question of Dr. Harter. If
the administration, Dr. Harter, allows this proposal, the
Atlanta VA in my home state will move to a nurse-only care
model while other world-class hospitals in Georgia continue to
use the anesthesia team model. Why, Dr. Harter, should veterans
in Georgia, or anywhere in our Nation, have a lower quality of
care and safety than any other member of our Nation or citizen
of our state? Dr. Harter.
Dr. Harter. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
Clearly we feel that there should not be a different
standard within the VA system than for what is in the civilian
setting for 45 states in the Nation and is used even in the
other five states it is a very frequently used model to still
have the anesthesiologist or physician-led anesthesia care
team. We feel that the standard should be at least as high
within the VA system as it is in the civilian setting.
Mr. Scott. Well, thank you very much for that response.
Is my time? All right. Thank you all very much.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Representative Scott.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes. Again,
thank you all for your testimony, for being here. For those who
served, thank you for your service, and for those who care for
our veterans, thank you all so very much.
Ms. Setnor, thank you for your comments about Iowa and Iowa
VA. It is a physician-led team. The surgeon who is a physician
is, in fact, in care in the operating room for all care. As a
practicing physician who worked with CRNAs and have deep
respect for them, I was, in fact, the supervising physician
during those care and those procedures.
I also would like to say that in my time as a faculty
member at the University of Iowa, we had optometrists that were
on our faculty. In my private practice in Ottumwa, Iowa, we had
a local optometrist join us who had done an internship at the
VA in St. Louis, and that person was a full partner in our
practice. Not an employee and not subservient to me. However, I
do feel that there is a difference in care. The concern that I
have is that you will see behind me a poster.
Dr. Barney, can you tell me what that is? Maybe we can
raise it up.
Dr. Barney. It is a multifocal Intraocular Lenses (IOL). It
looks like we might have some capsular opacification. From this
distance it is hard to tell but it looks like a multifocal IOL.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. It is a multifocal IOL that underwent a
Yttrium Aluminum Garnet (YAG) capsulotomy by an optometrist who
was trained by another optometrist. The veteran was sent out of
state to go to a state where it is under the state's licensure
laws that optometrists can do YAG laser capsulotomies. I will
fully admit that I have pitted an intraocular lens before. I am
not pure. This is a multifocal intraocular lens that was
severely pitted. It cost $20,000 to have this removed from that
veteran in another State when they went back to their
practicing state after they had been sent out of state by an
optometrist. That is why this is a concern to me.
Dr. McLeod, in your written testimony you referenced the
team approach to eye care helps ensure patients receive the
most appropriate treatment in a timely manner. Can you
elaborate on the benefits of this team approach that it has for
patients as well as for the healthcare system itself?
Dr. McLeod. Absolutely. As we look at the healthcare
systems, we recognize there is a full range of care that is
required whether you are out in the community or in the VA. It
has been referenced that, you know, that access to patient care
is really important. When we look at the volume of cases coming
in, having a system in place that you can adequately deal with
eye care, adequately deal with the need for glasses and contact
lenses, and meet those basic needs is really important. That is
actually a huge volume.
Beyond that we have glaucoma. We have macular degeneration.
We have diabetic retinopathy. There is a whole series of things
that need to be taken care of. Different people need to do
different things. Making sure that there is an adequate
optometric supply in order to deal with the primary eye care,
the glasses, contact lenses actually is one of the things that
would really help getting patients through. Once patients get
into a disease state, having physicians that have the expertise
to manage those diseases appropriately, to then get them to
surgical care when necessary, to do that surgical care working
with the optometric group allows for a system of care that is
able to manage a given patient and a population of patients
through the system in a timely manner with high quality safe
care. We have to work together for this.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. In its written statement, the American
Optometric Association states that state regulators have made
it clear that little or no patient complaints have resulted
from the expansion of state optometric scope of practice laws.
Let me also say that the physician who removed that intraocular
lens and brought this case to me, there was no complaint
reported, nor any lawsuit filed.
What have you heard from ophthalmologists or other
providers that are practicing in these states?
Dr. McLeod. The first thing to address is there is sort of
the misconception that it is a norm out in the community for
optometrists to be doing laser surgery. It is not the norm.
There are approximately 33,000 optometrists in the country. If
you look at the total percentage that are doing the YAG laser
capsulotomy that you reference, it is a half of 1 percent of
the total. If you look at laser cases it is 0.1 percent of the
total. Bringing optometric surgery into the VA with any degree
of scale is actually a far outlier from what happens in the
community. Then when you look at the relatively small
percentage that we do see, unfortunately what we see is an
overrepresentation of outcomes that we would be concerned
about.
Now, what you will hear is we do not have a lot of data for
poor outcomes. Much of that is that we actually as systems of
care do not have good systems for capturing and reporting poor
outcomes unless it is volunteered by practitioners.
The last point that I will make is that malpractice rates
are not a good way of looking at whether care is good or bad.
People do not typically get sued because they have got a bad
outcome. They get sued because they have a poor relationship
with an unhappy patient. You can smooth over a lot of poor
outcomes with your relationship and that is not what we want
for our veterans or for the American population.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much. I am sure we would
all have more questions that we would want to ask. On behalf of
the Committee I thank you all for your thoughtful testimony and
for joining us today.
You are now excused, and we will wait for a moment as the
second panel comes to the witness table.
[Recess]
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Welcome everyone. Thank you for your
participation today.
Joining us today from the Department of Veterans Affairs
are Dr. Erica Scavella, Assistant Under Secretary for Health
and Clinical Services and Chief Medical Officer; Dr.
Christopher Saslo, Assistant Under Secretary for Health for
Patient Care Services and Chief Nursing Officer; and Mr. Ethan
Kalett, Executive Director, Office of Regulations Appeals in
Policy.
Dr. Scavella, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ERICA SCAVELLA

Dr. Scavella. Good morning, Chairwoman Miller-Meeks,
Ranking Member Brownley, and distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity today to discuss
VHA's position regarding National Standards of Practice.
Accompanying me today are Dr. Christopher Saslo and Mr. Ethan
Kalett.
VA is developing National Standards of Practice for 51
occupations to ensure safe, high quality care our Nation's
veterans and to ensure that VA healthcare professionals meet
the needs of veterans wherever they are located. National
standards are designed to increase veterans' access to
healthcare and improve health outcomes.
VA is committed to ensuring that stakeholders are engaged
in the process to develop National Standards of Practice in
each and every health occupation. VA has not yet finalized
National Standards of Practice for any of the occupations. The
National Standards of Practice will be designed through
extensive internal and external expert consultation.
To further engage with key stakeholders, VA has been
hosting listening sessions in August and September 2023 for
professional associations that are in-service organizations,
the clinical community, the public, and Members of Congress to
provide to VA their research, input, comments on variances
between state licenses and scopes of practices, as well as
their recommendations on what should be included in VA's
National Standards of Practice.
VA will consider all feedback received in these listening
sessions when drafting the National Standards of Practice for
each discipline. When the draft National Standard is ready it
will be published in the Federal Register for public comment.
Further, VA will send to every state board for that profession
a letter with information on the impact of the proposed
National Standards of Practice on the specific state with an
opportunity for the state to respond.
The development of National Standards of Practice will not
undo the longstanding team-based model of care already
established within VA that ensures competent, safe, and
appropriate care for veterans. VA encourages a team-based
approach to patient care. National Standards of Practice will
support and define roles within the team regardless of state.
National Standards of Practice are intended to strengthen
the team-based care and thereby generate the best possible
access and outcomes for veterans. Patients are familiar with
the concept of having a team of caregivers, including nurses,
physical and respiratory therapists, and others. The anesthesia
care team can be considered a more specialized model of that
team. CRNAs provide anesthesia care for surgery, trauma,
procedures in nonsurgical and critical care settings, and
chronic pain management as part of the patient care team.
VA has a proven team-based model of care involving both
anesthesiologists and CRNAs, as well as various additional
types of providers, including trainees from both medical and
nursing training programs who come to VA for its longstanding
tradition of training excellence. The team concept relies on
the understanding that no one provider is alone and
unsupported.
Team-based care relies on the knowledge and discretion of
the facility anesthesia leadership who determine the team
composition based on multiple factors. Major procedures
performed at complex VA facilities such as cardiothoracic
surgery require the expertise of both subspecialty trained
anesthesiologists, as well as experienced CRNAs with additional
training or experience in cardiac anesthetic management.
More commonly performed procedures, such as screening
colonoscopies, are completed much more widely throughout our
system. These procedures can require careful preoperative
evaluation, and certain patients may safely receive their
anesthesia with a CRNA providing their principal care with
appropriate collegial support if needed.
In regard to the CRNA National Standards of Practice, VA
will only include independent practice if VA determines it is
appropriate, safe, and in the best interests of veterans. VA
anesthesiologists and CRNAs will continue to work as a team and
independently where appropriate to provide vital anesthesia
care to veterans throughout the United States.
The Temple University School of Law was contracted to
conduct an independent, third-party comprehensive review of
each state's licensure requirements for CRNA and analyze the
differences in CRNA practice across the country. This data is
now being used to develop the CRNA National Standards of
Practice by a team of expert CRNAs and other advanced practice
nurses and physicians. We intend to release this data in the
coming weeks.
In regard to the Optometry National Standards of Practice,
VA is currently evaluating whether the National Standards of
Practice will authorize optometrists in the 10 states that
allow eye surgery to practice and operate within the full scope
of their license. VA does not intend to allow VA optometrists
who hold a license in any other State to perform laser eye
surgery.
We received great feedback from the listening session held
on August 31. VA is using the information presented to
determine what should be included in the proposed national
standard.
We appreciate the input of the Committee, lawmakers, and
all stakeholders on this important issue. We are committed to
honoring our Nation's veterans by ensuring a safe environment,
to provide exception healthcare.
To close, our next listening session is this Thursday on
the 21st and will allow stakeholders invested in VA anesthesia
care the opportunity to provide research, input, and comments
on the variance between CRNA, State licenses, and also to
provide recommendations on what they believe should be included
in VA's proposed CRNA National Standards of Practice.
VA will consider all feedback received at the listening
session when drafting the National Standards of Practice.
Chairwoman Miller-Meeks and Ranking Member Brownley, we
appreciate our continued support and look forward to answering
your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Erica Scavella Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Dr. Scavella.
The chair now recognizes--is Mr. Saslo talking? Excuse me.
I am going to defer my questions to the end so the chair now
recognizes Ranking Member Brownley for any questions she may
have.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just wanted to say, I wanted to have a follow-up question
on the first panel and was unable to. I just want to make it
clear that my concern is the VA have the same kind of standard
that hospitals outside of the VA have. I know with physician-
led teams even in rural hospitals it was mentioned about the
challenges in rural areas.
Let us just take anesthesiology as an example. If there is
not an anesthesiologist in the rural area then it will be
physician-led or surgeon-led or something. It will be
physician-led is my understanding. In looking at that kind of
standard, in looking at the VA, I am hopeful that we will hold
on to that standard to be in parity with what private hospitals
are doing around the country.
Having said that I wanted to ask this question around
optometry and the ophthalmologist. The ophthalmology community,
and you mentioned this just in your testimony about you do not
intend on optometrists to be able to do laser surgery in states
where it is not allowed. It sounds to me as though you are
planning on having a two-tiered system within the standard.
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for the question.
When it does come to looking at any clinician's ability to
perform the services it is based on that person's experience
and licensure. With regard to optometrists, we do know that
there are only 10 states currently that do train their
optometrists to perform laser surgery. Transporting that skill
for those individual optometrists to a location theoretically
outside of those 10 states allowing them to do that surgery
could potentially happen. However, we would not be looking at
those who are not trained appropriately who have licenses in
the other 40 states. Again, this is all under review and
consideration based on our listening sessions, based on our
engagement with the entities who were here today on the first
panel. We are including all of that information as well as
review of quality, access, and safety data to make our decision
related to that.
Ms. Brownley. You are intending on that judgment call to be
made at the medical centers across the country?
Dr. Scavella. The decision to allow a clinician to do a
specific type of duty is based on their specific experience.
That takes place at each medical center. I, myself, am a
physician. My license in Maryland says physician and surgeon. I
am not proficient in surgery. My medical center would be
required to determine what specific skills I can provide
regardless of what my license states. It is an individual
decision that is based on that particular clinician. It is
based on their skills, their experience, and also their
clinical outcomes. We do evaluate our clinicians through a
focused and an ongoing professional practice evaluation which
allows us to know what we think they can do and we can see what
they can safely do and perform for our veterans.
Ms. Brownley. Very good.
This is the second time that the VA has considered adopting
a nurse-only anesthesia team. In 2016, veterans spoke out
strongly against the proposal and more than 25,000 veterans
commented in support of keeping anesthesiologists as the
leaders of the team. The American Legion recently conducted a
survey of veterans on the issue, the results of which it
provided in a statement for the record in this hearing.
Based on the Legion survey, most veterans believe it is
important for their anesthesia care to be provided by physician
anesthesiologists, and they prefer a physician to administer
anesthesia during surgery.
How is VA weighing the views of veterans in the development
of the National Standards of Practice for nurse anesthetists?
What exact criteria will be used to make the final decision?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question. I will start and
then I will hand it to my colleagues.
Related to the American Legion survey, we did speak with
the director of American Legion, both during the development of
the questions, as the information was coming back, and then we
did receive a preview of what the findings were.
We do understand that our veterans are committed to having
the best care possible. We would like to continue to work with
them to explore what that means in all different care settings.
Regarding the ability to make a determination related to
the type of care that they are receiving, we want to make sure
that we are providing care that is equitable, that is
accessible, and that is safe.
Dr. Saslo, would you like to add anything?
Mr. Saslo. Thank you, Dr. Scavella.
I think it is important to also recognize that we are not
looking, and we have said it before, we are not looking at a
nurse-only model. We continue in looking at the team-based
models.
As an adult nurse practitioner, even as an independent
practitioner in VA, my goal is to make sure that I work as part
of a team.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Excuse me. Your time is up. Thank you.
Mr. Saslo. Oh, I apologize.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. It was up when she yielded to you so,
which was inappropriate. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Representative Bergman for his
questions.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Just out of curiosity, those of you sitting on this panel
who work at the VA. Yes?
Dr. Scavella. Yes.
Mr. Bergman. Then you have got the members of the first
panel who basically do not work at the VA. They represent
their, if you will, constituencies. Do you guys ever get
together and just, you know, whether it be a quarterly meeting?
Let us focus on just the AMA, because the overarching
institution with all the subspecialties underneath it and you
as the VA are the overarching umbrella, if you will, of all
things veteran and veteran healthcare. Do you guys ever, I
mean, do you have routine meetings? Could you describe one?
Dr. Scavella. Sure. Thank you for that question,
Congressman Bergman.
We have been engaged with several organizations, including
the AMA since 2021. We have dates of the over 200 engagements
we have had with several different stakeholders.
Mr. Bergman. Did it not occur before 2021?
Dr. Scavella. We do but I can tell you that we have got
dates in our files today----
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Dr. Scavella [continuing]. that indicate that for this
particular purpose that we have been engaging with the groups,
including the AMA, since 2021.
We do meet with these entities and I think what we are
hearing from them is they are interested in being a part of
the----
Mr. Bergman. Let me ask the question. Since you do have
gatherings has the question ever come up since 2021 that care
in the community for veterans, has that ever been the subject
of one of your gatherings? It is one thing to work in the urban
suburban setting where you have the big VA medical centers and
you have big civilian, you know, hospitals and surgery centers
and whatever. I mean, has there ever been any focus of a
meeting on what it means to provide rural and remote healthcare
for veterans in this 21st century?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
Yes. We have explained that in some locations, due to the
acuity of the facility, the types of care that is provided.
Mr. Bergman. Explaining is not dialoguing.
Dr. Scavella. Okay. I will say during dialogs, during
meetings with these different entities we have explained that
we do have some concerns related to our ability to provide care
in all locations where VA facilities or care----
Mr. Bergman. Okay. I am just kind of curious because when
you have stakeholders in anything, and again, I think everybody
here in the room believes why we are here is to provide better
outcomes for veterans in healthcare.
Are you aware, and this is for any one of the three of you,
are any of you aware that in the 2016 APRN final rule that VA
stated that CRNAs provide quality care and are able to practice
independently without added risk to patient safety?
Mr. Saslo. Yes, we are aware of that. During that period of
time the decision was made by the administration at that time
not to move forward with the full practice authority for CRNAs
only while the remainder of the advanced practice rolls were
given the full practice authority at that time.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Well, since we are facing an ongoing
shortage, workforce shortage across both VA and the private
healthcare industry, especially in the rural and remote areas,
how will it restrict the services that certain health
professionals can provide instead of allowing them to provide
the full scope of services under their license do anything to
help the problem? Are we unnecessarily restricting?
Dr. Scavella. I will start and then I will turn it over to
my colleague, Mr. Kalett.
I think we want to make sure any provision of services that
we provide that we are providing safe care. That needs to be
evaluated closely to make sure that we are not providing
anything that we think is going to be potentially a poor
outcome for our veterans. It is not an easy answer. It is not
just a linear answer. It is based on lots of factors.
Mr. Kalett.
Mr. Kalett. Thanks for the question.
The idea here for the National Standards of Practice is to
remove barriers. If there are professions who, for example,
require a referral before they can see a patient, like PT,
eliminating that within the VA system would be our goal. The
goal is not to limit top of license practice. If you have a
license that allows you to do more than what a national
standard can do, there could still be the way to do that. We
are not looking to strict care if I understood your question.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Thank you.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Representative Bergman.
The chair now recognizes Representative Budzinski for 5
minutes.
Ms. Budzinski. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I appreciate the input from all stakeholders on this
important issue. My team and I have met with numerous
stakeholders on both sides of this issue, and I am particularly
interested in how much of this effort will impact our rural
veterans in particular.
As we all know and have consistently heard, we are facing
severe shortages of healthcare workers. Overall, and
particularly in rural areas like those in my district, veterans
in these areas most often travel lengthy distances for care,
especially when seeking more specialized care. Professions such
as CRNAs and optometrists often fill these gaps in most rural
areas which leads me to my first question to Dr. Scavella.
Can you elaborate on the VA's process for these standards
and to what extent the agency is factoring rural access
challenges into your analysis of whether health professions
such as CRNAs and optometrists' scope of practice should be
broadened?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
Yes, making sure that all of our veterans have access at
all the locations where we provide services is extremely
important to us. If you cannot get the care then it does not
matter if it is great or not. We want to make sure we are
providing that care.
In rural locations we may have different challenges. Even
in some urban locations we may have different challenges with
being able to provide the services that we need to provide. We
are keeping that at the forefront of everything that we are
doing.
Dr. Saslo or Mr. Kalett, would you like to add anything?
Mr. Saslo. I think it is really important, and I appreciate
the question about the rurality because we recognize that every
state has rural areas to it. Our goal really is to try to
provide the best and the safest care. NorthStar is always at
our forefront when we are looking at the national standards for
all 51 professions. I think the best take home message is, yes,
we are looking at exploring all of the opportunities as long as
it is the national standard, not the minority of what we
deliver in healthcare. For those states that may be a smaller
number providing greater access, we are not looking to restrict
those particular states but we do not necessarily want to see
that care broadened across because it is not the norm for the
rest of the country.
Mr. Kalett.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay. I wanted to mention another one of my
top priorities since joining the House Veterans' Affairs
Committee (HVAC) has been working to ensure veterans have
access to comprehensive behavioral health treatment as well.
That VA is keeping this as a focus in the development of these
national standards. With that in mind I noted the mental health
and suicide prevention professions that would be included in
the list of 51 occupations for national standards.
My question, again, I will start with Dr. Scavella, how do
you see these national standards improving behavioral health
access and suicide prevention efforts for our veterans?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
There are several professions represented that do extend
and perform care in our mental health or behavioral health
settings and that are able to both extend the team that is
providing that care and also sometimes provide that care
specifically. We know that there are ways to expand the team by
giving them more autonomy and ability to provide that care
directly to veterans when it comes to suicide prevention and
mental healthcare.
Mr. Saslo. If I could just add to that. I think it is
really important as Dr. Scavella pointed out that several of
the team members we already use and we want to maximize that
delivery such as those social workers, psychologists, and some
of our advanced practice nurses and delivering that mental
health that is so very vital for our suicide prevention.
Ms. Budzinski. Would you like to add anything? Okay. I
think I have time for one other point and question.
I wanted to turn to quality of care. We heard during the
first panel that quality of care may diminish under these new
standards and both sides have cited studies that I think are
important to factor into these proposed standards.
I believe we do need some form of standardization but I
also want to ensure it is done in a way that does not harm the
quality of care for our veterans, of course.
Can I start again with you, Dr. Scavella? In addition to
seeking public comments through the Federal Register, what
other steps does the VA plan on taking to ensure veterans see
improved health outcomes with these standards?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
One of the very nice things about the Department of
Veterans Affairs is that we have lots of data. We can look at
healthcare outcomes and compare and contrast the care that our
veterans are receiving. We obviously can look at the quality of
the care being provided by different clinicians by focusing on
the work that they are doing, work they have done in the past,
and make sure that we are rightsizing and only allowing those
with the skills, education, and training to perform those
duties.
Mr. Saslo. I would like to also add that one of the things
that we recognize as part of the National Standards of Practice
is that we have an obligation to look at the future state. As
we roll out those National Standards of Practice as they are
finalized, one of our goals in VHA is to look at the quality of
the data, the outcomes to make sure that what we are doing
continues to have ongoing oversight. The national standards
have to be reviewed and renewed or updated every 5 years at a
minimum. One of our goals is that should those standards need
to be changed sooner because we identify opportunities or
changes in practice across multiple states, we want to be able
to have that ability to look at them up front and be able to
address them sooner rather than later.
Ms. Budzinski. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Dr. Murphy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you guys all for
coming. I just want to say from the bottom of my heart as a
physician and a Member of Congress, I have a very, very large
contingent of veterans in our district. I deeply appreciate
your compassion and care for those who have severed our country
so well.
Just a few questions. I gave kind of my thoughts about the
scope of practice and the creep of the scope of practice
because everybody wants to do what everybody did before and
vice versa. It just gets in this absolute maelstrom of what is
happening.
Just a side note, Dr. Scavella, do you have anything to do
with the electronic medical record (EMR)? We had a hearing last
week and it did not go well. Everybody was very disappointed in
the EMR that is going on with the VA system.
Dr. Scavella. No, sir. That is not in my portfolio.
Mr. Murphy. Bless you. I think you are very lucky for that.
It spoke to me when you said we have data that confirms this,
that, and the other stuff. That was one of the purposes of the
EMR is to cull data. If you do not have a functional one I do
not know how you cull data really.
I just want to kind of ask a question. Dr. Scavella, you
noted that the VA has a plan not to move away from the team-
based model. If that is the case then tell me how you plan the
role of the physician in that if it is team based? How does
that work?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
In VA at times there may be different members of the team
who may be the lead of the team. We believe that the team-based
model is important. The majority of the time it is a physician-
led team but there could be times where the physician may not
be part of that team. We are being broad with that terminology
to make sure that we are able to be agile with the care we are
providing.
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Dr. Scavella. If there is something that requires a
physician, a physician. We want to make sure that we leave
ourselves some room for that.
Mr. Murphy. Sure. All right. Well, thank you.
I agree with you completely. A physician does not have to
be at everything all the time. The bottom line is we want to
take good care of our veterans. I mean, I think that is,
absolutely everybody agrees in the room. I said this before,
and I will say it again. That is the bottom line.
Can you describe to me what the problem is that is trying
to be solved?
Dr. Scavella. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question as
well.
We want to make sure that if we have veterans who are
entering our system in locations where we may not have the full
complement of a team, that those people who are trained and
competent in the needs of that patient, that they are able to
provide that care.
Mr. Murphy. Okay.
Dr. Scavella. That is the ultimate.
Mr. Murphy. Sure. Sure. I understand that completely.
Where does Community Care fit in with that? I take care of
VA patients. When I was running a practice we were part of the
Community Care system. You know, I have a VA clinic that is
literally 800 yards from the main medical center.
Where does Community Care fit in that model? My question
really centers around are you going to send somebody out in the
community that already has established scope of practice,
residency physician that has a fully recognized, fully
established expertise in that field? Or are we going to just
try to keep them within the VA where their expertise and their
scope of practice is not uniform satisfied within the country?
Dr. Scavella. To answer the question related to how we are
going to use Community Care, if we place a referral, our intent
is always to see what our availability is within our system. We
need to look at both the time length for the appointment
between the time desired and the time necessary for the patient
to be seen, as well as how far they may need to travel for that
care.
There are two different decision points when it comes to
looking at how we get patients seen within our system or within
the community. Those have to be evaluated each time to make
sure that we are providing that care.
We also use the technology that we have existing currently
to determine if we are able to provide that care face to face
or virtual if appropriate. Those are also factored into our
decisions related to making referrals, and we want to make sure
that we are doing what is best for the veteran.
Mr. Murphy. Okay. Again, we want the best care for the
veteran regardless of really what that looks like. In the world
of telehealth, in the world of Community Care, I do not think
we need to degrade the care of our veterans in the term of
``access.'' I live in a very rural area, very rural. We do not
need to do that.
I get concerned, and I will just kind of say this for the
record. Actually, I probably will not. Thank you. I will be
quiet. Thank you all.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Dr. Murphy.
The chair now recognizes Representative Landsman for 5
minutes.
Mr. Landsman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to thank Dr. Murphy for his comments about the
commitment and what you all do for veterans. Oftentimes, we
overlook that in hearings where we want to get into the work,
which is obviously really important, but I really appreciated
the fact that that is something we all believe which is how
hard you all work and why that matters so much.
Just two questions and then I will let you all answer them
as you see fit. One is on the listening sessions. Just sort of
next steps, what to expect, what we should be looking out for.
Will there be more? What do you hope to achieve and really just
what are the next steps there?
The second question has to do with this larger point about
making sure veterans get the best care possible, which is
obviously the goal that we all share. We have competing
thoughts; right? Folks from different communities are weighing
in. Bringing them together to think through this seems pretty
important to me. I know that has been brought up, but you know,
thoughts on that. How that works? How has that not worked? You
know, getting them in a room to say, okay, you know, we all
share the same goal of trying to provide the best possible
care. How do we do this together?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for those questions.
For the first one I will start and then I will share with
Mr. Kalett.
We have held four listening sessions for the National
Standards of Practice. We have broken up the groups of which
entities were included. Over the past 4 weeks, all on
Thursdays, the last one that is currently scheduled we
scheduled for this Thursday. They have been really impactful. I
think eye-opening to all of us on this panel. We think the
information gathered, because people have brought data,
presentations and other things to us, I think that has been
really important and impactful to us.
I will turn it over to Mr. Kalett for some more details on
how we have done.
Mr. Kalett. Thank you. Am I on now? There we go. Sorry
about that.
After the listening sessions, the final one is scheduled
for Thursday. That will the CRNA one. We expect to get a lot of
information as a result of that listening session. We are going
to need time to digest that information. We will then publish
something in the Federal Register. Notices to all the states.
We have provided your staff with a detailed high level version
of the process.
After we get information from the proposals where people
tell us what they think we got. Hopefully, something we got
right and what we did not get right. We will then have to
finalize the standard, publish it, and that is not where it
ends. Right?
Once we do that we are going to move to implementation. We
are going to have a live link where we are hoping states will
make sue of it if they notice for what ever reason during the
process that they are unable to get the information to us that
they felt we needed, they will do that.
I did want to also just address very quickly the why behind
this because several of you have asked about that. Most
professions are not going to experience a change as a result of
the National Standards of Practice. That sort of leads you to
ask, well, then why are you doing it? The reason we are doing
it is because those professions where there are slight
variances, administrative headaches that were noted as far back
as the 1990's by the National Academy of Science. That is a
problem for us. Things like requiring referrals. Or not
allowing people to order studies. Like chiropractors cannot
order imaging studies. These are the types of things. Or
audiologists to dispense hearing aids. This is really the
target of the NSPs. The bigger picture issues exist but they
are not the prime driver for why we are doing this.
Dr. Scavella. To continue to answer your second question
which is related to how we can better bring together the
groups, especially the opposing groups, I think our challenge
has been internally within our groups, especially the two
corollaries that are represented here. Between our
ophthalmologist and our optometrist, internally they both align
under me. I brought them together from day one. They have been
part of this process. They may or may not be members of these
organizations and may or not be representing the organizations
in their thought processes but they have been together
developing these standards from day one. Within our
organization, anesthesia care, the anesthesiologists sit under
me. The CRNAs sit under Dr. Saslo. From day one they have
worked together to put this together. Whether they represent an
internal VA professional group or one of these external
entities represented today, they have been part of this
process. I think our challenge remains and the fact that we are
not necessarily as agile and as able to engage the presidents
of organizations and to embed them in this work. We will need
to work on how better to do that.
Mr. Landsman. Thank you very much, all three of you. I
yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. The chair now recognizes Representative
Van Orden for 5 minutes.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Apparently, discretion is not the better part of valor so I
would like to yield to my colleague, Mr. Murphy, as much time
as he requires to say something that he will later regret.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. The chair now recognizes Mr. Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. Not at all. I only open my mouth to change
feet.
I will just say this very quickly. Right now in the state
of California, three nurse practitioners are suing the state so
that when they interview their patients they can be called
doctor. It is very confusing, and this is one of my major
concerns about scope creep as it is. I do not think that is
fair. I do not think it is right. I think it is inaccurate and
I honestly do not think most nurse practitioners would agree
with them. That said, it is just something that I think we have
to be wary about of marching up the stream when there is so
much of this scope creep. This really concerns me. I do not
think that is accurate. I do not think it is fair. There is a
difference between being a doctor and having a doctorate. Thank
you.
With that I will yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. The chair now recognizes Representative
Van Orden for the remainder of his time.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr., it is Kalett; is that correct?
Mr. Kalett. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. First of all, thank you very much for
coming. Dr. Saslo and Scavella. It is interesting that Dr.
Murphy and I are both struggling to read your names and we are
talking about optometrists.
Are there plans in place, and this is across the board, are
there plans in place for in extremis situations? Some of us are
from the Midwest, including the chairwoman. Suppose there is a
snowstorm or a blizzard and the anesthesiologist cannot get to
the hospital. Is that veteran going to be able to get medical
care promptly?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
Our goal is to make sure that we are there to provide the
care wherever a veteran may come into the system. Whether there
is a snowstorm or not. Perhaps I misunderstood your question.
Mr. Van Orden. Well, ma'am, I live in a very rural area. We
may only have one of the healthcare providers that are going to
meet your national standard of care. I am just going to say
that right now. It is going to happen. If we have one
anesthesiologist who gets snowed into their house or drive off
the road and in a ditch in a blizzard--it happens every
winter--will the veteran that is at the hospital waiting for
surgery be able to get that care in a timely manner?
Dr. Scavella. I will yield to Dr. Saslo.
Mr. Saslo. I think it is important to recognize that
whether it is a snowstorm, or a hurricane, or an earthquake,
one of the things that we try to make sure facilities recognize
is how they prepare their staffing models in order to be able
to meet the demands of the veterans when they are coming in.
Should those types of events occur, how do we make sure that we
are maximizing the care delivery to that veteran. It really
will be dependent upon the facility to prepare the right model
in order to make sure that they are meeting the needs
regardless of the issues that arise.
Mr. Van Orden. Well, I understand that, sir. You know,
rocks are heavy, trees are made of wood, and gravity is real.
We have got one anesthesiologist. If there is a qualified nurse
anesthetist who is on station and the anesthesiologist is in a
ditch, will he or she be able to give the appropriate medical
care to that veteran in a timely manner? It is a very, very
simple questions.
Dr. Scavella. Yes. It depends. Unfortunately, it does
depend. If the one sole anesthesia provider that is available
is not capable of providing the care that is provided it would
not be something that we would want to see. We would want to
make sure that that veteran is receiving the appropriate care
from a clinician that can provide it. In those instances it may
be a matter of delaying the procedure. If it is elective, it
may be a matter of sending him to another facility where there
is the appropriate care that could be provided. It could be a
matter of waiting if it is elective. If it is an emergency
there is a different situation.
Mr. Van Orden. Doctor.
Dr. Scavella. Yes.
Mr. Van Orden. Ma'am, may I ask where you are from?
Dr. Scavella. I grew up in Chicago, Illinois.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. You have been in a blizzard.
Dr. Scavella. Correct.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I want my hair to grow back. It is not
happening.
I am asking you a real simple question. We have a qualified
nurse anesthetist on station. You cannot send somebody to
another facility because there is not one where I live. Or it
is 60 miles away and it is 35 degrees below zero and you are in
a snowstorm. You physically cannot move. You have got a patient
and a qualified nurse anesthetist on station. The
anesthesiologist is in a ditch. Will that man or woman who is
qualified as a nurse anesthetist be able to provide adequate
healthcare, excuse me, timely healthcare to that veteran, yes
or no?
Dr. Scavella. Congressman Van Orden, your key word is
``qualified.'' If that entity is qualified----
Mr. Van Orden. Back it up. Sorry, go ahead?
Dr. Scavella. If that person is qualified to provide the
care that is being requested and needed then that person would
be able to provide that.
Mr. Van Orden. A qualified nurse anesthetist will be able
to administer anesthesia to a veteran in extremis without
direct supervision, or supervision, even a phone call because
someone is still at work, in extremis?
Dr. Scavella. Again it depends on the care that is being
provided and it would be a case by case basis. Sorry that I do
not have a better answer but to give a blanket authorization to
provide care just because you have a body does not necessarily
mean that you can. The same thing for an anesthesiologist or a
physician.
Mr. Van Orden. Yes, ma'am. I understand that.
My time is expired. I want to say one more thing. I believe
that this model may be too rigid and there must be things
written in here to provide for that exact scenario, because it
is going to happen in Dr. Miller-Meeks' district just as mine.
Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Representative Van Orden.
The chair now recognizes Representative Scott if he wishes
to have questions for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Yes, I would. Thank you very much once again,
Chairwoman Miller-Meeks and Ranking Member Brownley for your
kindness in allowing me to be a part of this.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are at a very critical moment in
time in our Nation's history. The way we care and express
publicly about our thoughts, our feelings, for two groups. One
group is our veterans. No other group is having the massive
suicide rates as our veterans. A large percentage of those
suicides come from inadequate healthcare in our VA system. Now
with this movement to try to now turn over the basic element of
medical treatment away from the doctors of anesthesiology to
the nurses. Think about that.
The other group are our law enforcement who put their lives
on the line. Both groups out there willing to pay the ultimate
sacrifice for our protection and our growth. They are worried
about what we are discussing here today, their healthcare.
Now, I want to direct my questions this time to both Dr.
Scavella. I hope I got that right. Dr. Saslo. If you could
answer these questions.
The VA's previous process was transparent and it included
all stakeholders. It resulted in the right decisions for our
veterans. However, this current process lacks any transparency.
A small work group has been tasked with working on this
proposal all behind closed doors.
My question to you is this. Why is this process so
secretive?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Scott.
We have been including our individual specialists in the
area of each of the 51 occupations on the working group. We
have been engaged with stakeholders since 2021 related to this
specific work.
Mr. Scott. Well, let me ask you this. What assurances do we
have that the work group includes subject matter expertise from
all key stakeholders, including front line VA
anesthesiologists?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question as well.
We have included our frontline anesthesiologists and CRNAs
as well as other advanced practice nurses and physicians
specifically for the work that is beginning for the National
Standards of Practice related to anesthesia care.
Mr. Scott. Well, let me ask you this. Can you and Dr.
Scavella I believe. Did I get that right?
Mr. Saslo. I am Dr. Saslo but that is all right.
Mr. Scott. I do not, okay, I do not want your colleague to
have to be by herself in answering these. This is important.
The eyes of the Nation are on us and finally we are dealing
with this issue of veterans.
Answer me. Can you list, either of you, who currently
serves on the work group?
Mr. Saslo. Thank you for the questions.
I think it is really important to recognize that with each
of the different 51 professions that we are working with we
have multiple professions within that group that are sitting on
those workgroups. We also go back to those workgroups as they
are developing because the concept of it as a small workgroup
is not necessarily as accurate as it might sound. The larger
workgroups of those particular professions are the ones
responsible to come in and work with us to identify what
opportunities for standardization exist amongst each of the
professions. We hope that it is a much bigger participation
than what you may have already been alluding to. Thank you.
Mr. Scott. Well, my time is up. Once again, thank you very
much. I appreciate this.
We have a bill going forward to make sure we keep our
anesthesiologists as the primary source for treatment in this
area. I appreciate you all having me as a guest. Thank you very
much. Thanks to the panel.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Representative Scott.
The chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
The reason we are having this hearing is actually because
of comments that you have made, Dr. Scavella. We are having
this hearing because multiple groups approached members of HVAC
with complaints that National Practice Standards were being
developed and they did not have access, nor were they
communicated. Not in email, not in phone calls, not in
meetings. We had a roundtable in April as Ranking Member
Brownley mentioned and we found further at that roundtable that
Allied Health professionals are nonphysician health
professionals. To be clear, I do not consider an optometrist a
physician. I will ask a question about that in a moment.
However, we found that nonphysician groups had great access to
the VA but physician groups did not. You specifically defended
yourself by saying ``within our organization.''
Let me just say, when you are an employee of an
organization, which I have been, both in my 24 years in the
military and as a physician-employee of a hospital, and as a
nurse of a hospital, you are sometimes muted in your responses
because you are talking to your employer. If you feel your
employer wants to go down a certain track or pathway, you may
not relay your true concerns or feelings.
The other thing that I would like to mention is something I
think that gets confused. It is often brought up in scope of
practice issues within states and state government, is that
often the rationale for expanding scope of practice is so
individuals get care in rural areas.
As we found when Oklahoma passed their laser law for
optometrists, looking at Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) data, the majority of laser procedures were
guess what? They were not performed in rural areas. They were
performed in the metropolitan areas of Tulsa and Oklahoma City.
That exists to this day.
Can you tell me how many VA hospitals are located in rural
areas? How many are in rural areas?
Dr. Scavella. Chairwoman Miller-Meeks. Thank you for the
question. I would actually have to look at a map and count. I
do not have a breakdown of those that are specifically in those
locations.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. They may be in rural states but in a
rural areas of a state. In Iowa, our two VA hospitals are in
Iowa City, where the University of Iowa is located, and in Des
Moines. There are not any facilities in a rural area. There may
be clinics. If, as you alluded, if you were to allow an
optometrist licensed in Alaska as Dr. Barney said he is
licensed in Alaska and can perform laser procedures to then
come and be located to the VA Hospital in Iowa, even though
there are ophthalmologists, that optometrist would then be
allowed to perform a procedure for which he is not licensed to
do in Iowa. Is that correct? I think that is what you stated.
Dr. Scavella. Theoretically, just like my license is
transportable across the country, I can operate in any Federal
location, potentially, if we were to make that decision that
would be something that we would look at for quality reasons,
potentially.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Which is why it is tremendously
concerning.
Dr. Scavella, are nonphysician providers required to
identify themselves as such to veteran patients? How does the
VA educate veterans as to the qualifications? When a veteran,
or for that matter the public hears doctor or physician, they
think that this is someone that has gone to medical school. Are
you going to inform veterans that the person treating you has
not gone to medical school, has not done a residency, is not
board certified? In fact, to get on the insurance of most
health insurance providers and Medicare, you have to be board
certified or board eligible. Are CRNAs, are optometrists, are
other Allied Health professionals that you may increase their
scope of practice to practice in a state for which they are not
licensed to do that, are they board certified and board
eligible?
How is it that you intend to, number one, address what the
American Legion said when they would prefer to have a
physician; and how are you going to use lower educated, lower
trained providers in lieu of having someone go out into a
community for care when there is a provider that is a physician
provider in that community?
Dr. Scavella. Thank you for that question.
We would always want to make sure we were providing the
highest quality care for the veteran and the needs the veteran
was having at that time.
Related to how clinicians identify themselves to veterans,
it is our understanding that they introduce themselves, explain
where they are as part of the care team.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Which is exactly why we are having this
hearing and exactly why as a nurse married to a nurse, as a
doctor, as a veteran, I am concerned about the secrecy. Thank
you, Representative Scott. The secrecy of the VA in going
through this procedure. Their lack of engagement with other
groups and other providers until you have an open comment.
I know that you are having listening sessions. I thank you
for doing that but I would say that my concerns have not been
allayed that we will be providing our veterans the highest
quality care by care teams led by physicians, and that patients
know whether or not a physician is delivering care or another
individual of other education and training as knowledgeable as
those individuals may be. I have great respect for everyone in
the healthcare profession but I am very concerned about what is
going on.
The chair would recognize Ranking Member Brownley for any
closing remarks.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I will say I served in the California legislature and
whenever there was a Committee hearing on scope of practice and
licensing you always knew it because there were crowds of
people outside of the hearing room that could not get into the
hearing room. There was a lot of debate going on outside of the
hearing room. I know that these are very, very difficult. Very,
very difficult issues to settle on.
I will say that based on this hearing I feel as though we
are getting closer to better clarity from the VA on whether a
team-based model of care means a physician-led team-based model
of care.
I think the answer from the VA was most of the time. Most
of the time it will be a physician-led model of care.
I will say in regards to that when we compare the VA to
those hospitals outside of the VA that is not their model of
care. I do not want to give up quality under any circumstance.
I think we heard also today that even in rural hospitals, and I
think Dr. Miller makes his point of there are no hospitals in
rural areas is a very good one. Even in those rural hospitals,
if they are there we have been told that it is always a
physician-led care team. It might not be the anesthesiologist.
It might not be the ophthalmologist. It is a physician-led
team.
I do not want to give up quality, and I do not want to be
less than what other hospitals are doing outside of the VA.
I will say again what I said in my opening comments and
that is to why the VA is doing this initiative when at the end
of the day the medical professionals at each medical centers
will ultimately make these decisions.
Now, the VA said we still have to settle some of these
discrepancies between different practices. At the end of the
day it is still going to be the medical centers and the
professionals they are in who will ultimately make final
decisions on who will be performing what and scope of practice.
The VA has also said we need more agility. I understand
that. Even when the VA provided more flexibility of scope of
practice during COVID, the VA has told me unequivocally that
the practices and protocols never changed regardless of the
emergency. Even when they were given that ability to be more
agile it was not utilized. I have to assume that those
decisions were based on the quality of care.
I will just end by saying I think what other members have
said on the Committee is the VA should never give up, ever give
up on delivering the highest quality of health care. Our
veterans have complex health issues and they should receive the
highest quality of care. They should deserve no less. This is
what we owe our veterans. I hope as we proceed in the process
of this that we will keep the highest standard of care.
I yield back.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Ranking Member Brownley.
I would like to thank everyone for their participation in
today's hearing and for the productive conversation.
I know this is a challenging topic. I have been involved in
it at the state level, as well as here at the Federal level.
The passion for your work and your care for veterans is evident
to us in both of our panels.
I appreciate everyone's willingness to come here today and
to focus on what should be our utmost priority of putting
veterans first.
It is important to me and to my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle that all veterans seeking care in the VA are ensured
quality care that is safe and effective. I look forward to
continued work on this effort to create equitable standards of
practice across the VA, within the department, stakeholders and
my colleagues on this Subcommittee.
I will echo again that the nature of care in rural areas
when it comes to a VA hospital facility needing providers is
very different than what it is within a state or a district. I
would also like to say that the workforce shortage that has
been mentioned, last year we passed a bill to increase the pay
for nurses, nurse practitioners, PAs, and Allied professionals
because there was a shortage of those. I think to proffer an
idea that there is a physician shortage so we need to replace
them with others would be inaccurate.
I am also going to echo a statement often made by VA
officials, that the veteran population is unique. They tend to
have more complex health issues with multiple comorbidities
resulting in a higher risk of complications. Let us not forget
that when considering policies that may have a significant
impact on the care they receive. Let us also remember that we
have a mission act and Community Care to address some of the
issues in where veterans can receive care and in a timely
fashion.
The complete written statements of today's witnesses will
be entered into the hearing record.
I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous
material.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I thank the members and the witnesses for their attendance
and participation today. This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Jesse Ehrenfeld

The American Medical Association (AMA) appreciates the opportunity
to submit the following statement to the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Veterans Affairs Subcommittee on Health as part of a
hearing concerning the ``VA's Federal Supremacy Initiative: Putting
Veterans First?'' The AMA commends the Committee for focusing on this
critically important issue since it is imperative that our Nation's
veterans receive the best health care possible.
``The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is the largest
integrated health care system in the United States, providing care at
1,298 health care facilities, including 171 VA Medical Centers and
1,113 outpatient sites of care of varying complexity (VHA outpatient
clinics) to over 9 million Veterans enrolled in the VA health care
program.'' \1\ Since the VHA is such a large health care system, the
actions it takes, especially in terms of the scope of practice of its
non-physician providers, could have an immense impact on health care in
its entirety. National Standards of Practice developed by the VA
Federal Supremacy Project would override long-established state laws
governing scope of practice and health-professional licensure, and, as
such, the quality of care provided to our veterans, and potentially
patients across the nation, will decline if the Project is fully
implemented. We therefore oppose the implementation of the Federal
Supremacy Project. At the very least, we urge Congress to ensure that
physician-led team-based care is maintained and that physician
representation on all the Work Groups, not just the Physician Work
Group, be mandatory.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.va.gov/health/
aboutvha.asp#:8:textThe%20Veterans%20Health %20Administration
%20(VHA,Veterans %20enrolled %20in %20the %20VA.

The VA Federal Supremacy Project: Physician representation is necessary
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
across all stages and Work Groups.

In November 2020, the VA published an interim final rule entitled
``Authority of VA Professionals to Practice Health Care.'' \2\ The
interim final rule was issued to expand health care professionals'
scope of practice ``notwithstanding any State license, registration,
certification, or other requirements . . . This rulemaking also
confirm[ed] VA's authority to establish national standards of practice
for health care professionals which will standardize a health care
professional's practice in all VA medical facilities.'' \3\ By invoking
the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution to preempt state laws to
develop National Standards of Practice, the VA is making it harder to
oversee the practice of medicine and is potentially allowing non-
physicians to perform procedures that are outside the scope of their
knowledge and state licensure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/11/12/2020-
24817/authority-of-va-professionals-to-practice-health-care#p-65.
\3\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based upon this interim final rule, the VA has begun the process of
implementing National Standards of Practice for 48 health care
occupations through the ``Federal Supremacy Project.'' As noted in the
rule, this Project preempts state scope of practice laws and creates a
single set of practice standards for all VA-employed physicians, and
separate standards for 47 other non-physician health care
professionals. The VA has already closed the comment period for Blind
Rehabilitation Specialists, Ophthalmology Technicians,
Kinesiotherapists, Therapeutic Medical Physicists, Registered Dietitian
Nutritionists, Orthotists, Prosthetists, and Prosthetist-Orthotists,
Histopathology Technologists, and Cytotechnologists.\4\ Moreover,
comment periods are currently open for Art Therapists, Dance/Movement
Therapists, Drama Therapists, Music Therapists, and Recreation
Therapists and close on September 26, 2023. Finally, the VA is
currently hosting five listening sessions to allow individuals to
provide input on state variances for health care occupations for the
occupations that have not yet had their feedback period closed,
including Optometrists, Nurse Practitioners, Physician Assistants, and
Pharmacists.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.va.gov/STANDARDSOFPRACTICE/providing-feedback.asp.
\5\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/08/14/2023-
17309/announcement-of-public-listening-sessions-to-inform-vas-
standards-of-practice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Physician-led, team-based care is the gold standard of health care
and the predominant model of care for many, if not most, of these
occupations across the country. As such, due to the physician's unique
role as head of the care team, it is important that physician input is
received and implemented within the Project as early as possible.
Importantly, physician representation on all the Work Groups, not just
the Physician Work Group, should be mandatory since it could help to
counter internal and external resistance when National Standards of
Practice are published in the Federal Register for comment and help to
ensure that these standards are accurate and built to help enforce
team-based care. Therefore, if the VA persists in moving forward with
the Federal Supremacy Project, we urge the VA to require physician
representation on all Work Groups and consultation with relevant
physician specialty societies and other internal and external
stakeholders.

Scope of Practice: Physicians should be the head of the care team to
ensure the highest quality care for our nation's veterans.

Should the VA move forward with the Federal Supremacy Project, the
AMA is concerned that the National Standards of Practice for non-
physician providers developed by the Project may not accurately reflect
the skills acquired through the education and training of such
occupations and may allow non-physicians to provide services and
perform procedures that are outside the scope of their knowledge and
licensure. The AMA strongly supports the team approach to patient care,
with each member of the team playing a clearly defined role as
determined by his or her education and training. While we greatly value
the contribution of all non-physicians, no other health care
professionals come close to the education and training that physicians
receive.
With more than 12,000 hours of clinical experience, physicians are
uniquely qualified to lead health care teams. Non-physicians such as
physician assistants, nurse anesthetists, pharmacists, and optometrists
do not have the same rigorous and comprehensive education as
physicians. For example, physician assistant programs are two years in
length, require 2,000 hours of clinical care, and have no residency
requirement.\6\ Similarly, nurse anesthetists complete only two-to-
three years of graduate level education and have no residency
requirement. Pharmacists are trained as experts in medication
management but have very limited direct patient care experience and are
not trained to independently diagnose and treat patients. Students of
optometry rarely complete postgraduate education and are trained in
primary eye care. They are not exposed to standard surgical procedure,
aseptic surgical technique, or medical response to adverse surgical
events. In short, the educational programs undergone by non-physicians
do not prepare them to develop clinical judgment or skills similar to a
physician. For this reason, physicians and non-physicians are not
interchangeable on a care team.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.ama-assn.org/system/files?file=corp/media-browser/
premium/arc/ama-issue-brief-independentnursingpractice.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But it is more than just the vast difference in hours of education
and training, it is also the difference in rigor, standardization, and
comprehensiveness of medical school and residency programs, compared to
other non-physician programs. To be recognized as a physician with an
unlimited medical license, medical students' education must prepare
them to enter any field of graduate medical education. During medical
school, students receive a comprehensive education in the classroom and
in laboratories, where they study the biological, chemical,
pharmacological, physiological, and behavioral aspects of the human
condition. This period of intense study is supplemented by two years of
patient care rotations through different specialties, during which
medical students assist licensed physicians in the care of patients.
During clinical rotations, medical students continue to develop their
clinical judgment and medical decision-making skills through direct
experience managing patients in all aspects of medicine. Following
graduation, students must then pass a series of examinations to assess
a physician's readiness for licensure. At this point, medical students
``match'' into a three-to-seven-year residency program during which
they provide care in a select surgical or medical specialty under the
supervision of experienced physician faculty. As resident physicians
gain experience and demonstrate growth in their ability to care for
patients, they are given greater responsibility and independence. This
level of education and training is necessary to develop the acumen
required for the independent practice of medicine, including diagnosing
and treating patients, performing eye surgery and administering
anesthesia.
There is deep concern that the VA removing scope of practice
safeguards will allow for non-physician practitioners who have not been
adequately trained to provide medical care or perform procedures that
are outside the scope of their expertise and licensure, ultimately
leading to a lower standard of care for veterans. Veterans are an
extremely complex patient population. Consequently, our veterans
deserve better--they deserve and have a right to have physicians
leading their health care team.

Increased Cost and Decreased Quality: Increasing non-physician
practitioners' scope of practice within the VHA increases cost and
decreases the quality of health care.

There is strong evidence that increasing the scope of practice of
non-physicians in the VA results in higher costs and worse outcomes for
veterans' health care. For example, a high-quality study published as a
working paper by the National Bureau of Economic Research in 2022
compared the productivity of nurse practitioners and physicians (MDs/
DOs) practicing in the emergency department using Veterans Health
Administration data. The study found that nurse practitioners use more
resources and achieve worse health outcomes than physicians. Nurse
practitioners ordered more tests and formal consults than physicians
and were more likely than physicians to seek information from external
sources such as X-rays and CT scans.\7\ They also saw worse health
outcomes, raising 30-day preventable hospitalizations by 20 percent,
and increasing length of stay in the emergency department. Altogether,
nurse practitioners practicing independently increased health care
costs by $66 per emergency department visit.\8\ The study found that
these productivity differences make nurse practitioners more costly
than physicians to employ, even accounting for differences in
salary.\9\ The authors estimate that continuing to use the current
staffing allocation of nurse practitioners in the emergency department
results in a net cost of $74 million per year, compared to staffing the
emergency department with only physicians. Not only does the increased
resource use by nurse practitioners result in increased costs and
longer lengths of stay, but it also means patients undergo unnecessary
tests, procedures, and hospital admissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Productivity of Professions: Lessons from the Emergency
Department, Chan, David C. and Chen, Yiqun, NBER, Oct. 2022.
\8\ Id.
\9\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This study is a uniquely high-quality study within this body of
literature because it measures nurse practitioners working within the
VHA system during a time when nurse practitioners were authorized to
practice without physician supervision. It also uses a high-quality
causal analysis. While the VA national standards of practice do not
include nurse practitioners, this study is informative as the VA
considers expanding the scope of practice of other non-physician
practitioners, including physician assistants. In short, education and
training matters. The authors note that these findings may reflect
poorer decision-making by nurse practitioners based on their lower
level of skill compared to physicians--causing them to seek additional
sources of information. While it is appropriate for nurse practitioners
to seek additional information when they are unsure or unable to make a
differential diagnosis and determine the appropriate course of
treatment, this path results in increased costs to the system and worse
patient outcomes, ultimately a lower quality of care for veterans.
These findings are consistent with other studies as well, including
a recent study from the Hattiesburg Clinic in Mississippi which found
that allowing physician assistants and nurse practitioners to function
with independent patient panels in the primary care setting resulted in
higher costs, higher utilization of services, and lower quality of care
compared to panels of patients with a primary care physician.
Specifically, the study found that non-nursing home Medicare ACO
patient spend was $43 higher per member, per month for patients on a
nurse practitioner/physician assistant panel compared to those with a
primary care physician. Similarly, patients with a nurse practitioner/
physician assistant as their primary care provider were 1.8 percent
more likely to visit the ER and had an eight-percent higher referral
rate to specialists despite being younger and healthier than the cohort
of patients in the primary care physician panel. On quality of care,
the researchers examined 10 quality measures and found that physicians
performed better on nine of the 10 measures compared to the non-
physicians.
Other studies further suggest that physician assistants and nurse
practitioners tend to overprescribe and overutilize diagnostic imaging
and other services, contributing to higher health care costs. For
example, a 2020 study published in the Journal of General Internal
Medicine found 3.8 percent of physicians (MDs/DOs), compared to 8
percent of nurse practitioners and 9.8 percent of physician assistants
met at least one definition of overprescribing opioids and 1.3 percent
of physicians compared to 8.4 percent of physician assistants and 6.3
percent of nurse practitioners prescribed an opioid to at least 50
percent of patients.\10\ The study further found that, in states that
allow independent prescribing, nurse practitioners and physician
assistants were 20 times more likely to overprescribe opioids than
those in prescription-restricted states.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ MJ Lozada, MA Raji, JS Goodwin, YF Kuo, ``Opioid Prescribing
by Primary Care Providers: A Cross-Sectional Analysis of Nurse
Practitioner, Physician Assistant, and Physician Prescribing
Patterns.'' Journal General Internal Medicine. 2020; 35(9):2584-2592.
\11\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple studies have also found that physician assistants and
nurse practitioners tend to prescribe unnecessary antibiotics.\12\ A
study in Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology which examined
prescribing data for patients with common upper respiratory infection
that should not require antibiotics and found that adults seen by nurse
practitioners or physician assistants were 15 percent more likely to
receive an antibiotic compared to those patients seen by a physician.
Similar rates were found for pediatric patients.\13\ Unnecessary
antibiotic prescribing leads to antibiotic resistance which can have
negative impact on a patient's future ability to fight infection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Sanchez GV, Hersh AL, Shapiro DJ, et al. Brief Report:
Outpatient Antibiotic Prescribing Among United States Nurse
Practitioners and Physician Assistants. Open Forum Infectious Diseases.
2016:1-4. Grijalva CG, Nuorti JP, Griffin MR. Antibiotic prescription
rates for acute respiratory tract infections in US ambulatory settings.
JAMA 2009; 302:758-66.
\13\ Schmidt ML, Spencer MD, Davidson LE. Patient, Provider, and
Practice Characteristics Associated with Inappropriate Antimicrobial
Prescribing in Ambulatory Practices. Infection Control & Hospital
Epidemiology. 2018:1-9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple studies have also shown that physician assistants and
nurse practitioners order more diagnostic imaging than physicians,
which increases health care costs and threatens patient safety by
exposing patients to unnecessary radiation. For example, a study in the
Journal of the American College of Radiology, which analyzed skeletal
X-ray utilization for Medicare beneficiaries from 2003 to 2015, found
ordering increased substantially--more than 400 percent--by non-
physicians, primarily nurse practitioners and physician assistants,
during this timeframe.\14\ A separate study published in JAMA Internal
Medicine found that physician assistants and nurse practitioners
ordered more diagnostic imaging than primary care physicians following
an outpatient visit. The study controlled for imaging claims that
occurred after a referral to a specialist.\15\ The authors opined this
increased utilization may have important ramifications on costs,
safety, and quality of care. They further found greater coordination in
health care teams may produce better outcomes than merely expanding
physician assistant or nurse practitioner scope of practice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ D.J. Mizrahi, et.al. ``National Trends in the Utilization of
Skeletal Radiography,'' Journal of the American College of Radiology
2018; 1408-1414.
\15\ D.R. Hughes, et al., A Comparison of Diagnostic Imaging
Ordering Patterns Between Advanced Practice Clinicians and Primary Care
Physicians Following Office-Based Evaluation and Management Visits.
JAMA Internal Med. 2014;175(1):101-07.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The findings are clear: nurse practitioners and physician
assistants tend to prescribe more opioids than physicians, order more
diagnostic imaging than physicians, and overprescribe antibiotics
\16\--all which increase health care costs and threaten patient safety.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Sanchez GV, Hersh AL, Shapiro DJ, et al. Brief Report:
Outpatient Antibiotic Prescribing Among United States Nurse
Practitioners and Physician Assistants. Open Forum Infectious Diseases.
2016:1-4. Schmidt ML, Spencer MD, Davidson LE. Patient, Provider, and
Practice Characteristics Associated with Inappropriate Antimicrobial
Prescribing in Ambulatory Practices. Infection Control & Hospital
Epidemiology. 2018:1-9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, it is important to ensure that certified registered nurse
anesthetists are properly overseen. There is no literature to support
the safety of eliminating physician clinical oversight of anesthesia.
To the contrary, independent literature points to the risk to patients
of anesthesia without appropriate physician clinical oversight. For
example, a study from Anesthesiology, found that patients having
general or orthopedic surgery were eight percent more likely to die if
anesthesia was not provided by a physician anesthesiologist.\17\ An
additional study from the Journal of Clinical Anesthesia found that
patients that had their anesthesia solely provided by a nurse
anesthetist rather than a physician anesthesiologist were 80 percent
more likely to have an unexpected disposition (admission to the
hospital or death).\18\ Furthermore, a study from VA Evidence Synthesis
Program Evidence Briefs, found that after the VA reviewed its own
research resources, the VA's Quality Enhancement Research Initiative
concluded that there was no evidence to support the safe implementation
of nurse-only models of anesthesia for the VA especially for complex
surgeries and in small or isolated VA hospitals.\19\ Last, multiple
studies have found that when states choose to remove the Medicare
physician supervision requirement for nurse anesthetists there is no
evidence that access to care increases.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Silber JH, Kennedy SK, Even-Shoshan O, et al. Anesthesiologist
direction and patient outcomes. Anesthesiology. 2000;93(1):152-163.
doi:10.1097/00000542-200007000-00026.
\18\ Memtsoudis SG, Ma Y, Swamidoss CP, Edwards AM, Mazumdar M,
Liguori GA. Factors influencing unexpected disposition after orthopedic
ambulatory surgery. J Clin Anesth. 2012;24(2):89-95. doi:10.1016/
j.jclinane.2011.10.002.
\19\ McCleery E, Christensen V, Peterson K, Humphrey L, Helfand M.
Evidence Brief: The quality of care provided by advanced practice
nurses. In: VA Evidence Synthesis Program Evidence Briefs. Washington
(DC): Department of Veterans Affairs (US); September 2014.
\20\ Schneider JE, Ohsfeldt R, Li P, Miller TR, Scheibling C.
Assessing the impact of state ``opt-out'' policy on access to and costs
of surgeries and other procedures requiring anesthesia services. Health
Econ Rev. 2017;7(1):10. doi:10.1186/s13561-017-0146-6; see also, Sun
EC, Dexter F, Miller TR, Baker LC. ``Opt out'' and access to anesthesia
care for elective and urgent surgeries among U.S. Medicare
beneficiaries. Anesthesiology. 2017;126(3):461-471. doi:10.1097/
ALN.0000000000001504; Sun E, Dexter F, Miller TR. The effect of ``opt-
out'' regulation on access to surgical care for urgent cases in the
United States: evidence from the National Inpatient Sample. Anesth
Analg. 2016;122(6):1983-1991. doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000001154.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nurse practitioners, nurse anesthetists, and physician assistants
are integral members of the care team, but the skills and acumen
obtained by physicians throughout their extensive education and
training make them uniquely qualified to oversee and supervise
patients' care. Physician-led team-based care has a proven track record
of success in improving the quality of patient care, reducing costs,
and allowing all health care professionals to spend more time with
their patients. We urge Congress to invest in the proven track record
of physician-led team-based care.

Patients Want Physicians: Patients have consistently stated that they
want a physician as the head of their care team.

In developing National Standards of Practice, patient sentiment
should be considered and support for physician-led teams should be
enhanced. Based on a series of nationwide surveys, patients
overwhelmingly want physicians to lead their health care team. Four out
of five patients want a physician leading their health care team and 95
percent believe it is important for physicians to be involved in their
medical diagnoses and treatment decisions (68 percent said it is very
important). Moreover, only 3 percent of U.S. voters said it was not
important to have physicians involved in specific treatments such as
anesthesia, surgery, and other invasive procedures.\21\ Patients
understand the value that physicians bring to the health care team and
expect to have access to a physician to ensure that their care is of
the highest quality. As such, developing National Standards of Practice
that will potentially remove physicians from many veterans' health care
teams goes against what patients want, which will decrease the quality
of care received, patient confidence, and the effectiveness of the VHA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://www.ama-assn.org/system/files/ama-scope-of-practice-
stand-alone-polling-toplines.pdf. The survey was conducted among 1,000
U.S. voters between January 27th and February 1st, 2021. The margin of
error is +/-3.5 at the 95 percent confidence interval.

State Based Licensure: The Federal Supremacy Project undermines state
licensing boards and will further encourage inadequate oversight of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
non-physician practitioners within the VA.

State licensing boards play an important role in ensuring that
medical care is properly administered and that providers are
disciplined when malpractice is committed. Such laws are often the
result of extensive debate by state legislatures, sometimes spanning
several years and involving negotiations among all stakeholders.
However, the VA's decision to circumvent state scope of practice laws
and regulations through the Federal Supremacy Project will make it
impossible for state boards to oversee physicians and non-physician
practitioners employed by the VA, leading to unintended
consequences.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ The vast majority of states support physician-led teams. For
example, 38 states plus DC require physician supervision of physician
assistants (PAs) and 11 states require PAs to practice pursuant to a
collaboration agreement with a physician. Similarly, 20 states require
physician involvement for nurse practitioners to diagnose, treat or
prescribe and 14 more states require physician involvement for a
certain number of hours or years of practice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unlike physicians who are supposed to have their licenses reviewed
every two years by the VA, registered nurses and other non-physician
practitioners within the VA are appointed for an indefinite time,
meaning that their credentials are reviewed before they are hired and
may never be reviewed again.\23\ As a result, according to multiple
Government Accountability Office (GAO) audits, the VA is doing an
inadequate job of supervising and disciplining its non-physician
practitioners. Over the past few years, the VA Office of Inspector
General has reported multiple cases of quality and safety concerns
regarding VA providers.\24\ The issues reported range from providers
lacking appropriate qualifications, to poor performance and provider
misconduct.\25\ Unfortunately, the VA has been deficient in putting an
end to this subpar care in part, due to the fact that VA medical center
officials lack the information they need to make decisions about
providers' privileges due to poor VA reporting. Owing to the VA's
inadequate oversight, VA medical center officials are not reviewing all
of the providers for whom clinical care concerns were raised, and the
VA is not taking appropriate adverse privileging actions.\26\ This
includes certain VA medical centers not reporting providers to the
National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) or to state licensing boards as
is required by law.\27\ If the National Standards of Practice are
implemented the oversight that these non-physician practitioners have
will be lowered even more, leading to an increased lack of
accountability for Veteran's care. Moreover, it will make it extremely
difficult for state boards to oversee the practitioners that they
license and will make it all but impossible to discipline VA-employed
non-physician practitioners who inadequately care for Veterans. This
lack of oversight means that patients' safety could easily be
jeopardized, especially if the national standard for a particular
provider-type differs from a state's scope of practice and licensing
requirements. In these cases, it would be unclear whether the VA
provider would have the necessary training, as dictated by the state
licensing or medical board, to appropriately treat a patient and could
potentially lead to Veterans receiving subpar care with little to no
repercussions for the provider.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697173.pdf.
\24\ https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/702090.pdf.
\25\ Id.
\26\ Id.
\27\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the VA already has numerous problems with quality of care,
the VA should not expand its scope of practice parameters and allow
non-physician practitioners to perform procedures for which they are
not properly licensed or trained. By implementing the Federal Supremacy
Project, the VA is making it difficult for state boards to oversee the
practitioners that they license and will likely make it tougher to
discipline non-physician practitioners who inadequately care for
patients due to a lack of clarity about these practitioners' scope of
practice. Since it has been shown that the VA is unable to adequately
oversee health care providers, it is vital to rescind or restructure
the Federal Supremacy Project and ensure that state licensing boards
can adequately supervise their non-physician practitioners to ensure
the highest quality of care for veterans.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697173.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also believe that the IFR did not meet the standards set out in
Executive Order 13132 and, by extension, is in violation of the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The IFR preempts state law by
asserting that state and local scope of practice laws relating to NPPs
that are employed by the VA ``will have no force or effect,'' and that
state and local governments ``have no legal authority to enforce
them.'' However, the requirements to preempt state law, set forth in
Executive Order 13132, have not been met.\29\ The VA did not ``provide
all affected state and local officials notice and an opportunity for
appropriate participation in the proceedings.'' \30\ This can be seen
by the fact that the VA did not provide any time for comments and
instead published the IFR on the same day the rule took effect, which
gave no opportunity for any stakeholders to meaningfully participate in
the proceedings.\31\ As such, the VA did not follow the guidelines set
out in Executive Order 13132 and ``act only with the greatest
caution,'' nor did the VA possess good cause when it bypassed the APA
and acted arbitrarily and capriciously by failing to adequately
consider the rights of the states and the long-term safety of our
nations' Veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-10/pdf/99-
20729.pdf.
\30\ Id.
\31\ Id.

Electronic Health Record (EHR): The VA should not be granted uniform
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
practitioner privileging as a result of their inadequate EHR system.

In the Interim Final Rule, the VA argued that non-physician
practitioners need to practice independently due to the newly created
EHR which purportedly requires uniform privileging irrespective of
where care is delivered.\32\ ``An electronic health record (EHR) is a
digital version of a patient's paper chart. EHRs are real-time,
patient-centered records that make information available instantly and
securely to authorized users.'' \33\ EHRs also provide privileging
options, meaning that they will provide only a certain amount of access
and authority to providers depending on their licensure. Despite
multiple EHR systems across the U.S. allowing for differing levels of
privileging, the VA argued that it must develop uniform standards of
practice because the new EHR system, which it developed in conjunction
with the Department of Defense over the course of years, requires all
practitioners with the same license to have the same practice
privileges. However, the VA recently announced that it will
indefinitely delay the implementation of its EHR system due to multiple
problems, including increased cost, and significant issues which have
led to the death of multiple veterans.\34\
,
\35\ With this
rationale removed from consideration, the VA should not be rewarded
with a universalized privileging system for building a $10 billion EHR
system that is subpar, defunct, and does not meet state scope of
practice laws.\36\ Moreover, if there must be uniform privileging in
the VA, then instead of setting practice privileges to align with the
least restrictive scope provisions, the VA should ensure that veterans
are provided with the best care and adhere to the most conservative
State scope requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/11/12/2020-
24817/authority-of-va-professionals-to-practice-health-care#p-65.
\33\ https://www.healthit.gov/faq/what-electronic-health-record-
ehr.
\34\ https://digital.va.gov/ehr-modernization/resources/ehr-
deployment-schedule/; https://subscriber.politicopro.com/article/2023/
04/vas-new-health-records-system-contributed-to-4-deaths-
00090830?source=email.
\35\ https://digital.va.gov/ehr-modernization/resources/ehr-
deployment-schedule/.
\36\ https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/700478.pdf.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alternate Solutions to VA Health Care Needs

The AMA understands the importance and need to have an adequately
staffed health care facility. As such, we suggest that, instead of
implementing the Federal Supremacy Project, additional funding is
provided to the VHA to hire and train more physicians. Simultaneously,
the VHA needs to accurately count all physicians providing care within
its facilities, including trainees, to accurately understand where
shortages exist and appropriately adjust hiring accordingly. The GAO
has consistently found that the VHA is unable to accurately count the
total number of physicians who provide care in its VA medical centers
(VAMC) and the VA has disagreed with the recommendation of the GAO to
develop and implement a process to accurately count all physicians
providing care at each medical center.\37\
,
\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-18-124#summary_recommend.
\38\ https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-105630.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The VA is the largest provider of health care training in the
United States. ``In general, each year approximately 43,000 individual
physician residents receive their clinical training by rotating through
about 11,000 VA-funded physician FTE residency positions at VA medical
facilities.'' \39\ However, approximately 99 percent of the VA's
programs are sponsored by outside medical schools or teaching
hospitals. Functionally, this limits the amount of expansion that can
occur in the VA system as those who train at VA locations must still be
housed under a third-party graduate medical education (GME) program
with full accreditation and administrative functioning. Therefore, the
VA should work to create more of its own GME residency positions as
well as continue to work with medical schools to expand existing
partnerships and shared training slots. A few of the ways this could be
accomplished include expanding the VA Pilot Program on Graduate Medical
Education and Residency \40\ and expanding the number of positions
available via the VA MISSION Act of 2018 \41\ and the Veterans Access,
Choice and Accountability Act.\42\ Expansions could be made through the
Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Academic Affiliations to help
preserve and expand GME within the VHA. The expansion of GME within the
VHA has already proven to be successful in retaining physicians. For
example, the annual Trainee Satisfaction Survey administered by the VA
Office of Academic Affiliations to physician residents consistently
finds that residents have a more positive opinion regarding a career at
the VA after completing their rotations, with over half (55 percent)
responding they would consider a career at a VA medical center.\43\ If
the full funding for the direct and indirect costs of GME positions was
expanded within the VA more physicians would be able to work within the
VA, which would decrease existing shortages while providing high
quality care for veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R44376.pdf.
\40\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/02/04/2022-
02292/va-pilot-program-on-graduate-medical-education-and-residency.
\41\ https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/COMPS-15905/pdf/COMPS-
15905.pdf.
\42\ https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/COMPS-15905/pdf/COMPS-
15905.pdf.
\43\ https://journals.lww.com/academicmedicine/Fulltext/2022/08000/
Veterans_Affairs_Graduate_Medical_Eduction.37.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the first time in years the staffing shortages within the VHA
have intensified, resulting in a 22 percent increase in occupational
staffing shortages in 2022 compared to 2021.\44\ Some of the
professions with the severest shortages within the VHA include
psychiatrists, primary care physicians, and gastroenterologists.\45\ As
such, another potential solution to the physician shortage is to hire
more physicians and provide additional benefits to physicians working
within the VA to help with retention.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-22-00722-187.pdf.
\45\ https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-22-00722-187.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Within the VHA, physician salaries are determined according to a
combination of base pay, market pay, and performance pay. Moreover,
under 38 U.S.C. 7431(e)(1)(A),\46\ every two years the Secretary must
prescribe for Department-wide applicability the minimum and maximum
amounts of VHA physicians annual pay.\47\ Therefore, under this statue,
it would be possible to increase the pay offered to physicians within
the VHA which would help with recruitment and retention. Furthermore,
the VA should enhance its loan forgiveness and scholarship efforts to
further incentivize physician recruiting and retention and improve
patient access in the Veterans Administration facilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2018-title38/html/
USCODE-2018-title38-partV-chap74-subchapIII-sec7431.htm.
\47\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/12/09/2019-
26435/annual-pay-ranges-for-physicians-dentists-and-podiatrists-of-the-
veterans-health-administration-vha.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, ensuring that all physician specialties are direct
hires and streamlining the hiring process in general will help with the
efficient and timely staffing of physicians. The hiring process for
international medical graduates (IMG) should also be streamlined,
including providing/expanding the exception to the two-year home
country return requirement if an IMG works for the VHA for a designated
period of time. The VA states for all its jobs that the hiring process
``may take a while.'' In line with this, 94 percent of respondents to a
survey about VA hiring stated that they had lost an interested
candidate due to delays in the HR hiring process.\48\ As such, changes
need to be made to the hiring and onboarding process so that good
candidates are not lost to other jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ https://www.afge.org/globalassets/documents/generalreports/
2023/03/vhpireport_v2.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, increasing access to the Community Care program when
physician employment gaps cannot be filled will help to ensure that
veterans continue to receive the care they need and increase access to
physician services. However, the implementation of this program must be
improved, including resolving delays in payment to participating
providers. For example, a 225-bed health care system in South Carolina
had $22.7 million in outstanding VA claims at the beginning of FY 2022
with $16.7M (83 percent) over 90 days due. On top of this, the health
care system had to write off approximately $12.7M during FY 22 because
the VA claims were over 300 days old. As such, increasing reliability
of payment for services rendered as part of the Community Care program
and increasing the number of physicians and other health care
professionals who are part of the program could help to fill workforce
gaps.
In line with this, the VHA should pay private physicians a minimum
of 100 percent of Medicare rates for visits and approved procedures to
ensure adequate access to care and choice of physician and ensure that
clean claims submitted electronically to the VA are paid within 14 days
and that clean paper claims are paid within 30 days. This would
increase the willingness and variety of providers who would care for
our veterans.

Conclusion

Our nation's veterans should be provided with physician-led health
care teams that consider important scope of practice limitations and
make the most of the respective education and training of physicians
and non-physician practitioners. Therefore, we oppose the
implementation of the VA Federal Supremacy Project. Instead, additional
investments in physicians and physician-led team-based care should be
made to ensure that veterans receive the care they deserve. At the very
least, we urge Congress to ensure that physician-led team-based care is
maintained and that physician representation on all the Work Groups,
not just the Physician Work Group, be mandatory.
______

Prepared Statement of Paul Barney
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Janet Setnor
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Stephen McLeod
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Ron Harter
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Erica Scavella

Good morning, Chairman Miller-Meeks, Ranking Member Brownley and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity today to discuss VHA's position regarding the National
Standards of Practice (NSP). Accompanying me today is M. Christopher
Saslo, DNS, APRN-BC, FAANP, Assistant Under Secretary for Health
Patient Care Services/Chief Nursing Officer, and Mr. Ethan Kalett,
Executive Director, Office of Regulations, Appeals and Policy.
VA remains committed to honoring the Nation's Veterans by ensuring
a safe environment to deliver exceptional health care. On November 12,
2020, VA published an interim final rule confirming that VA health care
professionals may practice their health care profession consistent with
the scope and requirements of their VA employment, notwithstanding any
State license, registration, certification, or other requirements that
unduly interfere with their practice (38 CFR 17.419; 85 FR 71838). The
rulemaking confirmed VA's authority to establish national standards of
practice for its health care professionals in all VA medical facilities
and explained that a national standard of practice describes the tasks
and duties that a VA health care professional may perform and may be
permitted to undertake regardless of the state in which the VA medical
facility where they are located or the State license, registration,
certification, or other State requirement they hold.
VA continues to pursue national standards of practice for 51
occupations (including nursing, dentistry, pharmacy, rehabilitation,
diagnostics, social work, mental health) to ensure safe, high-quality
care for the Nation's Veterans and to ensure that VA health care
professionals can meet the needs of Veterans wherever they are located.
National standards are designed to increase Veterans' access to health
care and improve health outcomes.
As the Nation's largest integrated health care system, VA must
develop national standards of practice that ensure Veterans receive the
same high-quality care regardless of where they enter the system. The
importance of this initiative has been underscored by the COVID-19
pandemic. The increased need for mobility in our workforce, including
through VA's Disaster Emergency Medical Personnel System, exemplifies
the necessity of uniform standards of practice in support of those VA
health care professionals who practice across State lines. Furthermore,
standardizing practice among VA health care occupations to decrease the
variances in care by State requirements also creates improved access
with VA. The lack of VA national standards can negatively impact the
ability of Veterans across all states to have equal access to certain
services.
For example, some states, such as Missouri, require a provider's
prior referral for Physical Therapy services. Direct access to these
services, that is a provider referral is not necessary, is beneficial
for increased access to health care, as it decreases wait times to
receive care and decreases the burden on the referring provider, thus
allowing the referring provider to see more Veteran patients. A VA
Physical Therapist NSP could permit all physical therapy services to be
initiated without a referral. By removing the additional step of
requiring Veterans to first obtain a referral, VA can increase timely
access to such services.
A second example involves nursing and the ability to independently
follow a protocol. A protocol is a standing order that has been
approved by medical and clinical leadership if a certain sequence of
health care events occur. For instance, if a patient is exhibiting
certain signs of a heart attack, there is a protocol in place to
administer potentially life-saving medication. If the nurse is the
first person to see the signs, the nurse will follow the approved
protocol and immediately administer the medication. However, if the
State license does not permit a nurse to follow the protocol and
requires a provider co-signature, administration of the medication will
be delayed until a provider is able to co-sign the order, which may
lead to the deterioration of the patient's condition. Co-signing
protocols also increase the provider's workload and decrease the amount
of time the provider can spend with patients. Almost all states permit
nurses to follow a protocol; however, Texas does not permit nurses to
follow a protocol without a provider co-signature. Thus, in Texas,
timely delivery of life saving care could be delayed for veterans as
compared to other states. The national standards of practice for
nursing could permit all VA nurses to follow protocol without provider
co-signature.
VA is committed to ensuring that stakeholders are engaged in the
process to develop national standards of practice for each and every
health care occupation. The national standards of practice are being
designed through extensive internal and external expert consultation
with a focus on increasing Veterans' access to health care and ensuring
health outcomes. There is an already established process for subject-
matter expertise inclusion, to include partnering with the Department
of Defense to align national standards, when appropriate, which will
apply to the development of all practice standards.
To further engage with key stakeholders, VA hosted five listening
sessions in August and September 2023, for professional associations,
Veteran Service Organizations, the clinical community, the public, and
Members of Congress to provide to VA their research, input and comments
on variance between state licenses and scopes of practices, and their
recommendations on what should be included in VA's national standards
of practice. VA will consider all feedback received at these listening
sessions when drafting the national standard of practice. In addition,
the draft national standard (once ready) will be published in the
Federal Register for public comment; and VA will send every State Board
for that profession a letter with information on the impact of the
proposed national standard of practice on the specific State, with an
opportunity for the State Board to respond.
VA remains committed to providing consistently high-quality patient
care by qualified health care providers. The development of national
standards of practice will not undo the longstanding team-based model
of care already established within VA that ensures competent, safe and
appropriate care for Veterans. When developing the national standards
of practice, VA encourages a team-based approach to patient care and
national standards of practice will support defined roles within the
team regardless of State requirements or restrictions. National
standards of practice are intended to strengthen team-based care by
creating consistent standards nationwide, thereby generating the best
possible access and outcomes for Veterans. However, privileges, scopes
of practice and functional statements will continue to be specific to
individuals based upon their education, training, experience, skill and
clinical assignment.
In regard to the certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA)
national standard of practice, VA will only include independent
practice if VA determines that it is appropriate, safe, and in the best
interest of Veterans. Work on the CRNA NSPs is currently underway. As
delineated in VHA Directive 1123, National Anesthesia Service, VA
anesthesiologists and CRNAs will continue to provide team-based care,
either under a scope of practice or privileges, where appropriate, to
provide vital anesthesia care to Veterans throughout the United States.
Currently, VHA Directive 1123, National Anesthesia Service, already
includes language for VA CRNAs to practice independently if permitted
by the facility bylaws and privileges, and if the CRNA is licensed in a
state whose licensing boards have authorized independent practice for
CRNAs. There is no evidence from impartial, independent studies, to
indicate that full practice authority for CRNAs leads to either
improved or adverse outcomes. Internally, VA monitors patient safety
and quality of care through the Focused Professional Practice
Evaluation (FPPE) and Ongoing Professional Practice Evaluation (OPPE)
processes. These evaluations are standards required by The Joint
Commission. To date, there have been no concerning FPPE/OPPE reports to
indicate concerns regarding the safety and quality of independent
practice authority either.
VA continues to invest in the team-based model of care, and there
is no planned change accompanying these National Standards of Practice
development. As noted above, all the team models defined in VHA 1123
are currently employed within the enterprise and already tested. Any
local decision to change models of care delivery would be initiated by
a need to improve access to care as well as subject to the very same
quality standards and reviews already present in VA.
VA engaged the Temple University School of Law to conduct an
independent third-party comprehensive review of each State's practice
acts for CRNAs and analyze the variance in CRNA practice across states
. This data is now being used to develop the CRNA national standard of
practice by a team of subject matter experts from within the anesthesia
service, comprised of anesthesiologists, CRNAs, and other advanced
practice nurses. The national standards of practice will be designed
through extensive internal and external expert consultation with a
focus on increasing Veterans' access to health care and improving
health outcomes. There is an already established process for subject-
matter expertise inclusion, which will apply to the development of
these practice standards.
In regard to the optometry national standard of practice, VA is
currently considering whether the national standard of practice will
authorize optometrists in the 10 States that allow laser eye surgery
(AK, AR, CO, IN, KY, LA, MS, OK, VA, WY) to practice and operate within
the full scope of their license in VA facilities. VA does not intend to
allow VA optometrists who hold a license in any other State to perform
laser eye surgery, this authority would only be considered for the
states that already authorize them to perform laser eye surgery. VA
held a listening session on August 31, 2023, and allowed stakeholders
invested in VA eye care the opportunity to provide research, input,
comments, and recommendations on what they believe should be included
in VA's proposed optometrist national standard of practice. Thirteen
organizations presented to VA, including numerous professional
societies and VSOs. VA is using the information presented by external
stakeholders to determine what should be included in the proposed
national standard of practice that will be published in the Federal
Register for public comment in the future. The forthcoming proposed
national standards of practice will ensure that VA upholds safe, high-
quality care for the Nation's Veterans and ensure VA optometrists can
meet the needs of Veterans when practicing within the scope of their VA
employment.
VHA is sensitive to issues regarding the safety of Veterans in our
care. As a High Reliability Organization (HRO), VA continuously
monitors the quality and safety of care delivered to Veterans and works
to ensure excellence for each Veteran in our care. HROs are
organizations that achieve safety, quality and efficiency goals by
employing five central principles, including sensitivity to operations;
reluctance to simplify; preoccupation with failure; deference to
expertise and practicing resilience. VA strives to continuously meet
these goals, always holding ourselves and our organization to the
highest possible standard. Since the standards of practice are still in
the developmental stages and no changes to the model of care have been
made, we will continue to monitor for issues and respond should they
arise.

Conclusion

We are committed to excellence in clinical care, utilizing our
highly skilled workforce in a manner commensurate with their training
and expertise. We appreciate the input of Congress and our other
stakeholders in ensuring this commitment is always met. We especially
appreciate the Committee's efforts in helping VA continue to deliver
safe, high-quality care to Veterans.
Chairwoman Miller-Meeks and Ranking Member Brownley, we appreciate
your continued support and look forward to answering your questions.

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of The American Legion
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of National Conference of State Legislatures
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of American Nurses Association

The American Nurses Association (ANA) would like to thank the House
Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Health for this opportunity to submit
a statement for the record with respect to the subcommittee's oversight
hearing on ``VA's Federal Supremacy Initiative: Putting Veterans
First?'' As the voice of our nation's nurses, ANA is committed to
working with the House Veterans' Affairs Committee and the U.S.
Department of Veterans' Affairs (VA) to ensure that our nation's
veterans and their families have access to highly qualified healthcare
professionals during their time of need. With this mission in mind and
given how nurses provide care for VA patients on a national basis, ANA
supports the VA's ongoing efforts to develop national practice
standards for nurses and other providers. This initiative gives nurses
needed flexibility to practice across state lines, improving VA
capacity to meet veterans' needs in more areas of the country.
The VA has struggled for years to recruit and retain nurses and
other healthcare professionals, which has in turn adversely impacted
veterans' access to timely, high-quality care. This predicament has
gotten worse since the COVID-19 pandemic. According to a report
published last year by the VA' Office of Inspector General, 91 percent
of VA facilities reported severe shortages for nurses during Fiscal
Year 2022.\1\ As the VA works to address this nursing shortage crisis,
it cannot afford to underutilize its existing nursing workforce.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ OIG Determination of Veterans Health Administration's
Occupational Staffing Shortages Fiscal Year 2022 (va.gov)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Registered Nurses (RNs) have a critical role in the care of
patients within the VA. RNs are frequently the provider who has the
most contact with patients, and therefore offer unique insights into
the needs of their patients. Unfortunately, nurse burnout is worsening
the shortage of nurses nationwide. ANA's most recent survey shows that
almost half of nurses are considering leaving their current position
and a lower, but not insignificant, percent are considering changing
professions and leaving nursing entirely.\2\ This would allow RNs to
practice at the top of their license and would provide flexibility to
the VA by allowing nurses to practice where they are most needed within
the VA system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.nursingworld.org/practice-policy/work-environment/
health-safety/disaster--preparedness/coronavirus/what-you-need-to-know/
annual-survey--third-year
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists (CRNAs) play a vital role
in providing anesthesia care across the care continuum, ranging from
general anesthesia to regional anesthesia to non-opioid pain
management. Past studies have shown that CRNAs can render high-quality
anesthesia care without physician supervision.\3\ In fact, CRNAs in
other federal health systems and the armed services have been granted
full practice authority. This is why it is crucial for the VA to
promptly develop and issue national standards that empower Certified
Registered Nurse Anesthetists (CRNAs) employed within the VA healthcare
system to practice to the full extent of their education and licensure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/
hlthaff.2008.0966
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In closing, ANA appreciates this opportunity to share the nursing
community's perspective on how the VA can utilize the federal supremacy
initiative to expand access to care for veterans and their families. We
stand ready to work with this subcommittee and the full committee to
advance this mission. Should you have any questions, please reach out
to Tim Nanof, Vice President of Policy and Government Affairs, at (301)
628-5081 or
[emailprotected]
.
______

Prepared Statement of Nursing Community Coalition
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of American Academy of Family Physicians
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Jewish War Veterans of the USA
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of American Society of Retina Specialists

The American Society of Retina Specialists (ASRS) is the largest
retina organization in the world, representing over 3,500 board-
certified ophthalmologists who have completed fellowship training in
the medical and surgical treatment of retinal diseases. The mission of
the ASRS is to provide a collegial open forum for education, to advance
the understanding and treatment of vitreoretinal diseases, and to
enhance the ability of its members to provide the highest quality of
patient care.
ASRS counts many veterans and physicians who have trained at
Veterans Affairs (VA) hospitals as its members. We thank the committee
for this hearing and appreciate the opportunity to share our deep
concern about a potential, unprecedented scope of practice expansion
for optometrists providing care in VA facilities.
As the VA continues to develop standards of practice for numerous
allied health professionals providing necessary care to veterans in VA
facilities, we ask for Congress' oversight to ensure veterans' eye
health is protected. We ask for your support to prevent the VA from
proposing standards for optometrists that allow them to perform
surgical or invasive procedures, which are currently well outside of
the majority of state licensing restrictions and standard optometric
training.

Significant Differences in Training

Retina specialists, like other ophthalmologists, have completed
four years of medical school, a hospital internship, and three years of
ophthalmology residency training, and then completed an additional two-
year retina fellowship. During their education, retina specialists
receive extensive one-on-one training in surgical techniques and
managing potential complications--both ocular and systemic.
Successfully operating on eyes requires meticulous and finely honed
microsurgical techniques. While it is frequently performed with little
or no complications, that success is directly attributable to the
proficiency of retina specialists and other ophthalmologists. These
delicate procedures carry the risk of irreversible vision loss if not
performed at an expert level.
Optometrists, by comparison, have no such training. The typical
optometric education rarely goes beyond the post-graduate level and
mainly focuses on examining the eye for vision prescriptions,
dispensing corrective lenses, performing some eye screening functions,
and prescribing topical medications. While optometrists are an integral
part of the eyecare team, they are generally not permitted to perform
invasive procedures on the general population, so expanding their scope
through the VA poses risks to veterans they would not face if they
sought care from private facilities.

Current Scope of Practice Issues

We believe our fears that a proposed standard would vastly and
inappropriately expand optometrists' scope of practice in the VA are
not unfounded. In September 2022, the VA removed language from its
Community Care ``Standardized Episode of Care: Eye Care Comprehensive''
guidelines stating ``only ophthalmologists can perform invasive
procedures, including injections, lasers, and eye surgery.'' This
change was made without input from the ophthalmic community and we
believe presages what will be included in the proposed standards of
practice--without congressional oversight.
The effort to expand optometrists' scope of practice in the VA
system mirrors similar attempts on the state level. In nearly every
state, there have been attempts to modify state licensing requirements
to allow optometrists to perform surgical procedures. Yet, they have
only been successful in a handful of states. In 2022, California
Governor Gavin Newsom vetoed an optometric surgery bill specifically
citing the lack of training as the rationale behind his decision. We
ask Congress to urge VA to approach this issue like so many states have
to date and prevent potential harm to veterans' eye health.
Most importantly, preventing the VA from expanding the scope of
optometric practice will protect all patients, not just veterans. While
state-based efforts have not been overall successful, a national
standard that allows optometrists to perform surgery could
inappropriately prompt further changes at the state level. Congress
must step in to ensure the VA Supremacy Project does not have
unintended consequences beyond the VA system.

Potential Negative Tradeoffs

Empowering untrained optometrists to perform surgical procedures
would be an unprecedented break with current standards of care. Since
there is no standard for training optometrists to perform surgical
procedures and very few states where it is permissible, allowing
optometrists to perform procedures in the VA is essentially offering up
our Nation's veterans as unwitting guinea pigs in a trial of untrained
professionals' surgical skill.
The argument for allowing optometrists to perform procedures is
generally that it will expand access to eye care for veterans. While
ASRS agrees that veterans deserve timely access to care, we do not
believe that quality of care should be shortchanged to meet that goal.
Veterans are a precious group of patients who have risked their lives
for the safety and security of our Nation. We owe it to them to ensure
they do not receive sub-standard care. If an identifiable access issue
exists, we urge Congress to work with the VA to find other, more
appropriate means of addressing it rather than lowering the quality of
eye care for veterans.
ASRS thanks the committee for holding this hearing to investigate
this issue. We believe Congress shares our goal of providing the
nation's veterans with the highest standard of care and hope it will
join us in advocating against allowing optometrists to perform surgical
and invasive procedures. We would be happy to provide you with any
assistance or additional information you may need. Please contact
Allison Madson, vice president of health policy, at

[emailprotected]
for assistance.
______

Prepared Statement of American Association of Nurse Practitioners

The American Association of Nurse Practitioners (AANP) appreciates
the opportunity to submit a statement for the record to the House
Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Health hearing entitled ``VA's
Federal Supremacy Initiative: Putting Veterans First?'' AANP represents
the more than 355,000 nurse practitioners (NPs) in the United States
and is committed to empowering all NPs to advance high-quality,
equitable care, while addressing health care disparities through
practice, education, advocacy, research, and leadership (PEARL).\1\ For
the record, we support our certified registered nurse anesthetist
(CRNA) colleagues in their efforts to seek Full Practice Authority
(FPA) in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and encourage the VA
to move forward with a process to implement this policy. As outlined
below, the VA previously authorized NPs to practice to the full extent
of their education and clinical training within VA facilities, and this
decision has yielded positive results for our nation's veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.aanp.org/advocacy/advocacy-resource/position-
statements/commitment-to-addressing-health-care-disparities-during-
covid-19
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NPs are advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs) who are
prepared at the masters or doctoral level to provide primary, acute,
chronic and specialty care to patients of all ages and backgrounds.
Daily practice includes assessment; ordering, performing, supervising
and interpreting diagnostic and laboratory tests; making diagnoses;
initiating and managing treatment including prescribing medication and
non-pharmacologic treatments; coordinating care; counseling; and
educating patients and their families and communities. NPs currently
provide a substantial portion of the high-quality \2\, cost-effective
\3\ care that our communities require, including the over 5,000 NPs
practicing within VHA facilities.\4\ NPs are also essential to
addressing issues of health equity, as they provide a substantial
portion of health care in rural areas and areas of lower socioeconomic
and health status.\5\
,
\6\
,
\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.aanp.org/images/documents/publications/
qualityofpractice.pdf.
\3\ https://www.aanp.org/images/documents/publications/
costeffectiveness.pdf.
\4\ 81 Fed. Reg. 90198, 90200. (Based on VHA payroll data from
August 31, 2016, the VHA employees 5,444 NPs).
\5\  Davis, M. A., Anthopolos, R., Tootoo, J., Titler, M., Bynum,
J. P. W., & Shipman, S. A. (2018). Supply of Healthcare Providers in
Relation to County Socioeconomic and Health Status. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 4-6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-017-4287-4
\6\ Xue, Y., Smith, J. A., & Spetz, J. (2019). Primary Care Nurse
Practitioners and Physicians in Low-Income and Rural Areas, 2010-2016.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 321(1), 102-105. https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2720014
\7\ Andrilla, C. H. A., Patterson, D. G., Moore, T. E., Coulthard,
C., & Larson, E. H. (2018). Projected Contributions of Nurse
Practitioners and Physicians Assistants to Buprenorphine Treatment
Services for Opioid Use Disorder in Rural Areas. Medical Care Research
and Review, Epub ahead. https://doi.org/10.1177/1077558718793070
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NPs practice in nearly every health care setting including VHA
facilities, schools and school-based clinics, hospitals, Indian Health
Services facilities, emergency rooms, urgent care sites, private
physician or NP practices (both managed and owned by NPs), skilled
nursing facilities (SNFs), nursing facilities (NFs), colleges and
universities, retail clinics, public health departments, nurse managed
clinics, homeless clinics, and home health. NPs hold prescriptive
authority in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Currently,
twenty-seven states and D.C. are full practice authority (FPA) states
because their licensure laws allow full and direct access to NPs.\8\ In
the majority of states, NPs are authorized under FPA to practice to the
full extent of their education and clinical training without a
regulated relationship with a physician.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.aanp.org/advocacy/state/state-practice-environment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you know, on December 14, 2016, the VA finalized rulemaking to
authorize NPs to practice to the full extent of their education and
clinical training within VA facilities. That final rule recognized the
value of NPs in the VA system, and that implementing VA FPA would
increase access to high-quality care for veterans.\9\ This approach is
in line with the majority of states as well as the Indian Health
Service. Many federal agencies, including the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration, Social Security Administration, United States
Marshals Service, United States Coast Guard, the Public Health Services
Corps, the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, recognize the
importance and quality of care provided by NPs. We have been pleased to
see that the VA has implemented FPA for NPs across all VA facilities
since the rule was published and that data demonstrates that FPA has
had a positive impact on wait times in mental health, specialty care
and primary care for our Nation's veterans.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 81 Fed. Reg. 90198 (December 14, 2016).
\10\ https://department.va.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/va-
strategic-plan-2022-2028.pdf (at page 33).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These findings are consistent with research outside of the VA which
has also shown that NPs are essential to ensuring patients have access
to high-quality health care, particularly among rural and underserved
populations. According to the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission
(MedPAC), APRNs and PAs comprise approximately one-third of our primary
care workforce, and up to half in rural areas.\11\ MedPAC also found
that, among all clinician types, NPs on average had the highest share
of allowed charges associated with low-income subsidy (LIS)
beneficiaries, which includes Medicaid beneficiaries. ``In 2019, 41
percent of the allowed charges billed by NPs who practiced in primary
care were for LIS beneficiaries, as were 36 percent for NPs who
practiced in specialty care compared with 28 percent for primary care
physicians and PAs and 25 percent for specialty care physicians and
PAs.'' \12\ A 2019 study of Medicaid participation of buprenorphine
waivered providers in Virginia found that buprenorphine waivered NPs
were more likely to treat Medicaid patients compared to physicians and
the probability of an NP treating a large number of Medicaid patients
was higher among NPs relative to physicians.\13\ A recent study
published in Health Affairs also found that from 2011-2019 the number
of psychiatric-mental health NPs (PMHNPs) treating Medicare
beneficiaries grew by 162 percent, compared to a 6 percent drop in
psychiatrists during that same period.\14\ The study also found that
the proportion of all mental health prescriber visits provided by
PMHNPs to Medicare beneficiaries increased from 12.5 percent to 29.8
percent during that same period, exceeding 50 percent in rural, full
practice authority regions.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/
Jun22_MedPAC_Report_to_Congress_SEC.pdf (see Chapter 2.)
\12\ https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/
Mar23_MedPAC_Report_To_Congress_SEC.pdf (Page 135).
\13\ Saunders, Heather, et.al (2022). Medicaid Participation Among
Practitioners Authorized to Prescribe Buprenorphine. Journal of
Substance Abuse Treatment, Epub. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
34148758/.
\14\ Cai, Arno, et.al (2022). Trends in Mental Health Care Delivery
by Psychiatrists and Nurses Practitioners in Medicare, 2011-2019.
Health Affairs, 41(9), 1222-1230. https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/
full/10.1377/hlthaff.2022.00289
\15\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2010 the Institute of Medicine (IOM) issued The Future of
Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health report, which called for the
removal of laws, regulations, and policies that prevent APRNs from
providing the full scope of health care services they are educated and
trained to provide. This position was reaffirmed by the National
Academy of Medicine (previously the IOM) in their 2021 The Future of
Nursing 2020-2030: Charting a Path to Achieve Health Equity report.\16\
The World Health Organization's State of the World's Nursing 2020
report also recommends modernizing regulations to authorize APRNs to
practice to the full extent of their education and clinical training,
noting the positive impact it would have on addressing health care
disparities and health care access within vulnerable communities.\17\
The merits of the high-quality care provided by NPs have been widely
praised by bipartisan stakeholders such as the American Enterprise
Institute \18\ and the Brookings Institution \19\, as well as
bipartisan recognition from multiple administrations.\20\
,

\21\ Additionally, the Federal Trade Commission has highlighted how
barriers to practice on APRNs are unnecessary and limit
competition.\22\ Decades of evidence demonstrates that NPs provide
high-quality, cost--effective health care with high patient
satisfaction both inside and outside of the VA, examples of studies
include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ The Future of Nursing 2020-2030 National Academies. (see Page
363).
\17\ https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331673/
9789240003293-eng.pdf
\18\ https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/nurse-
practitioners-a-solution-to-americas-primary-care-crisis/.
\19\ https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
AM_Web_20190122.pdf.
\20\ https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2019-10-08/pdf/2019-
22073.pdf (see Section 5).
\21\ https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/
forefront.20220404.728371/. (ACO REACH also includes a nurse
practitioner services benefit enhancement designed to reduce barriers
to care access, particularly for individuals with limited access to
physicians. Through waivers, this strategy would authorize nurse
practitioners to certify patient needs (for example, for hospice) and
order and supervise certain services (for example, cardiac
rehabilitation).
\22\ https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/policy-
perspectives-competition-regulation-advanced-practice-nurses/
140307aprnpolicypaper.pdf.

A recent study utilizing VA data from FY 2013 found
significant savings, 6-7 percent lower costs, for highly complex
diabetic patients who had an NP as their primary provider compared to
those with a physician.\23\ Other researchers found even greater
savings, 12-13 percent lower costs when examining diabetic patients
with varying degrees of complexity served by the VA. For a single VAMC
this equated to an annual savings of just over $14 million exemplifying
the efficiency and effectiveness of NP delivered care in the VA.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Morgan, et.al (2019). Impact of Physicians, Nurse
Practitioners, And Physician Assistants On Utilization and Costs for
Complex Patients. Health Affairs, 38(6), 1028-1036. https://
www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2019.00014.
\24\ Rajan, et. al (2021) ``Health care costs associated with
primary care physicians versus nurse practitioners and physician
assistants''. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34074952/.

Results from 806,434 patients at 530 Veterans Health
Administration (VA) facilities found that patients assigned to primary
care nurse practitioners were less likely to utilize additional
services, had no difference in costs and experienced similar chronic
disease management compared to physician-assigned patients.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Liu, C. F., Hebert, P. L., Douglas, J. H., Neely, E. L., Sulc,
C. A., Reddy, A., & Wong, E. S. (2020).Outcomes of primary care
delivery by nurse practitioners: Utilization, cost, and quality of
care. Health Services Research, 55(2), 178-189. https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31943190/

Meta-analysis of studies comparing the quality of primary
care services of physicians and NPs demonstrates the role NPs play in
reinventing how primary care is delivered. The authors found that
comparable outcomes are obtained by both providers, with NPs performing
better in terms of time spent consulting with the patient, patient
follow ups and patient satisfaction.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Naylor, M.D. and Kurtzman, E.T. (2010). The Role of Nurse
Practitioners in Reinventing Primary Care. Health Affairs, (5), 893-99.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20439877/

The outcomes of NP care were examined through a
systematic review of 37 published studies, most of which compared NP
outcomes with those of physicians. Outcomes included measures such as
patient satisfaction; patient perceived health status; functional
status; hospitalizations; emergency department visits; and biomarkers
such as blood glucose, serum lipids and blood pressure. Newhouse, et
al., conclude that NP patient outcomes are comparable to those of
physicians.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Newhouse, R.P., Stanik-Hutt, J., White, K.M., Johantgen, M.,
Bass, E.B., Zangaro, G., Wilson, R.F., Fountain, L., Steinwachs, D.M.,
Heindel, L., & Weiner, J.P. (2011). Advanced practice nurse outcomes
1999-2008: A systematic review. Nursing Economics, 29(5), 1-22. https:/
/pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22372080/

A 2022 Morning Consult poll found that 82 percent of
patients support authorizing NPs to practice to the full extent of
their education and clinical training.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ https://connectwithcare.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/
Telehealth_MC-Branded_PPT_Final.pdf.

Last, we would also like to take this opportunity to directly
address the misinformation that has been raised with respect to the NP
profession and the care provided to patients. To be clear, contrary to
the Statement for the Record submitted by the American Medical
Association (AMA), the VA is not currently hosting a listening session
on NPs and there is no open feedback period on NPs (the VA finalized NP
Standards of Practice in 2016). Yet, the AMA still used their
opportunity to provide feedback to the subcommittee to denigrate their
NP colleagues. In doing so, the AMA referenced non-peer reviewed
reports with small sample sizes (such as those from the Hattiesburg
Clinic and the National Bureau of Economic Research) while ignoring the
substantial body of well-conducted, independent research that has shown
that NPs provide high-quality care comparable to their physician
colleagues. Arbitrary barriers to practice, such as those promoted by
the AMA, do not improve patient care and do not support patient access
to treatment.
For example, after Congress authorized NPs to prescribe
buprenorphine for the treatment of opioid use disorder in the
Comprehensive Addiction Recovery Act, states without restrictive
practice environments for NPs saw a significantly larger increase in
waived clinicians (particularly rural counties) than more restrictive
states.\29\ This is just one example that demonstrates that policies
that prevent clinicians from practicing to the full extent of their
education and clinical training only harm patients. Additionally, the
AMA references two Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports that
they claim show that the VA is doing an inadequate job of supervising
and disciplining non-physician practitioners. However, they do not
mention that these reports also included discussion of oversight of
physicians, who are actually the most common provider type in the 57
case studies that were included. For reference, only two of the case
studies included NPs (neither of which found wrongdoing by the NP), and
25 case studies involved physicians with multiple individuals having
their VA employment terminated due to their conduct. To infer that
these reports were limited to non-physicians is not an accurate
representation of the reports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Barnett, Michael L., Lee, Dennis, & Frank, Richard G. (2019).
In Rural Areas, Buprenorphine Waiver Adoption Since 2017 Driven by
Nurses Practitioners And Physician Assistants. Health Affairs, 38(12),
2048-2056. https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/
hlthaff.2019.00859.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In closing, AANP recognizes and appreciates the contributions of
all members of the health care team to high-quality patient care, and
it is essential that all health care professionals be authorized to
work to the top of their education and clinical training to best serve
our nation's veterans. This is consistent with the team-based care
model endorsed by the National Academy of Medicine which focuses on
constructing a team that is tailored to meet the specific needs of the
patient.\30\ AANP is pleased to take this opportunity to highlight the
success of the VA's decision in 2016 to authorize NPs in VHA facilities
to practice to the full extent of their education and clinical
training. AANP hopes the objectively positive results yielded for our
veterans is instructive to the subcommittee. We look forward to working
with the subcommittee on ways to continue to improve the health care of
our nation's veterans. We thank the subcommittee for holding a hearing
on this important topic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ https://www.aanp.org/advocacy/advocacy-resource/position-
statements/team-based-care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Prepared Statement of Blinded Veterans Association
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Fleet Reserve Association
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of American Pharmacists Association
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

VA Document for the Record, Briefings and Engagements
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
