- THE TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM: STEPS TO ENSURE SUCCESS FOR SERVICEMEMBERS AS THEY ENTER CIVILIAN LIFE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM:
STEPS TO ENSURE SUCCESS FOR
SERVICEMEMBERS AS THEY ENTER
CIVILIAN LIFE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, MAY 17, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

52-537                    WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California Ranking
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida             Member
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 17, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Derrick Van Orden, Chairman........................     1
The Honorable Mike Levin, Ranking Member.........................     3

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Mr. Alex Baird, Acting Director of the Defense Support Services
Center, Department of Defense..................................     5

Ms. Cheryl J. Rawls, Executive Director, Outreach, Transition and
Economic Development, Department of Veteran Affairs............     6

Ms. Margarita Devlin, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Department of
Labor..........................................................     7

Ms. Dawn Locke, Director, Strategic Studies, Government
Accountability Office..........................................     9

Panel 2

Ms. Brittany Dymond, Associate Director, National Security and
Foreign Affairs Directorate, Veterans of Foreign Wars..........    22

Mr. Michael Quinn, Chief Executive Officer, Hire Military &
Tenova LLC.....................................................    23

Dr. Abby Kinch, PhD, Chief of Staff, Student Veterans of America.    25

Mr. Jim Lorraine, President and CEO, America's Warrior
Partnership....................................................    27

Mr. Hernan Luis y Prado, Founder and CEO, Workshop for Warriors..    28

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Alex Baird Prepared Statement................................    39
Ms. Cheryl J. Rawls Prepared Statement...........................    41
Ms. Margarita Devlin Prepared Statement..........................    47
Ms. Dawn Locke Prepared Statement................................    54
Ms. Brittany Dymond Prepared Statement...........................    71
Mr. Michael Quinn Prepared Statement.............................    76
Dr. Abby Kinch, PhD Prepared Statement...........................    79
Mr. Jim Lorraine Prepared Statement..............................    83
Mr. Hernan Luis y Prado Prepared Statement.......................    86

THE TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM:
STEPS TO ENSURE SUCCESS FOR
SERVICEMEMBERS AS THEY ENTER
CIVILIAN LIFE

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 17, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:02 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Derrick Van Orden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Van Orden, Mace, Franklin,
Ciscomani, Crane, Levin, Mrvan, Ramirez, and McGarvey.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DERRICK VAN ORDEN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Van Orden. Is this the second? There we go, thank you.
The subcommittee will come to order. I believe this is the
second Veterans Administration Committee hearing that we have
had since the renovation? I believe this is the fourth. I want
to thank everybody for coming today. I want to thank our
witnesses. It is great to see you for being here today to
discuss the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) and the role
that each department plays in helping service members take this
monumental step in their lives. As you may know, I am a former
Navy Seal. I did 26 years in the military. I have firsthand
knowledge of the difficulties that can come with making the
change from being an active-duty service member to a veteran.
Over 200,000 military personnel leave the service each
year. For many service members, this can be a time when they
take on new challenges and hopefully build a promising new
life. For others, this year-long process is filled with
uncertainty and anxiety. Having had a job, a strong community,
and a sense of purpose for many years, these service members
must redefine who they are, and their new purpose will be the
minute they step off their base or ship. That is when that
starts.
If they do not have a well-thought-out plan in place, they
can find themselves without the necessities of life, income,
food, shelter, and it can happen very, very quickly.
As we learned in our field hearing in San Diego earlier
this month, there is approximately 33,000 homeless veterans in
the United States, and this simply should not happen. One
homeless veteran is too many, and we owe these men and women
who sacrifice so much for us more than that, especially when we
think of veterans being thrown out of lodging to make room for
illegal immigrants. Even though the Veterans Administration has
assured us that they were not funding this program that is
still shameful on all levels.
I am committed to solving this problem and doing right by
our veterans. This Transition Assistance Program is a big tool
in our toolbox to help address this problem. Service members
who have a job lined up after separation from the military or a
clear path for their future are much less likely to experience
homelessness. Service members who are aware and have already
signed up for the benefits they are entitled to and understand
how to access them are much less likely to end up in dire
straits. Service members who have community or family support
are less likely to end up in a state of mental distress and
commit suicide. That is why this is my primary legislative
agenda.
The current TAP program, while well intended, is not
meeting the needs of our service members. Too many of them are
falling through the cracks, and we have got to do better by
helping them build a concrete plan for their life after
service.
Oh, here you go. I ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record a memo that we picked up in San Diego. It is called the
R4-ST. That is a Readiness for Special Operations Transition
Program. This is now an MF4-P11 program, which means it is a
fully funded program through the Special Operations Command.
Without objection, so ordered.
In June 2019, this committee worked incredibly hard to
modernize the transition assistance program under your
leadership. Many of these proposals were thought during the
hearing, much like the ones we are having today. However, what
Congress intended and what the Department of Defense
implemented ended up being wildly different. We are here again
today with the same organizations in the room discussing an
improved TAP, but also a program that is still not up to spec
for our service members.
While some veterans speak highly of TAP, we have heard many
more veterans refer to the current TAP program as nothing more
than a resume writing workshop. While having an up-to-date
resume tool is an important tool for finding a job, there are
so many other tools that we can build into TAP to ensure the
transition progress is easier.
We have heard of the successful SkillBridge program in
helping transitioning service members connect with employment.
We have heard of the need for more mental health counseling. We
have heard of the need for more individualized training
sessions. We have heard of the need for a warm handoff for
service members that are at risk of being homeless and food
insecure. We need to be creating more connections like these
for our service members. We need to ensure that the transition
process is started when it is legally required to ensure
service members can take advantage of all the tools that are
offered to them.
It is my understanding that 70 percent of service members
are not beginning this process a year in advance. Delaying the
start of transition puts these service members at a distinct
disadvantage. It is a disservice to those who have risked their
lives for our wonderful country.
Finally, we need to be building in more one-on-one
counseling for transition. This should not be a check the box
situation. It should be dedicated to helping each individual
service member have the tools they need to successfully
transition. We owe it to each and every one of them. I hope to
hear from you today, our witnesses in the first panel about
what has improved since 2019 and what continues to need work.
It is important that all agencies, as well as Congress work
together, especially on this issue. I also welcome the second
panel later this afternoon and hope to hear about the
improvements we can make to TAP from their perspective. As I
said during my first hearing as chairman back in March, this
subcommittee is not bipartisan. It is nonpartisan. This topic
reflects that more than any other topic I believe that we
handle every day. I now yield to the ranking member for his
opening remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE LEVIN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Levin. I thank my friend the chairman and I thank him
particularly for coming to visit our district recently. We had
a great hearing out there. I want to thank our witnesses and
our viewers. I want to thank all the capital staff that worked
on this beautiful hearing room that we have been waiting a
while to move back into.
Today we are going to address a matter that is crucial to
the well-being and success of our service members, the
transition out of the military. It is my honor to advocate for
the brave men and women in uniform. Today as we hear from our
Federal partners and organizational leaders, I hope we can
focus on two key issues that require immediate attention.
First, the need for a personalized transition process and the
necessity of granting our service members more time to prepare
for civilian life.
Each individual who serves in our armed forces has unique
experiences, skills, and aspirations, every single service
member. Each individual prepares to begin a civilian life in a
wholly individual and unique way. Recognizing this, we have got
to strive to create a transition process that is tailored to
the specific needs of each service member. Put another way, a
one size fits all approach simply does not suffice. It is
crucial that we develop personalized plans that consider
factors such as career goals, educational pursuits, physical
health, mental health, and financial, and familial obligations.
The reforms made in the Fiscal Year 2019 National Defense
Authorization Act were a great start. However, as we are going
to hear today, those reforms are still not fully implemented. I
recognize that COVID-19 contributed to this by forcing TAP to
pivot to a lot of remote programming. However, Department of
Defense (DoD) began moving away from remote TAP over a year
ago. Last week, as I think we all know, the President ended the
public health emergency.
As far as I am concerned, the time for excuses is over. We
lost too much time already. Too many service members have
missed the value of a full transition process. Look, if it is a
matter of resources, let us know. That is why we are here. It
is no secret that Congress has not met the Department of
Labor's funding request for TAP staffing. That is true. Does
DoD need more? What about VA?
Our duty as legislators is to deliver resources to
accomplish our shared goal, but we can only do so if our
partners make us aware of what is needed. Today we look at how
we achieve full implementation of current law, but we also look
forward. We have got to look forward by discussing and working
on the next improvements to TAP. That is why I have introduced
the Tier Act. The Tier Act expands examination of a service
member's needs during the TAP process to cover things like
childcare requirements, spouse employment status, duty station
location, service members operating tempo, and if the service
member is a Native American, the eligibility for additional
benefits. With these basic fixes to help prepare service
members for transition, we can significantly improve the
program.
It is also vital that we recognize the limited timeframe
currently allotted for in this critical period in a service
member's life. Far too often, our brave men and women are
rushed through this transition phase, resulting in unnecessary
hardships and increased vulnerability. The numbers that
Government Accountability Office (GAO) will present today are
simply stunning. Too many veterans have been waved out of their
two-day track, missed out on employment, and education
information.
Look, I am aware of the challenges that our commanders face
in giving their unit members time to prepare for civilian life
while balancing the vast responsibility of providing for our
Nation's defense. I have heard those challenges firsthand,
representing Camp Pendleton, for example. That is why we have
got to have a serious conversation about how service branches
handle force structure. It is unacceptable for a transitioning
service member to be told they are irreplaceable and therefore
can not attend a TAP class.
It is our duty as a grateful Nation to provide our service
members with the support and the time that they need to
successfully transition into civilian life. By personalizing
the transition process, by guaranteeing the time, we can
empower our veterans to not only reintegrate into society, but
also thrive in their post military careers, which is ultimately
what we all want to see. With that, I will yield back to the
chairman.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. I will now
introduce our witness panels. Our first witness is from the
Department of Defense, Mr. Alex Baird, the Acting Director of
Defense Support Services Center at the Department of Defense.
Our next witness is Ms. Cheryl Rawls, the Executive Director of
Outreach, Transition and Economic Development at the Department
of Veterans Affairs. Our third witness is Ms. Margarita Devlin,
the Deputy Assistant Secretary at the Department of Labor. Our
final witness for this panel is Ms. Dawn Locke, the Director of
Strategic Studies at the Government Accountability Office. I
would ask the witnesses to please stand and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn]
Thank you. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Please take your seats. Hey, so I
am a retired Navy Seal Senior Chief. You are going to see a
clock that is going to be in front of you. It is going to be 5
minutes, and that is exactly how long you will be talking. I
have read all of your written testimony, and it is fantastic in
its entirety, but we want to keep this moving at a steady clip.
Is that good? That is a deal right there. Mr. Baird, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your testimony on
behalf of the Department of Defense.

STATEMENT OF ALEX BAIRD

Mr. Baird. Sir, I will start by telling you I was raised by
a Marine, so I never go overtime. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking
Member Levin, and distinguished members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear before this oversight
hearing on the Transition Assistance Program, TAP. The
Department is committed to supporting our warfighters and their
families as they navigate the transition from military to
civilian life.
TAP is the essential foundation of that support and sets
the conditions for successful transition. Each year, TAP
provides approximately 200,000 service members with a common
level of support, regardless of location, service, or
component, at over 200 locations around the globe. The
overarching result is that today's TAP provides service members
more comprehensive transition preparation, information,
support, and services than at any other time during our
Nation's history. TAP provides broad ranging information,
training, resources, and support that effectively prepare
service members for success as they navigate through the
challenges and opportunities presented during the transition
from active duty to civilian life.
This support enables and empowers service members to
leverage their skills, knowledge, and abilities to reach their
full potential, achieve individual post transition goals, and
to continue serving our Nation as successful veterans who
strengthen our communities. Since its inception in 1991, TAP
has undergone sweeping changes. These changes have ensured that
TAP is relevant, progressive, and ever improving to meet the
needs of transitioning service members. The flexibility
afforded by the current TAP design allows tailoring of the
transition process to individual needs and goals, while
ensuring that service members receive information and resources
that best support individualized preparation for transition.
The relevance of TAP focused on the preparation for civilian
life ensures service member buy in and active participation in
TAP. In short, TAP works.
TAP works in large part because of the TAP interagency
dynamic partnership, a best-in-class example of effective
Federal agency collaboration and service delivery. The TAP
interagency delivers TAP as an individualized, robust program
with alternative pathways and multiple levels of assistance.
Each step of the process is guided by TAP counselors trained in
providing service members with--training service members,
allowing them to be in control of their transition, and to
utilize program resources and information that best fit their
needs in line with their post transition goals.
TAP is and must remain adaptive while ensuring programmatic
focus on two fundamental and complementary tenets, effective
counseling and service member buy in. Correspondingly, TAP will
sustain emphasis on individualized approach that best meets the
service members post traumatic--post transition goals. To that
end, TAP will remain innovative, responsive, transparent, and
collaborative. The Department, working with the service
members, military services, interagency partners,
nongovernmental entities, and Congress, will continuously
improve transition service and support. Together, we will build
upon current successes and achieve our ever-improving outcomes
for all TAP eligible service members from all components.
We will achieve this by providing agile, adaptive, and
individualized support and services while addressing barriers
that prevent successful transition to civilian life. In
closing, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and the ranking member and
the members of the subcommittee for your outstanding and
continuing support of the men and women who proudly wear the
uniform in defense of our great Nation.

[The Prepared Statement Of Alex Baird Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Well done, sir. Thank you, Mr. Baird. The
written statement of Mr. Baird will be entered into the hearing
record. Ms. Rawls, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF CHERYL RAWLS

Ms. Rawls. Thank you very much. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking
Member Levin, and the distinguished members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you
today to discuss the support the Department of Veterans Affairs
provides to service members as they prepare to enter civilian
life and beyond. I want to express my appreciation for your
continued support of VA's mission to care for those who have
served in our Nation's military and for their families,
caregivers, and survivors.
Support for transitioning service members is an interagency
effort between Department of Defense, Department of labor, the
Small Business Administration, and other agencies. In 2019, the
interagency partners approved the Military to Civilian Ready
Pathway, a six-step framework encompassing holistic programs
and services provided by Federal interagency partners, veteran
service organizations, VA State directors, and local community
resources.
Also in 2019, the John S. McCain National Defense
Authorization Act required service members to begin the
Transition Assistance Program no later than 365 days prior to
separation and as soon as possible in the 24 months prior to
retirement. The VA One-Day Benefits and Services course is
provided during TAP and orients the 200,000 transitioning
service members annually to all VA benefits and services.
Additionally, VA provides military lifecycle modules and
opportunities to meet individually with benefits advisors.
Through human-centered design and survey results, we
identified additional special emphasis areas for future
military lifecycle modules, including LGBTQ-plus, minority,
rural, military sexual trauma, National Guard, and Reserve
component. VA continues to offer the Women's Health Transition
Training course, which is an online course that emphasizes
women veterans' specific needs.
VA acknowledges the first year of transition out of the
military may pose significant challenges. It is with this
thought in mind that VA created the VA Solid Start program that
connects with recently separated veterans at three critical
points after transitioning 90, 180, and 365 days during the
first year. In Fiscal Year 2022, VA Solid Start successfully
connected with over 175,000 recently separated veterans.
VA frequently assesses the need for changes and
opportunities for growth. We use stakeholder engagements like
the VA Transition Forum and the Military to Civilian Transition
Summit to bring VA, public, and private stakeholders together
to learn more about transition programs and ways to better
coordinate transition services while strengthening community
relationships. In Fiscal Year 2022, VA partnered with the DoD
and Department of Labor (DOL) in a human-centered design
project designed to better understand the experiential needs
and desires of transitioning service members, recently
separated veterans, and their families for navigating military
transition. The results of this research are and will be used
to enhance transition. There is a need for increased
collaboration with veteran service organizations, and state
departments, better data sharing opportunities, and increased
spousal and family engagement. VA continues working toward
making improvements in these areas by removing barriers and
developing communication tools for spouses.
In conclusion, legislation has enabled VA and our
interagency partners to become a robust transition program with
alternate pathways and multiple levels of assistance, allowing
service members to utilize the programs, resources, and
information that fits their needs aligned with their post
transition goals. However, VA recognizes the need for
continuous improvement and remains dedicated to strengthening
military to civilian transition outcomes. Chairman Van Orden,
Ranking Member Levin, this concludes my testimony, and I am
happy to respond to any questions you or the subcommittee may
have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Cheryl Rawls Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ms. Rawls. Yes, Ms. Rawls'
testimony will be entered into the record. Ms. Devlin, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARGARITA DEVLIN

Ms. Devlin. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, thank
you for this opportunity to testify about the Transition
Assistance Program and what Department of Labor Veterans'
Employment and Training Services (DOL VETS) is doing to
transform and modernize it. I have spent my entire Federal
career working with veterans and serving veterans. This is my
passion, so I am really happy to be here.
VETS' mission is to prepare America's veterans, service
members and military spouses for meaningful careers, provide
them with employment resources, protect their employment
rights, and promote their employment opportunities. VETS
administers employment programs through the Transition
Assistance program.
I would like to highlight five areas that I think will be
of interest to this committee, to the subcommittee. First,
service members are attending TAP employment workshops in
record breaking numbers. VETS administers three core TAP
employment workshops: the one-day Employment Fundamentals of
Career Transition, the two-day DOL Employment Workshop, and the
two-day Career and Credential Exploration Workshop.
In Fiscal Year 2022, we provided instruction to over
266,000 participants, which is over a 40 percent increase from
the previous workshop record in Fiscal Year 2021. Our
participant survey results are encouraging. In Fiscal Year
2023, 97 percent of participants indicated they would use what
they learned in their own transition planning, and 95 percent
reported that their confidence in transition planning was
enhanced.
Second topic, VETS is leading the way to transform the TAP
employment space. In response to consistent feedback that
service members want more personalized support beyond the
classroom environment, VETS created the Employment Navigator
and Partnership Pilot, or ENPP. Since its original launch at 13
military installations, ENPP has served over 10,000
participants. Our contract Employment Navigators provide
personalized one-on-one assistance with resumes, career
direction, and referrals to vetted partner organizations and
American job centers.
As of March 31, 2023, 96 percent of ENPP survey respondents
reported positive feelings after meeting with their Employment
Navigator and would recommend ENPP to a colleague.
Additionally, 98 percent felt ENPP partners met or exceeded
their employment-related expectations. I want to share just one
quote from a participant. He said, the value of the Employment
Navigator is having a one-on-one conversation to go back over
the plethora of information you received in TAP classes and
give guidance and recommendations specific to your situation.
Third topic, VETS asks Congress to consider expanding the
Off-Base Transition Training pilot. Currently, veterans and
their spouses are eligible to receive support modeled after our
TAP curriculum at locations other than active military
installations in areas with high veteran unemployment. Congress
may wish to consider expanding OBTT eligibility to current
serving members of the Guard and Reserve, regardless of their
veteran status, and their spouses.
Fourth topic, VETS will leverage data to improve TAP
outcomes. Traditionally, VETS has only had access to data about
TAP workshops and those workshop participants. However, new
initiatives, such as the Employment Navigator Partnership
Pilot, have enabled VETS to access employment outcome
information on our transitioning service members through the
National Directory of New Hires at the Department of Health and
Human Services. DOL is leveraging this information to improve
program delivery and employment outcomes, and we look forward
to sharing this information and these outcomes when it is
available.
Fifth, we ask that Congress appropriate the full amount
requested in the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget for VETS.
We appreciate the funding increases appropriated by Congress
for TAP. However, Congress has not appropriated the full amount
requested by the President's budget and needed for VETS,
Federal Administration, and Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA). This appropriation is the one
that funds all VETS staff and enforcement activities. This
reduction presents a great risk to all VETS programs, including
TAP.
In conclusion, our long-term strategic goal for TAP is for
the Nation as a whole to recognize military service as a path
to a high-quality civilian career. The future of the country's
all volunteer force depends on it. We look forward to working
with this committee and appreciate the support to be able to
create opportunities that ensure all veterans can have a good
job and opportunity for advancement. Thank you again for the
opportunity to be a part of this hearing, and I welcome your
questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Margarita Devlin Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ms. Devlin. Ms. Devlin's written
statement will now be entered into the record. Ms. Locke, you
are recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DAWN LOCKE

Ms. Locke. Thank you, Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member
Levin, and members of the Subcommittee. I am so pleased to be
here today to discuss our work on the Transition Assistance
Program, or TAP. Over the next couple of years, almost half a
million service members will transition into civilian life.
These transitioning individuals are required to go through TAP
to get the support they need, whether it is finding a job,
going to school, or taking advantage of other resources. Today,
I will be discussing our most recent work on the TAP counseling
pathways. The three areas I will cover are whether the pathways
have been implemented, service member participation in the
pathways, and finally, how effectively TAP is working.
For the first area on implementation, I am pleased to
report that the pathways have been fully implemented by all DoD
services. As you know, the pathways consist of one-on-one
counseling, self-assessments, goal setting, placement into one
of three tiers depending on the level of support needed, and
three core classes, followed by a two-day tailored course. We
heard generally positive feedback about these pathways and how
they are now more customized versus being that one size fits
all approach.
As for the second area related to participation, we found
that more than 90 percent of service members went through TAP
and attended the three-day courses. Unfortunately, the story
was very different for the additional two-day courses that dive
deeper into various aspects of employment and higher education.
The services waived the 2-day courses requirement for 53
percent of service members. That is a little more than 64,000
men and women. Notably, 22 percent of tier three service
members did not attend a two-day class as required. Now, keep
in mind, the tier three service members are those who are most
vulnerable for transition challenges, and nearly a quarter of
them are not taking the two-day class.
Another important aspect of TAP participation has to do
with timeliness. The law generally requires that service
members start at least a year before they separate, but we
found that only 25 percent started on time. The reason this is
an issue is because service members who begin TAP late may miss
opportunities, such as applying for disability benefits before
leaving military service or taking advantage of DoD's on-the-
job training programs with civilian employers.
It is unclear why there is low attendance for the two-day
classes or why most service members start TAP late. We were
told it could be due to various factors, such as medical
discharges, deployments, or a lack of command support, but it
is hard to be sure. While DoD and the services collect data on
timeliness and two-day class attendance, they do not use these
data to get at root causes. We therefore recommended that they
leverage the data they already have to determine the reasons
for-and how to fix-the issues with attendance and timeliness.
For the third area of our review on TAP effectiveness, we
found that DoD and its interagency partners, such as the VA and
the Department of labor, are sponsoring a number of studies on
TAP's long-term outcomes. While not yet complete, the studies
aim to show whether TAP leads to favorable results, such as how
quickly veterans get a job and how much they earn.
I do not have to tell anyone on this subcommittee how
critical it is that we now protect the individuals who have
spent so many years protecting us. They must be given the time
and support needed to access transition resources. DoD and the
services can help do this by making better use of their data to
determine deficiencies and adjust accordingly. We will also be
looking for the TAP agency partners to leverage upcoming
evaluation results to verify what is working and what could be
improved so veterans can better transition into healthy,
sustainable lives. This concludes my statement. I look forward
to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Dawn Locke Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ms. Locke. The written statement
of Ms. Locke will be entered into the hearing record. We will
now proceed to questionings, and I recognize myself for exactly
5 minutes. Mr. Baird, do you consider the TAP program
successful?
Mr. Baird. Yes, sir, I do consider the TAP program
successful.
Mr. Van Orden. Are you aware that in a December 2022 report
the Government Accountability Office stated that the majority,
which is 70 percent of transitioning veteran service members,
did not begin TAP at least 365 days before leaving military
service?
Mr. Baird. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Why has the Department of Defense
failed to implement the law as mandated by Congress?
Mr. Baird. Mr. Chairman, we were in the process of
implementing the law when COVID started. At that time, 95 to 98
percent of our courses were in brick and mortar. We had to
shift to a virtual environment, as did our Federal partners.
Mr. Van Orden. All right. Okay. What are the DoD service
branches doing to ensure that installation leadership and unit
commanders are held accountable to ensure the timeline of TAP
is met?
Mr. Baird. Sir, each of the service has a corrective action
plan for how they will get their numbers back on track. We
agree with you. The most important thing is that people start
at 365.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Are you aware of any other Department
of Defense programs that are performing at a 25 percent success
rate, and would you consider those successful that are?
Mr. Baird. No, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Now, Ms. Locke, in your testimony, you
said that generally someone is held accountable. A unit
commander, generally, they are not held accountable. That means
if someone generally has specifically, there should be somebody
who has been held accountable for this. Can you tell me how
many commanders have been held accountable for their troops not
attending TAP?
Ms. Locke. We did not look into data on commander
accountability, but what we did hear across the services and
installations we visited was that commanders are not being held
accountable. It was suggested to us ways that this could be
improved by, for example, incorporating TAP into commander
performance metrics, because we know what gets measured is what
gets done. We have also been told given the idea to incorporate
TAP into DoD's mission, because, as we all know, there is zero
room for failure when it comes to the mission. If TAP were part
of that mission, it might be given a higher priority.
Mr. Van Orden. I strongly recommend that you do that
because no one is going to get to--you can only get to
functional 365. There is going to be something that comes up,
rapid deployment. These service members and the Department of
Defense will not take this program seriously until commanders
are held accountable, which means them not getting promoted.
That is the only thing that this is going to happen. This model
that we gave from Naval Special Warfare, they actually start 2
years out. It is a 24-year cycle because they understand 1 year
is not enough time because stuff comes up. It is a fantastic
model. We will make sure you get that. Ms. Baird, you said the
22 percent, that is 11,000 service members who are placed in
the tier three require the maximum transition assistance, they
did not attend this class. Is that correct?
Ms. Locke. Was that for, me?
Mr. Van Orden. Yes, I am sorry.
Ms. Locke. Okay, that is correct. 11,000 in that tier three
category did not attend a 2-day class. Again, those tier three
service members are those who are most vulnerable to housing
insecurity and food insecurity----
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Ms. Locke [continuing]. or other things like that and they
are not attending the course as required.
Mr. Van Orden. Then Mr. Baird, as a representative of the
Department of Defense, can you explain to me why the service
members in the greatest danger of becoming homeless and
starving to death are being granted waivers by their
commanders?
Mr. Baird. Sir, I cannot answer for each of the commanders.
What I can tell you is that it is a commander's program. It is
a service secretary program. During COVID we put the priority
on operating in a virtual environment. In March 2022, we put
the emphasis back on the Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) 19,
making sure we implemented all the components of NDA 19 and we
are putting the emphasis back on the services. We report that
information back up through the JEC structure, the Joint
Executive Council.
Mr. Van Orden. I got it.
Mr. Baird. We will also have that information to you this
fall in our report to Congress.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Baird, with that information that you
give back to Congress the number of tier three folks that are
not meeting this 2-day thing, I want a list of the commanding
officers' names and their command sergeant majors or command
master chiefs or command chiefs. I want their names because
this has got to stop. If someone's being lazy and not running a
person through this program, they need to be held directly
accountable.
The last thing is this, would you be opposed to having the
Veterans Administration become the lead agency for the
Transition Assistance Program? The lead. It is a huge,
convoluted chain of command. I would posit that this program
and our service members would be better served if in fact the
Veterans Administration was the lead agency. Would you support
that?
Mr. Baird. Mr. Chairman, the three of us work as a team. I
do not know that it makes any difference who you make lead.
Mr. Van Orden. My time has expired. I now recognize Ranking
Member Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Baird, it was nice
meeting you in my office recently. I want to thank you for
joining us today. We do not often have DoD testify before us,
so I have got some questions for you. DoD's mission statement
is to provide the military forces needed to deter war and
ensure our Nation's security. How does service member
transition fall into that mission?
Mr. Baird. Ranking Member Levin, it is a key component of
the entire military service process. It is key to recruitment
and retention in that my service was based on my father's
experience in the United States Marine Corps. My daughter's
experience was based on my time in the Air Force. She is now a
first lieutenant in the Air Force. It is inherent that the
Department of Defense has got to make a smooth transition so
that those people leave, continue to recruit for us.
Mr. Levin. VA's mission is to fulfill President Lincoln's
promise to care for those who have served in our Nation's
military and for their families, caregivers, and survivors.
Would you say that VA's mission more adequately encompasses a
service member's transition?
Mr. Baird. I think it is a partnership between the
Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans.
Mr. Levin. I understand that, but of the two mission
statements, which do you think better encompasses transition?
Mr. Baird. The veterans, sir.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that. As we talked about when we
met with Undersecretary Cisneros as well, and as I said in my
opening remarks, I was frankly stunned to hear some of the
numbers from GAO, and these have been repeated. 25 percent of
service members in the highest risk level that did not attend
the mandatory 2-day class, 70 percent of service members did
not start TAP at least 1 year before separation. My question
for you is to what extent, if at all, does TAP participation
affect commanders' performance ratings and promotion potential?
Mr. Baird. Mr. Ranking Member, that is part of each of the
services' corrective action plan. How are they going to make
this a commander's program and hold commanders responsible?
Mr. Levin. What is the consequence for a commander that
does not ensure service members under their command start TAP
on time, or that all tier three service members take the two-
day class?
Mr. Baird. Sir, I could take that for the record, but I can
not speak for the services.
Mr. Levin. It is fair to say it is all over the place. Some
may have consequences, some may not. Is that a fair statement?
Mr. Baird. Again, Mr. Ranking Member, I can not speak for
the services and how they would answer that.
Mr. Levin. Okay. Well, some of them might say there are
consequences, some of them might say there are not, correct?
Mr. Baird. Correct.
Mr. Levin. Correct. Ms. Locke, I will turn to you. The goal
of TAP is to ensure service members transitioning from active
duty are prepared for their next step in life. Do you know
whether the program is effective?
Ms. Locke. You know what, we do not. That is because we do
not have the outcome data. There is a lot of output data on
participation. The TAP interagency partners are collecting
surveys and they are telling us that, for example, service
members think the 3-day courses are useful or that they think
the 2-day courses are helpful. They do not have actual outcomes
on the service members who have gone through TAP and how they
are now living as veterans.
What is encouraging is that these partners have interagency
agreements to share data with, for example, the Census Bureau,
or the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), or, as Ms. Devlin said,
the Health and Human Services new hire data. Hopefully,
eventually, those data will be able to show us that a TAP
graduate was able to get a job, keep a job, how much they
earned, and whether they had to collect unemployment. Right
now, we just do not have those data.
Mr. Levin. Just to be clear, we have no data to understand
the effectiveness of TAP?
Ms. Locke. That is correct.
Mr. Levin. That is something we all need to work on
together. Let me turn back to you, Mr. Baird, I have a minute
here. How does the existing TAP structure work for Guard and
Reserve members?
Mr. Baird. For Guard and Reserve members, it works exactly
like it does for active duty. One of the things we did is we
incorporated a work group as part of the TAP governance
structure that is a Guard and Reserve working group so they can
elevate their members. Additionally, we have members at each
level of the Senior Steering Group (SSG) and the Transition
Assistance Program Executive Council (TAP EC) from the Guard
and Reserve.
Mr. Levin. You think it is working effectively?
Mr. Baird. I think it could work better. It is a difficult
thing. Having spent many years working for the National Guard,
if they deploy for 180 days, they are already behind the power
curve the day they arrive at their deployed location. One of
the things we want to continue to look at is how can we best
integrate both the Transition Assistance Program and the Yellow
Ribbon Reintegration Program to be effective.
Mr. Levin. I appreciate that, and, you know, I just want to
say, make no mistake, we are truly grateful for the work that
you do for our veterans, our transitioning service members. It
does not mean we can not improve. We all want to hopefully work
together. We might be a little biased here on House Veterans'
Affairs Committee (HVAC), thinking that this fits more within
the VA wheelhouse, but we need the support of the DoD. We need
the support of the chain of command, make sure that this is a
top priority. We need some accountability and transparency on
how the results are whether this is working or not. I suspect
we know what the outcome of such analysis would be, but the
sooner we get to the bottom of it, the better. With that, I
will yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you Ranking Member Levin. I now
recognize Mr. Ciscomani for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you again to all
the witnesses for coming here to testify. I am proud to
represent Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, which is in Tucson and
Fort Huachuca in Sierra Vista, both in Arizona's Sixth
District, my district. Between both installations, thousands of
service members can call Southeast Arizona home. Ensuring that
they are successful after their service in the country is a
huge priority for me. My questions are going to be in that line
here for both them and their spouses.
My first one will be to you, Mr. Baird. Now, the service
members leaving the military are required to participate in the
Transition Assistance Program, or TAP, which includes a
combination of pre-separation counseling and 5 days of
classroom, which is classroom-based instruction. However, the
Department of Defense has interpreted the five-day TAP course
differently, and each military branch and military base
commander has the authority to waive the optional two-day
class. Do you think that 3 days is enough for a service member
to take in all the information needed to prepare for a civilian
life? I know that we went through a two-week orientation here,
and there was a lot more to cover and a lot of information that
is thrown our way in any kind of orientation, I can just
imagine the amount of information that our service members
would need before hitting civilian life and 3 days with the
option of waiving two. What do you think about that?
Mr. Baird. That is a great question, Representative. In my
case, 3 days was enough. I was 24 years in the United States
Air Force. I had a job before I started terminal leave. The
Marine Corps has chosen that everyone who is a first termer
will be a category three, will be a tier three because they
need more information. The key is we have got to get to 365
days so that I have got a full year to address any of the
issues I have for my transition.
Mr. Ciscomani. You have found--what is the feedback from
the service members saying back? What I am hearing is that it
is not enough. Perhaps in your case it sounds like it was and
that worked out. For a lot of the members that I am talking to
it just does not seem to be enough for what they can recall is
not only the days but is the amount of information. How do you
think Congress can improve TAP to ensure the positive outcomes
on the transitioning of service members? I am hearing here from
my colleagues as well, there is always room for improvement. It
might have worked for you, it may work for others like you, but
it does not work for a lot of people out there as well. What
are the opportunities here for growth and improvement?
Mr. Baird. Sir, what I would tell you is TAP today is
better than it was yesterday and TAP tomorrow will be better
than it is today. It is a continuous, evolving environment and
a learning environment. The 2019 National Defense Authorization
Committee (NDAA) changed the entire program. Before that, it
was just about compliance. Everybody got the same information.
There are so many benefits out there for our service members as
they transition that it is hard to know all the benefits. What
we have been teaching them is where to go to get the additional
information. An advantage of going to a virtual environment is
a service member who is now a veteran can still go back and
retake----
Mr. Ciscomani. I am sorry to interrupt here because I only
have a minute and a half left, but I understand that part. I
want to hear from you is what are improvements that you think
we can still make? As good as you are describing the program, I
am sure there are ways and areas where you and I could agree
that we have to improve. Please cover that.
Mr. Baird. It is where I need to improve, sir. It is where
I need to get all of our commanders to 365 days. It is where I
need to get the IT infrastructure in place to support the long-
term data.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you for that. I only have a little
over a minute. Ms. Devlin, if I can address you with the
question here quickly around spouses. In the testimony, you
described the Transition Employment Assistance for Military
Spouses, or TEAMS, to help military spouses find employment
when their spouses leave the military. Based on the information
from the Department of Labor, military spouses have higher
unemployment rates compared to national averages, and many can
only find part-time work. What takeaways does the Department of
Labor have from the military spouse employment curriculum, and
are there any plans to scale up this program?
Ms. Devlin. Thank you so much for that question. It is very
important that we work with military spouses to eliminate their
unemployment and eliminate the barriers that they have to
continued employment due the multiple deployments with their
spouses. The TEAMS program has been popular, but it is new and,
you know, people are just gaining awareness. We also have
services for military spouses at our American Job Centers
through the American Job Center network. What we are learning
is that we need to get to them early enough. We need to give
them the information and the resources so that they do not have
gaps in employment with each change in duty station.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you so much. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani. I now recognize my
friend Ms. Ramirez for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, friend Chairman Van Orden, and
Ranking Member Levin for today's hearing. I additionally want
to thank all of you who are here today as our witnesses, Ms.
Rawls, Mr. Baird, Ms. Devlin, and Ms. Locke for coming before
the committee to engage in what is a critical discussion about
service member transition and how the Transition Assistance
Program is an essential tool to empower veterans to make the
most informed decisions regarding their post service life.
When we talk about service member transition into veteran
life, we tend to focus primarily on education and employment
with good reason. That is not the whole picture. As some of you
have heard me speak before, I spent many years running a social
service agency in Chicago, and I cannot emphasize enough how
important wraparound services are. Mr. Baird, to what extent
does TAP make service members aware of other resources beyond
employment and education? For example, how does TAP help with
mental health or food or housing assistance that might further
support service members during their transition?
Mr. Baird. Thank you for that question. TAP was designed to
prepare the service member for transition. We do avail them of
opportunities of where to get additional information. The
Department of Veterans Affairs does that quite nicely. We do
not address those social needs after they are out of the
service. That is difficult for us because we do not have that
control. The best we can do is teach people what is available
so they can go post service when they are a veteran, they can
go out and seek those opportunities out.
Ms. Ramirez. I know that in testimony, one of you talked
about how they are supposed to go through this 2-day
orientation of services within that year before they are
returning, but about 70 percent of them do not participate a
year prior. Usually there are housing issues when they are
going to be coming back or there are other resources they need.
That period of time would help. Why do you think so many are
not participating within the year prior for them transitioning
back to civilian life?
Mr. Baird. I think part of it was during the COVID period,
people just--commanders were not pushing as hard. That is got
to change. There are many reasons why somebody would be given a
waiver. If I have already enrolled in education, if I am
enrolled at a university, I do not need to go through the
education track because I already know how to do that. If I
already have a job, I do not need to go through the employment
track because I have already got employment.
Ms. Ramirez. Got it. Let me go back. I have been talking a
lot about housing, and certainly I also feel like it is
important to highlight our women veterans. Women veterans have
specific health needs, including reproductive healthcare needs.
I understand that the Department of Veteran Affairs currently
offers women's health transition training to help support our
women veterans' transition.
Ms. Rawls, as you know, less than half of eligible women
veterans are enrolled in VA healthcare. We also know that women
veterans face a higher rate of some health-related challenges
after military service compared to men. That includes chronic
pain, depression, and the list goes on. How can the Women's
Health Transition Training program be improved to reach more
women veterans and increase VA Healthcare enrollment?
Ms. Rawls. Thank you very much for that question, ma'am.
One of the things that can help improve this offering is for us
to be able to have it virtually instructor led so the women
have an opportunity to engage. I want to make it very clear
that the information that is provided in the Women's Health
Transition Training, all of the information is provided in the
VA one-day services. The big distinction between the Women's
Health Transition Training is that it provides a forum to
connect to services that VA offers particularly for women. By
me asking to have an opportunity to have it instructor led
virtually, I think that is going to have an effect on women to
be able to talk about what is happening instead of just viewing
the information again.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ms. Ramirez. I recognize my
friend Mr. Crane from Arizona for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I always appreciate
that. Juan's egging me on over here. He wants me to say
something nasty to you. I do not know what it is about this
place.
Thank you guys for being here. This is something that is
near and dear to me as a veteran myself, watching many friends
of mine struggle getting out of the service. I went through TAP
class and I also volunteered a good amount of my time and
resources to help other members transition out of the military.
I have a couple of questions for you guys. I wanted to know if
when you are doing TAP class, Mr. Baird, you guys bring in
experts or representatives in some of the trades and other
industries that veterans might be able to pipeline into, like
construction, IT, entrepreneurship, banking, law enforcement,
tech, et cetera, so that they might be able to actually get
connected with somebody in a field, a national field that might
actually help them place in a job.
Mr. Baird. Congressman, we do not. There is the ability
through the SkillBridge program for them to make that
connection.
Mr. Crane. Through the what program?
Mr. Baird. SkillBridge.
Mr. Crane. Are they informed about that during TAP?
Mr. Baird. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Great. Thank you, sir. One of the other things
that I wanted to mention and see if this is a part of the
curriculum at all, often successful transitions are not just
about finding a job, income, housing, et cetera, but a lot of
veterans do not even realize how hardwired they are for
service. Is there any information put out to these individuals
going through TAP to how they can get plugged in and serve in
their community, in their state, and possibly at higher levels?
Mr. Baird. Mr. Representative, it happens both through the
DoD part and also through our partners. We emphasize the
important skills that they bring. That is one of the reasons--
we just met with Bank of America a couple of weeks ago. One
hundred percent of the people who do SkillBridge with them,
they hire. What we are finding is, if we can make that
connection between corporate America and our veterans, then
they get hired.
Mr. Crane. Okay, well, then let me just make a suggestion,
because this is one of the biggest things that I see, one of
the biggest reasons I see veterans fail is because after a
certain point of time, maybe 6 months, a year, they eventually
land the job and they can pay the bills. Like I said, a lot of
veterans are hardwired for service and they do not even know
it, which is why they actually went into the military to begin
with. Once that mission is missing from their life, they feel
lost. You know, and so, just a suggestion that might be
something you guys take a look at is helping them not only
understand that, but possibly getting plugged into mission-
based, you know, type things when they get out might be
helpful.
The next question I have is for Ms. Dawn Locke. Why are so
few service members starting TAP on time? What are some of the
consequences to service members of starting TAP later than
required by law?
Ms. Locke. Sure. We have been told that the reason why
people are starting TAP so late is because there is mission
need. They could be on deployment. They could be hospitalized.
Or again, we heard that there might be a lack of command
support. The reason why it is important to be timely with TAP
is so that the service members can take advantage of the
resources that are provided to them. For example, they would
have the time to take advantage of SkillBridge. SkillBridge is
a 6-month long program and to apply and to interview, it takes
time. For those service members that are starting TAP too late,
they miss out on that opportunity.
In addition, what we heard from a number of service members
is that the VA benefits is a very complicated process and it is
a lot being thrown at them. They need time to research their
benefits and to apply. It is helpful if they apply and get
approved while they are still in the service because they are
able to be directly connected to those resources. In addition
to that, if they are approved while they are in the service,
that means they immediately start collecting those benefits
once they leave the service.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. Mr. Baird, in 2019, NDAA, Congress
mandated that TAP would consist of a 5-day class to give
service members more time to disseminate information. However,
Congress has since learned that the service branches have
waived attendance. Why has DoD decided not to implement law
mandated by Congress? What could a service member miss during
those extra 2 days?
Mr. Baird. Representative, we believe the law gave us the
flexibility to tailor TAP to each individual. There are some
people who do not need to go through all 5 days. As I described
myself before I separated from the service, I had a job.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the distinguished gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Mrvan.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairman. I am going to do everything
I can to be introduced as your friend going forward. If you
want to meet for a cup of coffee after this.
Mr. Van Orden. I now recognize my friend, Mr. Mrvan, from
Indiana.
Mr. Mrvan. Sweet. I will get to the point. Mr. Baird, my
question is, and Ms. Locke had a phenomenal point that I think
needs to be emphasized, if you cut short the time of the 365
days and the SkillBridge program takes time in order to ramp
up, then in essence, you are eliminating a program that is
successful. Now we know statistically less veterans are able to
participate in that because of awareness and because of the
ramp of time of which they are doing that.
I guess my direct question is, when it comes to veteran
benefits, I have a specific case at my office right now, and I
am going to just go through the scenario very quickly. The
veteran was leaving, did not know that if he did not transfer
his GI bill for the education component to his daughter, he
could not do that unless he reenlisted or did four additional
years or the additional service that he did. He gets out, he
tries giving it to his daughter, he calls my office and said, I
was not aware of that. Now, generally, he should be, but the
fact of the matter is, if he did not participate in that
program because of command not telling him that he had to go,
then he is unaware of it. That is a benefit that he is out of
that he was depending on.
What I am trying to say is there are real people and
veterans on the other end of that that you know of. Can you
explain, if you had a magic wand, what would you do in order
for the veterans, besides the command, what other steps would
you take so that the veterans themselves are aware and they
know what they are missing?
Mr. Baird. That is a great question. We are very fortunate
right now that our Undersecretary for Personnel Readiness is an
advocate of the TAP process, and he is vowed to help us push
those commanders to make sure that they are hitting that 365 so
that people have enough time. We are going to continue to
leverage the online services available to make TAP open to not
just the service member, but also to their spouses.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Thank you. Ms. Devlin, how is the
Department of Labor engaging with employers and industry
representatives to create more employment opportunities
specifically targeted at transitioning service members?
Ms. Devlin. Thank you so much for that question. Several
different ways. We have a Honoring Investments in Recruiting
and Employing American Military Veterans Act of 2017 (HIRE)
Veterans Medallion Program which recognizes employers who hire
veterans. There is strict criteria for it, and it is the only
Federal Government program that recognizes employers for hiring
veterans and retaining them.
Mr. Mrvan. What does that mean that they are recognized?
Ms. Devlin. Correct. They can apply to be recognized. We
verify based on the statistics of their organization. If they
meet the requirements for hiring, retention, and development of
veterans, they can get this recognition as a HIRE Veterans
Medallion Program awardee.
Then in the TAP program, when transitioning service members
are learning about their employment options, we tell them about
this. There was actually one example in TAP class where we had
a service member leave the TAP class and go contact one of the
employers in the Hire Vets Medallion Program and actually got a
job after separation. That is one way in which we market to
employers that, hey, it is not only great that you hire
veterans, but you need to get the message out that you are
hiring veterans so that transitioning service members will know
to come find you and come work for you.
Mr. Mrvan. For my own education, where does SkillBridge
fall under? Who is in charge of SkillBridge?
Ms. Devlin. Department of Defense.
Mr. Mrvan. I guess I have a minute-28. If you are in charge
of a program but not giving people enough time, do you see how
the frustration we all have that we put these forward?
Corporations are saying we want to participate. All the
individuals that participate, your own words at 100 percent.
100 percent go into that program, get jobs. The ones that are
missing are the ones that are missing that opportunity. I am
asking you to go back and to keep that in mind when you are
advocating for the veterans on how important it is, because we
have a program that people are unaware of that has 100 percent
placement.
Mr. Baird. If I can Representative. Overall, the program
has 70 percent placement. It was Bank of America that is 100
percent.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay.
Mr. Baird. I just want to make sure I do not----
Mr. Mrvan. Seventy percent.
Mr. Baird. I am excited to say that as of 1 May, the
program now belongs to us. It was in a separate department
within P&R, Personnel and Readiness. It was not fully
incorporated into the TAP process. We believe bringing it into
the TAP process will allow us to use that to leverage
commanders to get people in earlier so they can take advantage
of the SkillBridge.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you. With that, I yield back my time.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. Now, I recognize my
distinguished colleague and great friend, Mr. McGarvey from
Kentucky.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that. I
will take my 5 minutes. I appreciate you all being here today
and obviously talking about how we can help our veterans. That
is the purpose of this committee is how can we better help our
veterans honestly get what they have earned and what they
deserve from this panel. I was a little troubled by the answers
to the questions that Mr. Levin was asking earlier and
certainly look for follow up from that. Do want to continue to
talk about TAP and its importance.
As you all know, there are all kinds of challenges veterans
face when transitioning out of the service and coming into
being civilians. The TAP is a big part of helping veterans be
able to succeed. Nearly 2/3 of our student veterans are first
generation college students. Not only are they facing a
transition out of the military, they are facing a potential
transition with TAP into a world that they do not know.
Certainly, we should be there to help them and their families.
We must do more for first generation college students across
the board, but particularly our veterans.
In light of all the testimony today, just think about this,
what actions do you recommend Congress take to improve TAP and
transition as a whole to better support service members in
attaining higher education?
Mr. Baird. Thank you for that question. We believe we have
all the tools right now that were given to us in the NDA 2019.
Now it is our responsibility to continue and to implement them
and use them.
Mr. McGarvey. If you have all the tools you need, what is
the problem?
Mr. Baird. The problem was coming out of a COVID
environment where the services had different priorities, to be
bluntly, honest. Now, the priorities got to be back on taking
care of our service members as they transition.
Mr. McGarvey. How do you plan to do that?
Mr. Baird. We plan to do that through our TAP corporate
structure. We have services at every level of that and we are
holding them accountable. This committee is holding them
accountable because they know we have got a report due that
will come over to Congress in the fall. We will continue to use
the structure we have to put the pressure on the services. They
get very competitive as one starts achieving numbers that
somebody else has not.
Mr. McGarvey. Again, to what Mr. Levin was discussing, you
know, we certainly want to see that report. We want to get this
data back. We want to make sure if you do have all the tools
that you need, these programs are in fact working and that they
are working for our veterans to give them again what they have
earned, what they deserve, what they need to continue to find
success. With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the rest of
my time.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you very much, Mr. McGarvey. Before we
close out here, I just want to follow up on one thing. When I
asked you if you would be opposed, Mr. Baird, of the Department
of Veterans Affairs taking lead on this issue for transition,
the reason I asked that is because you have to have a captain
of a ship. When you work collaboratively, what you do and I
have looked at the--I would love to see a line and block chart
of how this is organized because it appears to be a mess. There
needs to be a desk where the buck can stop, as President Truman
would say.
I want to talk to you again after this. I understood that
you went and saw Mr. Levin. I appreciate that. I would like to
meet you personally in my office to talk about making sure we
understand that there is a single point of contact. If anybody
has any issues that they know who to go to, not a board. We
govern by consensus. I would not use the word nimble to
describe it, Congress.
With that, thank you all very much for coming. I appreciate
your time very much. The witnesses are now excused.
I hope you stick around and listen to the next panel. It
would be awesome. Thank you. We will take a short recess.
[Recess]
Mr. Van Orden. Well, thank you all for coming. Mr. Luis y
Prado, if you can have a seat, please. Our second panel we will
be hearing from today Ms. Brittany Dymond, the Associate
Director of National Security and Foreign Affairs Directorate
from the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW). I left my hat in my
office. Mr. Michael Quinn, Chief Executive Officer of Higher
Military and Tenova, LLC. Dr. Abby Knish, Kinch? Say it again?
Ms. Kinch. Kinch.
Mr. Van Orden. Kinch, PhD, Chief of Staff of Student
Veterans of America (SVA). We have had you guys over a few
times. Mr. Jim Lorraine, the President and Chief Executive
Officer (CEO) of America's Warrior Partnership (AWP), and Mr.
Hern n Luis y Prado, the founder and CEO of Workshops for
Warriors.
I would like to welcome you all here to our second panel,
and I would ask you to please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn]
Thank you. Let the record reflect all witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Ms. Dymond, you guys see us. I do
not know if you were all here earlier, but we will be talking
for exactly 5 minutes. Ms. Dymond, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRITTANY DYMOND

Ms. Dymond. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of
the VFW, we thank you for the opportunity to provide our
remarks on this vital topic. The critical nature of military
transition cannot be understated. For many transitioning
service members, the change from military to civilian life
represents a complete personal and professional shift not
previously experienced as adults. Additionally, leaving service
is often complicated by service-related ailments, family needs,
loss of identity and support networks, and the need for
retraining to enter a new career field. Sadly, the initial year
following discharge also comes with increased suicide risk
among new veterans, bolstering the need to ensure all
transition stakeholders work to get it right.
Some of the best resources service members have during
transition are accredited representatives like those in the
VFW's Benefits Delivery at Discharge Program, also known as
BDD. Through BDD, individuals can file expedited VA claims and
complete medical evaluations before leaving service, enabling
VA to provide disability ratings upon or shortly after
discharge. Receiving expedited claims decisions means BDD
participants are better able to minimize gaps in essential care
like mental health counseling and medication management, and
use resources like the VA's Veteran Readiness and Employment
Program.
For these reasons, the VFW believes there is untold value
in incorporating accredited representatives into the TAP
curriculum. Specifically, we would like to see these
individuals facilitate complementary course materials that
cover VA benefits and services where practical, with an
emphasis toward those that can be applied for prior to
discharge. Accredited representatives would not only be able to
highlight the BDD program, but also help transitioning service
members file claims to aid in the seamless delivery of care and
benefits once they return to civilian life. Claims assistance
is a task that VA contract employees, who largely teach the VA
curriculum legally cannot do.
Currently, however, representatives like the VFW's BDD
employees experience wide variability in how, if at all, they
could engage TAP participants. This is because no statute or
policy exists that requires installation commanders and site
managers to permit their entry into and participation in any
element of the course. As a result, site managers vary in their
willingness to allow representatives in TAP, and if entry is
permitted, managers also differ in how they will allow them to
interact with attendees.
While not the rule, TAP managers often do not see the value
in having accredited representative present, or they assert
that there simply is not enough time to allow them to speak to
service members. We have even been told that we can get better
help from outside of TAP, which is completely false, especially
in the context of needing to meet service members where they
are. As such, the VFW believes VA must utilize representatives
as tools in their TAP toolkit to the maximum practical extent.
Another area of major concern is community connections. The
VFW also believes it is crucial for Congress to clarify how it
defines resources located in communities, as outlined in
Section 1142 of Title 10. Within the Fiscal Year 2019 TAP
reforms, Congress mandated that all transitioning service
members be connected to resources in the communities in which
they plan to live after service. However, DoD is not doing this
consistently or effectively.
As written, the requirement is too ambiguous since the
statute does not articulate how resources should be identified
or what it actually means to connect service members.
Respondents to the VFW's BDD program survey are asked whether
they received those community connections. Between September
2022 and May 2023, one-third of more than 1,000 respondents
indicated that they either were not or did not know if they
received those connections during individualized counseling.
As the law requires, we would like Congress to ensure
connections are being consistently made between transitioning
service members and resources in the communities to which they
are transitioning. One option Congress can designate for
identifying connection points is the National Resource
Directory. This resource contains vetted organizations that
span the transition spectrum from career assistance to
caregiver support. The transition program's generalist nature
is not a flaw of the system, but rather a feature of the
system. TAP is neither designed for nor able to address
everyone's unique needs, so community resources fill the void
that its curriculum cannot. In other words, community
organizations are the transition program's force multiplier,
but only if connections to those organizations are effectively
made. Chairman Van Orden and Ranking Member Levin, this
concludes my testimony. I am prepared to take any questions you
or members of the subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Brittany Dymond Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ms. Dymond. The written statement
of Ms. Dymond will be entered into the hearing record. Mr.
Quinn, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL QUINN

Mr. Quinn. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, distinguished
members of the subpanel--subcommittee, my apologies. I am a
retired sergeant major. I retired November 1, 2017. I am a
little direct. I apologize if that offends anyone. I am
assuming it is okay with Mr. Chairman. TAP is personal to me. I
was a top performer in my entire career. I was promoted first
almost my entire career, special mission units. I led security
for the White House Communications Agency. In my last job, I
led the operations for 17,000 people in 45 countries. I was
planning on doing another 7 years. I brought the list of
assignments home to my former spouse, and she said, yes, I am
not moving. She had moved seven times in 9 years, and she had
finally gotten a good job and was near where she had support.
That goes into the military spouse employment piece as well.
I thought with a top-secret Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI) clearance, my last job, all the intel
experience that I had in the D.C. area, it was going to be a
breeze. I went to TAP and did everything they taught me. I went
to my first job fair and I spent 6 hours talking to 41
employers. All 41 employers said, check our careers page and
apply online, and actually broke contact with me so that I
could not ask follow-on questions.
It was a gut punch. Luckily, a little bit of the sergeant
major came out of me in recruiter number 40, and I said, no,
look back here. How do I follow up with you? They told me to
connect with them on LinkedIn, and I did.
I will tell you, that tool, that resource, it is not social
media. It was a networking tool for me. It was a way to get
information outside of TAP. I dove in. I did over 200
informational interviews to figure out what I wanted to do,
what I was qualified to do, and how I could make myself a best
candidate, and to find the mentors that I needed to open doors
for me.
You know, when we talk about TAP, I will tell you that TAP
was the hardest year of my life. Harder than Iraq, harder than
Afghanistan, Bosnia, Philippines, Guantanamo Bay, because of
the uncertainty at the end, not knowing how I was going to take
care of my family. I had a retirement. When I tell you it is
personal, I mean, I lived it. It is been my life to give back.
What I want to say is that I acknowledge that the four
leaders here that spoke before us are all very passionate and
they are doing their best about the program. I know that the
interagency council is really working hard to improve TAP. I
have seen it improve since 2017 when I got out. Somebody needs
to be in charge. It is an interagency council. They default
back to their own specific elements. You can not hold anybody
accountable if it is not getting fixed. You can not drive
innovation. I sat in on a briefing by a VA, defense fellow at
the VA on May 3rd, and he shared the numbers of people not
attending. The VA can not really do anything about that. No one
is in charge. Somebody has to be in charge of the program for
it to be effective, for it to continue to grow.
Number two, I would say that the military lifecycle
transition was mandated starting back, I believe, in the
Veterans Opportunity to Work (VOW) Act and again in 2017, which
means that service members get transition related training
throughout their entire career, not just the 1 week of training
at the end when it is too much. It is been mandated by
Congress. DoD's never implemented it. There is even a website.
I will tell you that the services are not providing it. If you
provided training at key Permanent Change in Stations (PCSs),
at leadership schools over the course of a career, not only
will it not be the first time they see it, leaders will be able
to mentor their service members and provide access to resources
that they need to find their success.
The third part is TAP delivery. Seven hundred facilitators
around the world reading PowerPoint for 2 to 3 days is
overkill, and how much of that can you really retain? What I
will say is that the pandemic taught us how to be remote. I
will tell you that the vast majority of our transitioning
service members would love to be able to access content
whenever they need it on their mobile devices with some earbuds
in. There should be an Learning Management System (LMS) with
all the training they want. They could take it as often as they
have it. You can track performance along the way, along with on
demand, expert driven classes that they can get live classes
on. That is TAP delivery.
Then the last part is, this is hard coming from the Army,
but we have got to hold DoD accountable. It is comical that if
a soldier, God forbid, does not get their dental checkup, it is
coming down from the installation through all the command
levels, and a first arm's marching them to the dental center.
We can not get people in the TAP training. I recommend holding
them accountable using UCX, Unemployed Compensation for Ex-
Service Members, to track performance and fiscal repercussions.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Michael Quinn Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you. The sergeant major's time has
expired. I now recognize Ms. Kinch for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ABBY KINCH

Ms. Kinch. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting Student
Veterans of America to submit testimony on the topic of the
Transition Assistance Program. I want to talk to you today from
the perspective of a former student veteran representing the
post-911 generation of veterans currently in classrooms across
the country.
While there have been some attempts to improve TAP, the
program is still lacking, particularly when it comes to helping
transitioning service members prepare to use their education
benefits as a means to transition into civilian life.
Primarily, this programmatic deficit is due to a lack of
emphasis placed on the education portion of TAP, which has
manifested culturally within units, as well as impacted the
decisions available when transitioning through higher
education.
First, the transition track of TAP is simply not sufficient
for anyone entering higher education. Imagine a high school
student sitting down with a guidance counselor to prepare for
college. They often start 1, 2, sometimes 4 years out, and
these visits are frequent, including a comprehensive assessment
of majors, college selection, housing, financial aid, and more.
TAP's Education Workshop provides service members with 2 days
or online 240 minutes of counseling without individualized
attention. The deficit brought by this disparity leaves service
members and their families to make sometimes poor decisions
that cost them time and money.
Student veterans are more than twice as likely as
traditional students to change their degree major because of
ill informed decisions or simple unknowns. They are also likely
to incur debt, as more than half are married, more than half
have children, 20 percent are single parents. While they are
successful in the classroom, they often do not take advantage
of opportunities outside of the classroom or on campus because
they feel isolated by age and experience.
If proper interventions started sooner and with more
emphasis on education, degree major changes would be reduced,
the GI bill could be used on longer Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) degrees, and Temporary
Assistance (TA) dollars could be more appropriately used to
take courses that transfer or that are housed in the
destination school.
More holistically, student veterans find that isolation
greatly contributed to transition stress. However, our survey
feedback shows that a vast majority of student veterans felt
TAP did not prepare them for these type of social and
psychological struggles. Combating common feelings of isolation
for student veterans with the camaraderie provided by an SVA
chapter also exposes these students to the larger campus
community. We have noted that student veterans who have engaged
with their SVA chapter are more likely to engage with other
areas of campus.
Additionally, a 2016 survey found that most student
veterans have some level of service-connected disability,
though virtually none at the time were using disability offices
or accommodations to support their academic experience. When
that same study was repeated in 2022, the number of student
veterans utilizing these services had increased to 26 percent.
Not only are SVA chapters a front door to other campus
organizations, but they serve as a gateway to needed campus and
VA services. Most student veterans, unfortunately, do not
discover their SVA chapter until late in their college career.
If veteran service organizations such as SVA connected with
transitioning service members during TAP or earlier, this
timeline to discovering support is shortened, and we may see
real impact that continues beyond immediate transition and
education.
Finally, the culture around the importance of TAP. There is
an imbalance in the emphasis placed on transition tracks,
anecdotally and in response to surveys, some student veterans
report that their unit's culture is unsupportive regarding TAP
and education. Some service members do not understand the
importance of the program because it is not stressed to them by
their command, who themselves do not see TAP as important for
transitioning service members, as was pointed to in the GAO
report.
The short optional track, the lack of involvement of the
Department of Education in the career portion of TAP, and the
minimal discussion of education opportunities post service when
compared to career opportunities, demonstrates to everyone that
higher education is not the intended destination for service
members. Because of this, the education portion of TAP, noting
that service members in large numbers are transitioning through
higher education, must be improved. Not only should TAP begin
earlier in the transition process, but it should be robust
enough to follow a service member from the decision to separate
through education and into a meaningful career. For SVA,
transition services are not a bridge from one point to another,
from inside the DoD to out, but through the entirety of the
transition process to include all departments. Thank you,
Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and the members of
the subcommittee for this opportunity. I look forward to your
questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Abby Kinch Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Dr. Kinch. I now recognize Mr.
Lorraine for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JIM LORRAINE

Mr. Lorraine. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
testify to you today. The topic of veterans employment and
transition is a very important one. We all know that transition
between jobs is one of the most volatile times in a life, but
even more so when you are involved with a change of culture, a
change in routine, a change in location, the loss of
camaraderie, the loss of financial security, and sometimes the
loss of a sense of purpose. Together, this has repeatedly shown
to lead to feelings of hopelessness, and the loss of hope is
one of the largest contributing factors to veteran suicide.
At America's Warrior Partnership, our mission is to partner
with communities to prevent veteran suicide. Ensuring veterans
have purpose and are financially stable are the ultimate issues
that we are here to address today. The greatest indictment of
the military is often how we treat our veterans and the next
generation's watching. When 15-to 17-year-olds see how veterans
are struggling with transition and jobs after service, many
quickly choose not to join the military.
At AWP, we found that most companies did not know how to
utilize or help veterans and their families who were already in
the workforce. In response, AWP began the Corporate Veteran
Initiative (CVI), which is powered by our AWP network
consisting of thousands of partners. Most of them are
communities. CVI raises morale and productivity of the veterans
and helps employee retention and recruitment. It is a win win.
Companies such as Wells Fargo, Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS),
and Peraton, to name a few, have made the choice to act.
For those in transition, underemployment and financial
insecurity are major issues. Programs led in coordination by
the Department of Defense, VA, and DOL have made significant
progress in helping veterans navigate this transition better,
but they have a long way to go. However, most of this process
is DoD heavy, yet, the VA and DOL will be with these former
service members from discharge on. DOL and the VA must play a
bigger role. When everyone's in charge, no one's in charge.
The DOL's Veterans Employment & Training Service, DOL VETS,
has a program called Employee Navigator Partnership Pilot, or
ENPP. Utilizing the ENPP those can look to job markets,
research geographic regions, craft resumes and other pre-career
functions in partnership with major employers and Veterans
Service Organizations (VSOs) to assist. Importantly, ENPP is
open to spouses. ENPP must be expanded and given additional
funding to add more to the communities. I think my colleague
with the VFW said it best.
While the GI bill is well known, the VA Apprenticeship
Program is not. With such a high potential for the
Apprenticeship Program, it needs to be updated and reformed.
First, the VA Apprenticeship Program needs to be updated to a
cost of living paid to the students. Currently, it is a
percentage of what is paid for using the GI Bill. That needs to
end. There should be parity. Second, this program should not in
any way use their GI Bill benefits. The student should not risk
losing their GI bill.
Next, more needs to be done to ensure the cost of
apprenticeships do not fall on the employers, including costs
of certifications and licensures. We must make it easier for
employers to find partners who are participating students.
Finally, I am here to applaud the SkillBridge program and
offer some recommendations. SkillBridge needs to be consistent
across the Department of Defense, available everywhere, and
more companies need to know how this program works and provide
no cost opportunities to transition service members without
excessive bureaucracy. I suggest SkillBridge program moves to
the Department of Labor for a full execution and integration
into the employer space.
Last, I would also like to point out that veterans
protected status is only selected for a few, not open to
everyone. By changing the veterans protected status for all who
served in the National Guard, Reserve, active duty were
discharged in a status other than dishonorable, you can protect
the rights of veteran employees across the board. Again, I
thank you to everyone on the subcommittee, and I look forward
to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jim Lorraine Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Lorraine. The written
statements of Dr. Kinch, Sergeant Major Quinn, and Mr. Lorraine
will all be entered into the hearing record. Thank you. I now
recognize Mr. Luis y Prado for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HERNAN LUIS Y PRADO

Mr. Luis y Prado. Good afternoon, Chairman Van Orden,
Ranking Member Levin, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Hernan Luis y Prado, the founder and CEO of
Workshops for Warriors, headquartered in San Diego, California.
I would like to share with you a way to provide those that have
served an opportunity to be trained and placed into dignified,
lifelong careers, increase our military readiness, and continue
serving our Nation.
What got me here? Have you ever struggled or lost your
footing? Do you remember how it felt to suddenly lose a job or
even worse, a loved one? I am a 15-year Navy veteran with
combat tours in Afghanistan and Iraq. I knew that on any given
day, more than 20 of us were dying from suicide. Why was I
losing more friends to suicide than to bombs and bullets
overseas? When you are in the military, you are part of
America's suit of armor. In this purpose-driven tapestry, each
of us knows what is expected and what to expect from others.
When your service ends, you are suddenly ripped out of this
fabric and you find yourself alone, adrift, and without a
mission. The sudden lack of income, purpose, and identity are
overwhelming because you have never been trained or equipped
for this new set of challenges. When I came back from my first
tour in Iraq, many of my injured marines convalescing at
National Naval Medical Center would come to my house, gather in
my garage to tinker with tools and pass the time. Spending time
together made me realize how worried these combat veterans were
about the scariest thing they had ever encountered, their
imminent transition to civilian life.
Our numbers grew, and soon my garage became crowded with
Marines welding, machining, and fabricating, the underpinnings
of manufacturing. This was just a diversion. I needed to find a
long-term solution for the veteran crisis, as well as another
looming problem.
While we were distracted in not one but two wars, China
overtook America and became the world's number one
manufacturing nation. In 2010, China had 56 submarines. By
2030, they will have 76. We need to build three submarines a
year just to catch up. We can currently build one. In short,
manufacturing dominance had long been America's economic and
military backbone, but now it was no longer our superpower. I
began to wonder, could we harness the tremendous human capital
that our veterans contain by retraining them to help America
regain her economic, manufacturing, and military prowess? What
if we gave every veteran the opportunity to rebuild America's
manufacturing workforce, to have a dignified life, to be part
of the American dream? Sounds great, right? I just did not know
how.
In 2006, I was in a mall when I heard a familiar voice call
out, Doc. I turned to see one of my Marines, who I had served
with, coming toward me. He told me that he had lost both of his
legs to an improvised explosive device in Iraq. I remembered
his dream of being a Marine Corps lifer. As he wheeled away
from me, I was devastated. Not just by him, but because he
represented the lost dreams and aspirations of all of my
injured comrades in arms. My knees literally melted, and as I
sank to the ground, I had a life changing epiphany that has
driven my life ever since. I grabbed my wife Rachel's arm and
said, we are going to sell everything we have and do something.
To Rachel's huge credit, she said yes.
We sold our home, vehicles, and cashed in our retirement to
create an advanced manufacturing training center so that our
veterans could be trained for a viable future. We named it
Workshops for Warriors. Workshops for Warriors is the only
accredited nonprofit in the U.S. dedicated to accelerated and
compressed training and placement of veterans and transitioning
service members in welding, fabrication, Computer Numerical
Control (CNC), machining, 3D printing, robotics, and computer
aided design careers. Our graduates leave with nationally
recognized portable and stackable credentials.
I am married, I am married to a statistician and survey
methodologist, so here are the facts. Our school has grown 350
times our original footprint and is about to expand nationally.
Workshops has graduated more than 1,125 veterans, who have
earned more than 12,000 nationally recognized credentials. Our
graduates work in every State of our Nation for companies like
Boeing, SpaceX, and Ford. Since 2011, we have a 94 percent
average placement rate, with an average starting salary of
$60,000 a year.
You could help veterans become America's force multiplier.
We know that TAP and SkillBridge can work. We know that
retraining veterans works, and it could solve our Nation's
manufacturing crisis while giving veterans purpose and an
opportunity to serve our Nation again.
So, what is the issue? Since 2015, 40 percent of Workshops
for Warriors graduates found out about our program through the
Transition Assistance Program. Fifty-six percent attended by
using SkillBridge. For every graduate that used SkillBridge,
three times that number said their command denied their
requests and, as a result, could not enroll.
In January 2023, Deloitte confirmed that America has
803,000 unfilled manufacturing jobs due to lack of skilled
labor, and that number is rising to 2.1 million. We should take
advantage of this to train our veterans to make America the
world's manufacturing and military superpower again. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Hernan Luis Y Prado Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thanks, Doc. By the way, my title used to be
HMCS Van Orden in case you were wondering. That means you are
cleaning the toilets when we get done here, Prado.
Mr. Luis y Prado's testimony, written statement will now be
entered into the record.
Before we get started with this questioning here, I would
like to recognize someone who is sitting in the front row
there, Mr. Romesha, Staff Sergeant, 1H Medal of Honor
recipient. Just made me smile.
All right, we will now start our questions. I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
My number one legislative priority is to prevent veteran
suicide. That is what I am doing. I have got an email on my
desk. It was written to me by a service member's brother who
committed suicide. I spent my first day in Congress calling his
widow, his brother, and his father and apologizing for the
department or the Federal Government's inability to schedule a
medical appointment.
My Ranking Member Levin's number one legislative priority
is preventing veterans homelessness. I am afraid that we catch
up on these things too late. What we are talking about here and
what you are discussing is an upstream solution, because once
someone has food insecurity or they are living in a bush on a
corner, it is so much harder to get that back. I want you to
know that we are taking this exceptionally seriously. That is
why we went to your district in California in Oceanside, home
of the Marines.
There are a couple of things here I just want to point out,
Sergeant Major and Mr. Lorraine. Sergeant Major, you said
someone must be in charge. Mr. Lorraine, you echoed that
comment, and that is what I started with when we were speaking
with our Department of Defense folks here. Someone has to be in
charge. We just have to, or things do not work.
We have Senior Executive Services (SESs). We have got all
these people making a ton of money. I do not know how many
people are associated with these different programs, how many
agencies, and phone calls, and no one knows what is going on.
It gives everybody the excuse to get nothing done. That has got
to stop.
I do not agree, Mr. Lorraine, that this should be a
Department of Labor issue. I think that this should reside with
the Veterans Affairs Committee and with the Veterans Affairs
Administration. This is why, because every single day we get
up, this is all we think about. That is it. The Department--
ma'am, you came to my office and I appreciate that greatly. I
do not have heartburn with you at all.
What I have heartburn with is the Department of Defense
appears to be dragging their feet with this. Lots of times they
think that we are shanking people out of the military. That is
not the case. My brothers in Naval Special Warfare produced
this fantastic transition program. It clearly demonstrates
unequivocally that by providing an off ramp into the civilian
community, you are not making people get out of the military
sooner. What you are doing is preventing them from killing
themselves and becoming homeless and drug addicts and
alcoholics.
That is what we are here to do. You may not be aware of
this but when you joined the Navy or the Army, the Navy, or the
Army, Air Force signed you up for a 30-year career. There is
something called the enlisted ladder that lays out very clearly
from day one of boot camp until you retire as an E-9, Sergeant
Major, or Command Master Chief. This has to be integrated into
that program. Then it becomes programmatic.
That is something, sir, that we can tie directly to the
performance results of these officers. Until officers start
getting fired for this, and senior enlisted people start
getting fired for this, and SESs start getting fired for this,
it is not going to change. We all know, anybody that spent 5
seconds in the military knows that. I am going to ask you just
one by one here, Ms. Dymond, if you could be queen of the world
for a day, who would you put in charge of running the
Transition Assistance Program?
Ms. Dymond. I would most likely say the VA, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Quinn, excuse me, Sergeant Major.
Mr. Quinn. The VA.
Mr. Van Orden. Doctor.
Ms. Kinch. The VA.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Lorraine.
Mr. Lorraine. The VA. Sir, I said the ENPP program should
move--or sorry, the SkillBridge----
Mr. Van Orden. SkillBridge----
Mr. Lorraine [continuing]. program should move to labor.
Mr. Van Orden. Yes, oh, I understand.
Mr. Lorraine. Not the----
Mr. Van Orden. I am with you.
Mr. Lorraine [continuing]. transition. Okay.
Mr. Van Orden. I still disagree. That is all right.
Mr. Lorraine. Okay.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Luis y Prado.
Mr. Luis y Prado. The Department----
Mr. Van Orden. I would start with the Department, then a
person. Why are you looking for a job? Apparently you are busy
already, Doc.
Mr. Luis y Prado. Not me, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Did you hear that?
Mr. Luis y Prado. Not me. I know some people that would be
very capable----
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Luis Y Prado.--who could help us with that.
Mr. Van Orden. Which department do you think they should
fall under?
Mr. Luis y Prado. DoD, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Let the record reflect that every single
member of this panel thinks that the Veterans Administration
should be in charge of the Transition Assistance Program. With
that, I yield back. I recognize my Ranking Member, Mr. Levin,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, chairman. I thank Mr. Luis y Prado
for making the journey from San Diego to Washington D.C. today.
A journey I am quite familiar with every week. Thank you for
your expertise as well. Hearing from experts like you is really
important. You are on the ground. You are serving veterans
every day. Hearing from you and seeing what you are
experiencing is really critical for the work of the
subcommittee.
You urge greater SkillBridge participation. How would you
suggest we drive more employers to participate in SkillBridge?
Mr. Luis y Prado. Ranking Member, it is not a question of
employers per se. I would say it is the wraparound services
required. It is difficult to focus on studying if you are
focusing on survival. The wraparound services are the most
impactful way to move a transitioning service member into a
viable, lifelong career. For example, we had 21 national
employers at our last job fair. Every one of our graduates got
a job. It is never the employers that are the issue. It is how
do we take care of the young men and women that have served to
provide them the wraparound services, the housing?
You can not study if you do not know where you are going to
put your head at night, if you are starving. We have had to
purchase housing, buy a restaurant so you can feed people. We
call it Forward Operating Base (FOB) San Diego. You can not
focus on what you are trying to do if you do not know where you
are going to put your head down. I h would say the wraparound
service is the most important part of that, sir.
Mr. Levin. Gotcha. I appreciate that very much. The Warrior
Training Advancement Course, WARTAC, a really good opportunity
for transitioning service members and often leads to employment
at one of Veteran Benefits Administration's (VBA's) regional
offices. Would you support more programs similar to WARTAC and
other Federal Government agencies for transitioning service
members?
Mr. Luis y Prado. I would support any program that actually
holds schools and commands accountable with objectively
verifiable metrics such as job placement, average starting
salaries, nationally recognized credentials, time to hire. We
need to have, I believe, objectively measured, and tracked
metrics so we can track the effectiveness of an organization or
their outputs.
Mr. Levin. Before I turn to others, I just wanted to expand
a bit on the chairman's question about which agency should be
in charge. I heard the four of you say VA. I heard you say DoD,
and I wanted to ask you your rationale.
Mr. Luis y Prado. DoD has people in uniform that can be
held accountable. I think right now the biggest challenge is
that the DoD Contracting Officers (COs) do not understand how
they can navigate the friction between unit readiness, a gapped
billet, and their responsibility toward helping the service
members that are transitioning from their unit get into a
lifelong, useful career so they can maintain their communities
and rebuild our Nation. If you are able to provide them an
opportunity by having some higher cover and saying, if you move
this person into SkillBridge earlier, you will get that billet
back. I think that would be the easiest way of making this work
forward, because the people that go through our SkillBridge
program are almost four times more likely to make it through
the program than someone that is not.
Mr. Levin. I appreciate that. When you look at the mission
statements of the two entities, DoD is, again is to provide the
military forces needed to deter war and ensure nation's
security.
Mr. Luis y Prado. Yes, sir.
Mr. Levin. VA is to fulfill President Lincoln's promise to
care for those who have served our Nation's military and for
their families, caregivers, and survivors. Same question for
you that I had for the last panel. Which do you think more
adequately encompasses transition?
Mr. Luis y Prado. I believe----
Mr. Levin. It is not a trick question, I promise.
Mr. Luis y Prado.--the VA should have overall
accountability. There should be a much tighter accountability
with the DoD units that we need to mandate and control that
they actually send their people to SkillBridge. I agree that
the VA should hold onto it, but there has to be much tighter
collaboration and accountability between the DoD and the VA.
Mr. Levin. Got it. I think that is where we are heading
with all this. Ms. Dymond, I will turn to you. You noted that
the initial year following transition poses increased risk of
suicide for new veterans. Can you speak to the risk factors
that contribute to this trend and any protective factors that
can alleviate it?
Ms. Dymond. Mr. Ranking Member, absolutely. Thank you for
the question. In the short time we have remaining, we need to
look at the social determinants of health. The protective
factors. Do they have a roof over their head? Do they have food
in their stomach? Can they take care of themselves and their
families? Basic needs to be met. Basic needs need to be met.
In addition, as Mr. Crane noted, we also need to make sure
that service members understand the challenges inherent with
transition when we are talking about the loss of social support
and the network that you have inherent in the military and
ensuring that we are facilitating connections appropriately to
community resources so that they can get those connections.
Also, connections to benefits is vital.
Mr. Levin. I am out of time. I would just end by saying
that, as the chairman mentioned, his top priority, ending
veteran suicide. Mine ending veteran homelessness. Although
both, I think, are incredibly important to us both. Improving
transition and the work that you are all doing is vital to both
of our objectives. This is very high stakes, very important,
and we really appreciate the work that you do, and I will yield
back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin. I now
recognize Mr. Crane for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Thank you guys for coming today. As I told the last panel, this
is a very important topic to me, and I thank you for all the
work that you guys are doing on this issue. I want to start
with Dr. Kinch. Did I pronounce that correctly? Thank you. All
right. Does Student Veterans of America have any recommendation
to the education track that could improve how transitioning
service members use their GI eligibility and make sure to make
the correct choice?
Ms. Kinch. Yes. Thank you so much for that question. We
have to start considering the education benefit as soon as
someone decides to utilize tuition assistance while in service,
because those credits will largely dictate where, how, and when
someone can continue to use credits post service or post
transition using the GI bill. If someone does not complete a
degree using tuition assistance and they have gone somewhere
with credits that we will say are largely untransferable, they
have then wasted that money using tuition assistance and have
to start over using their GI bill.
Student veterans largely go to 4-year public universities.
Understanding the behavior of service members in higher
education as well as veterans in higher education and
understanding the transition there would be the first step. We
do have a lot of ideas.
Mr. Crane. Okay. Can somebody maybe we can start with you,
Dr. Kinch, or anybody on this panel help me understand what
other opportunities are available for veterans who have paid
into their GI bill who might not want to go to a 4-year
university, higher education, et cetera? Mr. Luis y Prado?
Mr. Luis y Prado. Vocational training programs that lead to
nationally recognized credentials, I would say would be my
number one pick. It is an easy way for people to get average
starting salary jobs of $60,000 a year, and most importantly,
it rebuilds America's manufacturing capability and readiness.
Every single graduating class that I have had since 2008, I ask
them the same question, when America goes to war again, sea
lanes are cut, and we need DoD facilities to rebuild everything
that is hard and metal that goes overseas. I want you to report
to your closest DoD facility to help rebuild our manufacturing
infrastructure. Would anybody here object? In 15 years, I have
yet to hear a ``no.'' They are all people that have a clear
purpose, which is why they joined the military. If you provide
them compressed training, nationally recognized credentials,
they are happy to engage and rebuild our manufacturing
infrastructure.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. Dr. Kinch, real quick, is there any
pushback from any of the VSOs up here on giving veterans more
of a choice, more options on how to use their GI bill?
Ms. Kinch. Thank you for that. As far as I know, the
options are extremely robust, and a majority of folks who
enlist do so for the education benefits on the other side to
obtain a college degree. You can use education benefits for a
number of opportunities, like my colleague said, vocational
opportunities. You can get your pilot's license. There are a
number of things that you can use those benefits for.
Mr. Crane. Just to put you on the spot, ma'am, can you run
me through five or six of those if you know them off the top of
your head?
Ms. Kinch. I would be happy to get that to you after this
hearing.
Mr. Crane. Okay. All right. The reason I am pushing and the
reason I ask is because I am big on choice. Like Mr. Luis y
Prado, when I was getting out, I had the wise idea to start a
bottle opening company, of all things. I was working out of my
garage with a bunch of other active-duty veterans. It is where
I found out, sir, that you cannot make a corkscrew in the
United States of America. It blew me away. All of them are made
overseas. I love what you are doing. As far as trying to bring
back manufacturing into this country. Unfortunately, I do not
think it is a workforce issue. I think it is a politician
issue, and shipping a lot of our manufacturing overseas, which
is very, very disheartening. I do want to see veterans have the
opportunity, you know, when possible, to use their GI Bill,
which they paid into if they decide, or if a 4-year higher
education track is not what they are looking for. Mr. Lorraine.
Ms. Kinch. Sir.
Mr. Crane. Go ahead, ma'am.
Ms. Kinch. I just wanted to clarify the current iteration
as well as the post-911 GI bill are not paid into.
Mr. Crane. Oh, really?
Ms. Kinch. Yes.
Mr. Crane. Interesting. Okay.
Mr. Lorraine. Just really--I brought up apprenticeships.
Apprenticeships are opportunities that are a GI bill-like
program. The problem is that the housing stipend decreases over
time, makes it unattractive.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Van Orden. You are welcome, Mr. Crane. I appreciate it
greatly. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin, for correcting that.
Apparently, I am a little older than you, Doc, because I swear
I heard VA. Son of a--hey, but we will sit down and talk about
this, and I think you will see the clarity of thought there.
Mr. Luis y Prado. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. I want to thank you all. I want to thank you
all for coming. I really do. This is an incredibly important
topic, and you guys are doing the work, and gals, you are doing
the work, and I am just so proud of you. We owe each other a
debt that does not get repaid. It simply does not.
If we can, through our work up here with your work out
there and with you guys in the back and I was yelling at you,
sir, from the DoD, if all of us can get together and prevent
one veteran from committing suicide and preventing one veteran
from winding up sleeping in a bush, then all of this is worth
it. I want to thank you very much.
I want you also to understand that we are not done with
TAP. We will be working--bless you--we will be working
diligently to make sure that we can get the best product to the
most amount of people, to our brothers and sisters that have
served this country. Again, thank you very much. With that,
Ranking Member Levin, do you have any closing comments?
Mr. Levin. I just want to thank everybody for the work they
do each and every day that is often overlooked. It is
incredibly important, and we are grateful for it. I thank the
chairman for his outstanding hearing today.
Mr. Van Orden. All right. I ask unanimous consent that all
members may have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their
remarks and include extraneous materials.
Without objection, so ordered. This hearing stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Alex Baird

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and distinguished members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
for this oversight hearing on the Transition Assistance Program (TAP).
The Department is committed to supporting our Warfighters and their
families as they navigate the transition from military to civilian
life. Required for all Service members with 180 days or more of
continuous active duty, TAP is the essential foundation of that
support, setting the conditions for successful transition. Each year,
TAP provides approximately 200,000 Service members with a common level
of support--regardless of location, Service, or component--at over 200
locations around the globe. The over-arching result is that today's TAP
provides Service members and their spouses more comprehensive
transition preparation, information, support, and services than at any
time during our Nation's history.
TAP provides broad-ranging information, training, resources, and
support that effectively prepares Service members for success as they
navigate through the challenges and opportunities presented during the
transition from active duty to civilian life. This support enables and
empowers Service members to leverage their skills, knowledge, and
abilities to reach their full potential, achieve individual post-
transition goals, and continue to serve our Nation as successful
Veterans who strengthen their communities.
Since its inception in 1991, TAP has undergone sweeping changes.
These changes have ensured that TAP is relevant, progressive, and ever-
improving to meet the needs of the transitioning Service member
population. TAP's design ensures both flexibility and relevance. The
flexibility afforded by the current TAP design, allowing tailoring of
the transition process to individual needs and goals, ensures that
Service members receive information and resources that best support
individualized preparation for transition. The relevance of TAP,
focused on preparation for civilian life, ensures Service member buy-in
and active participation. The effectiveness of this programmatic
flexibility and relevance makes the Department and the TAP Interagency
Partnership confident in saying that TAP works.
TAP works in large part because of the dynamic TAP interagency
Partnership, a best-in-class example of effective Federal agency
collaboration and service delivery. Seven Federal agencies and the
Military Services comprise the TAP Interagency Partnership. The
Interagency Partnership is a formal collaborative body committed to
supporting and facilitating success for transitioning Service members
to civilian life by providing synergy, consistency, and synchronization
in TAP design and delivery. TAP delivery is a collaborative effort
between the Department of Defense and the Military Services, the
Department of Labor, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Small
Business Administration, each with a primary area of responsibility and
focus. TAP succeeds due to a robust interagency collaboration among the
four agencies and Military Services listed above, along with program
development and oversight support from three additional agencies - the
Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Education, and the
U.S. Office of Personnel Management.
TAP is an individualized, robust program with alternate pathways
and multiple levels of assistance. Each step of the process is guided
by trained counselors, allowing Service members to be in control of
their transition and use programs, resources, and information that fit
their specific needs and align with their post-transition goals.
TAP begins with an Initial Counseling (IC) session initiated no
later than 365 days prior to separation, with retirees strongly
encouraged to begin TAP 24 months prior to retirement. During the
individualized counseling session with a trained TAP counselor, a
Service member completes a personal self-assessment and begins
development of an Individual Transition Plan (ITP). Based on the
personal self-assessment and counseling, the TAP counselor assigns the
Service member to a transition tier level. The assigned tier level--one
(minimal assistance), two (medium assistance), or three (most
assistance)--determines the transition assistance a Service member
needs. Each individual Service member's tier alignment details which
TAP components, courses, and Career Readiness Standards (CRS) are
mandatory. While the required elements associated with each tier are
standardized, each Service delivers a Service-specific self-assessment,
allowing maximum flexibility and alignment with the individual Service
culture.
Once the IC is complete, the Service member attends the Pre-
Separation Counseling Brief (Pre-Sep). Pre-Sep informs the Service
member of various services, benefits, and resources available during
and after transition. The Pre-Sep also familiarizes the Service member
with available resources and content within the TAP courses. This
provides the Service member with the knowledge and flexibility to
determine when to use services based on individual needs and timeline
for transition. Regardless of tier level, five core courses are
mandatory for all transitioning Service members: Managing Your
Transition, Military Occupational Code Crosswalk, Financial Planning
for Transition, VA Benefits and Services, and DOL Employment
Fundamentals for Career Transition.
Along with the core curriculum, TAP includes four two-day courses
(tracks) to provide focused information and resources that are aligned
with specific post-transition goals. The four tracks are employment,
vocational, education, and entrepreneurship. Regardless of tier,
Service members must elect a track based on individual post-transition
goals and are encouraged to attend the track-specific course. However,
only those determined as Tier Level 3 are required to attend the
elected track. Military Departments may exempt Service members
determined as Tier Level 2 from track attendance based on the results
of their self-assessment and IC. Service members determined as Tier
Level 1 are exempt from track attendance, but are strongly encouraged
to attend their elected track. While Service members must elect one
track during IC, the Department strongly encourages attendance at any
additional track(s) that would provide valuable information for their
transition.
Conducted no later than 90 days before transition from active duty,
Capstone is the final component of TAP. During Capstone, the Commander
or Commander's Designee reviews the Service member's transition journey
to determine completion of all applicable components. Not fulfilling
one of the identified components requires a warm handover by the
Commander or designee. A warm handover facilitates the Service members'
transition to the appropriate interagency partner such as the
Department of Veterans Affairs or the Department of Labor. It is
designed to create a connection between the Service member and the
appropriate partner or agency with the resources to assist in
transition and beyond. Service members may also request a warm handover
from the TAP counselor.
The Department uses the Transition Assistance Participant
Assessment (TAPA) to capture Service member experiences and knowledge
gained. TAPA, along with diverse assessments from both governmental and
non-governmental entities, allows the TAP Interagency Partnership to
evaluate TAP, the perception of TAP, and the quality of the counseling
and instruction provided. The TAPA measures participants' knowledge of
the information presented during training and compiles participant
satisfaction on the quality of instruction, content, and facilities.
The TAPA also captures basic demographics, such as gender.
Participation in the TAPA is voluntary and anonymous. However, the
Department encourages Service members to complete the TAPA after each
TAP course.
For an effective TAP, Service members must obtain training relevant
to their individual post-transition goals. To assess the effectiveness
of TAP, the Department examines whether Service members take the track
associated with their post-transition goal and complete the associated
CRS. For example, if a Service member indicates employment as a post-
transition goal, the Service member may elect to attend the DOL
Employment Track and provide a completed resume to meet the CRS.
Attendance at the track aligned with the identified post-transition
goal provides the necessary training for successful transition. To
evaluate the effectiveness of the training, the Department analyzes the
elected track, track attendance, alignment with post-transition goal,
and the completed CRS data points.
Military-to-civilian transition is an ever-evolving, complex, and
multi-faceted environment in which individual goals can be as unique as
each transitioning Service member. TAP is, and must remain, adaptive
while vigilantly maintaining programmatic focus on two foundational and
complimentary tenets: effective counseling and Service member buy-in.
Correspondingly, TAP will sustain emphasis on an individualized
approach that best meets Service member's post-transition goals. To
that end, TAP will remain innovative, responsive, transparent, and
collaborative. The Department, working closely with the Service
members, Military Services, interagency partners, and non-governmental
entities, and Congress, will continuously improve transition services
and support. Together, the TAP interagency partners will build on
current successes and achieve ever-improving outcomes for TAP-eligible
Service members from all Components. This will be achieved by providing
agile, adaptive, and individualized support and services, and address
barriers that inhibit a successful transition to civilian life.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, the Ranking Member, and the
members of this Subcommittee for your outstanding and continuing
support of the men and women who proudly wear the uniform in defense of
our great Nation.
______

Prepared Statement of Cheryl Rawls

Chairman Derrick Van Orden, Ranking Member Mike Levin, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity
to appear before you today to discuss the Transition Assistance Program
(TAP) and what steps should be made to continue modernizing and
reforming the program. I want to express my appreciation for your
continued support of the Nation's Veterans, their families, caregivers
and survivors. Within VA, our focus is on increasing transparency,
improving collaboration, and keeping Veterans at the center of
everything we do. This mission is personal and professional for me,
having previously served my country and now serving Veterans, their
loved ones and caregivers through VA.

Transition Assistance Program

Established in 1991, TAP is an interagency effort designed to help
more than 200,000 transitioning Service members annually. Together with
the Department of Defense (DoD), Department of Labor (DOL), the Small
Business Administration (SBA), the Department of Homeland Security, the
Department of Education, the Office of Personnel Management and other
agencies, we equip Service members with the tools they need to succeed
in civilian life, and we connect them with the benefits and services
they have earned and deserve. In partnership, we take a comprehensive
approach to care, ensuring TAP is a tailored program that evolves with
the changing needs of transitioning Service members.
To that end, TAP has a robust governance structure under the
Transition Assistance Program Executive Council (TAP-EC) and Joint
Executive Committee (JEC). The TAP-EC is comprised of multiple working
groups that provide oversight and input into course curriculum, data
sharing, employment, performance management, the Reserve Component,
strategic communications, and available supportive services. The JEC
co-chaired by the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness and the Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs serves as the
primary Federal interagency body for overseeing transition assistance
activities for Active and Reserve Component Service members.
Recent legislative changes in the transition space, including the
``John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2019'' (NDAA 2019), P.L. 115-232, have been impactful. Requiring
Service members to begin TAP no later than 365 days prior to separation
or release from active duty, and as soon as possible in the 24 months
prior to retirement has underscored the importance of engaging in
conversations about transition early and often. Shortly after NDAA 2019
was enacted on August 13, 2018, VA, in concert with our TAP interagency
partners, approved the Military to Civilian Readiness (M2C Ready)
Pathway, a joint agency effort designed to better connect Service
members, Veterans and their families with available resources to
support their transition.

Military to Civilian Readiness (M2C Ready)

In alignment with and in support of Presidential goals to improve
the customer experience across Federal programs, the JEC approved the
M2C Ready framework in September 2019. M2C Ready defines transition as
365-days pre-and 365-days post-separation. M2C Ready meets and builds
upon several components of the President's Management Agenda. The
framework ensures that transitioning Service members, recently
separated Service members and Veterans (1) receive comprehensive,
standardized and individualized assessments across VA and DoD, (2) are
informed and educated about all post-separation VA, DOL and DoD
benefits and services they are eligible for, (3) are equipped with the
tools they need to succeed and reintegrate into their communities and
(4) achieve sustainable economic well-being.

VA TAP Curriculum

TAP consists of five core curricula shared among the interagency
partners. These courses are developed and maintained through these
partnerships to ensure continuity, consistency and relevance while
reducing redundancy for the transitioning Service members. VA, DoD, DOL
and SBA collaborate through an annual evaluation process by reviewing
and approving the TAP curricula through the interagency governance
structure. Each agency is responsible for the delivery or facilitation
of its curriculum.
The 1-day VA Benefits and Services (BAS) course helps Service
members and their families understand how to navigate the resources
within VA, including how to access the benefits and services they have
earned through their military careers. More specifically, the BAS
course provides the skills, resources and tools needed to support
emotional and physical health; career readiness; and economic stability
in civilian life. During FY 2022 (FY 2022), VA Benefits Advisors
delivered the BAS course to 160,916 transitioning Service members
during an in-person classroom environment and to 84,795 transitioning
Service members on a virtual platform. In addition, in FY 2022, VA
Benefits Advisors conducted 335,761 individual touchpoints, following
the 1-day BAS course, with Service members, military spouses,
caregivers and survivors across all VA's transition assistance
offerings at over 300 military installations worldwide. The BAS course
currently has a 97.3 percent satisfaction rating for in-person course
delivery. VA continues to seek opportunities for improvement by
conducting site visits, quality assurance evaluations and, most
recently, Human Centered Design research to channel direct Service
member and Veteran feedback about the transition experience into
action.
In addition to the BAS course, Service members and their families
may access Military Life Cycle (MLC) modules to access information
about VA's benefits and services at their own pace and when they need
that information most. MLC modules are 45-to 60-minute information
sessions that can be taken anytime throughout a Service member's
career. The sessions are especially valuable after major events such as
permanent changes of station, marriage or the birth of a child. Each
MLC module addresses a specific in-depth topic. In FY 2022, 5,280
Service members participated in MLCs. Available MLC modules include:

Reserve Component Dual Payments

Social and Emotional Health Resources

Survivor and Casualty Assistance Resources

VA Benefits 101

VA Education Benefits

VA Home Loan Guaranty Program

VA Life Insurance Benefits

Vet Centers

Community Integration Resources

VA Education and Training Benefits for Spouses and
Dependents

Mental Health for Families

Disability Compensation

Future micro-learning opportunities will cover topics related to
Other than Honorable (OTH) discharge; lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and queer plus (LGBTQ+) specific benefits; and services
available to military spouses and families and will incorporate
insights from our Human Centered Design research. In FY 2022, 5,490
military spouses, caregivers and Veterans attended BAS briefings, as
well as accessed MLC modules in person or online through TAP
events.mil. A Common Access Card-enabled device is not required to
access the courses. VA Benefits Advisors also are available through
one-on-one assistance sessions to answer questions, explain benefits
and connect spouses to helpful resources, including education and
employment benefits.

Women's Health Transition Training

The Women's Health Transition Training (WHTT) is a five-phase web-
based training course that can be taken anytime, anywhere and is open
to all Service women and women Veterans. Topics include transitioning
to civilian life, health benefits (emphasizing women-specific needs),
mental well-being, managing health care, eligibility and transition
assistance resources

Separation Health Assessment

The Separation Health Assessment is an initiative of the VA/DoD
that JEC designed to yield mutual benefits in support of Service
members during separation. The objective is to establish a consistent
opportunity for Service members to discuss events, illnesses and
injuries incurred or aggravated during service. Service members must
meet statutory and policy requirements for a Separation Health
Assessment before transitioning from active-duty service. To ensure
Service members' health care needs are addressed before separating, VA
and DoD screen for medical retainability and provide final
documentation in the service treatment record that VA can use to help
determine service connections in evaluating future disability claims.
In January 2022, the Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness signed a new
Memorandum of Agreement on Separation Health Assessments that details
the joint partnership for consistent application of the Separation
Health Assessment. The VA-DoD agreement includes continuity of health
care (physical and mental) and improvements to transition support
plans. The Departments are committed to improving the efficiency of the
separation examination process for transitioning Service members.

Enhanced Statement of Benefits

In September 2020, the JEC approved the concept of an enhanced
individualized statement of benefits at discharge. The Enhanced
Statement of Benefits will provide transitioning Service members and/or
recently separated Veterans with personalized information about their
specific benefits and services statement, based on their input and in
one centralized application. The TAP Executive Council approved the
implementation plan in March 2021 and is presently in the program
development phase.

VA Health Care Support for Transitioning Service Members

The health and overall well-being of Veterans is a top priority. VA
recognizes that the first year of transition out of military service is
crucial for Service members and Veterans. The first year following
discharge from active-duty service, in particular, may pose significant
challenges, including homelessness, difficulties with family
reintegration, unemployment, posttraumatic stress disorder and
substance use, which can increase the risk for suicide. Veterans and
former Service members with an OTH discharge in acute suicidal crisis
are eligible for emergent suicide care in VA facilities and in the
community. In addition, ongoing mental health care is available to
former Service members with an OTH discharge, including reservists, who
meet the eligibility criteria in 38 U.S.C. Sec.  1720I. This important
information and other mental health resources and care are shared with
transitioning Service members and Veterans at multiple touchpoints
throughout their transition journey.
VA programs like the VA Liaison and Post 9/11 Transition and Case
Management bridge the gap between DoD and the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) to support transitioning Service members and Post
9/11 era Veterans.

VA Solid Start

The VA Solid Start program launched on December 2, 2019, as part of
the M2C Ready Pathway, to make early, consistent and caring contact
with newly separated Veterans. VA Solid Start proactively calls all
eligible Veterans at three key stages (90-, 180-and 365-days post-
separation) during their first year after separation from active duty.
Using data provided by DoD, VA Solid Start provides priority contact to
Veterans meeting certain mental health risk factors, helping to target
and provide access and continuity of care for mental health. VA Solid
Start representatives address challenges the Veteran may be facing at
the time of the call by connecting the Veteran with the appropriate
benefit or resources for assistance. These representatives receive
special training to recognize the signs of crisis and, when needed, can
provide a direct transfer to the Veterans Crisis Line for additional
support.
In FY 2022, VA Solid Start successfully connected with 175,369
recently separated Veterans, surpassing its goal of a 50 percent
successful connection rate by achieving a rate of 64 percent. As a
subset of this group, VA Solid Start successfully connected with
29,042, or 78 percent, of eligible Priority Veterans, helping to lower
the barrier to accessing mental health care. On October 17, 2022, the
Solid Start Act of 2022 was signed into law (P.L. 117-205), permanently
authorizing VA to expand the Solid Start Program with DoD coordination.
VBA will continue to utilize multi-channel engagement efforts to
further improve the successful connection rates with all VASS-eligible
Veterans.

Network of Support Pilot

The Veterans Comprehensive Prevention, Access to Care, and
Treatment Act of 2020 (Veterans COMPACT Act of 2020), P.L. 116-214, was
signed into law on December 5, 2020. The Veterans COMPACT Act of 2020
calls for a pilot program that allows Veterans to designate up to ten
people to receive information on specified services and benefits from
VA. The intent of the program is to provide each Veteran with a Network
of Support made up of friends and family members they select who can
help them better understand and apply for the benefits they have
earned. The Network of Support pilot was launched in December 2021 and
will run through December 2023. During FY 2022, VA developed and
obtained Office of Management and Budget approval for the required
survey, which was conducted in December 2022 and will be conducted
again December 2023.

Personalized Career Planning and Guidance

Personalized Career Planning and Guidance (PCPG), also known as
Chapter 36, fulfills 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3697A by supporting transitioning
Service members, Veterans and qualified dependents by offering
personalized career and academic counseling to achieve goals and
ensuring the use of VA benefits. Since the inception of the PCPG
program in FY 2021, PCPG has provided career and academic services to
over 6,000 transitioning Service Members, Veterans and eligible
dependents. Currently, for FY 2023, PCPG has received 4,700
applications.

VA SkillBridge

VA SkillBridge successfully launched in February 2020 and focuses
on supporting Service members who are entering into careers with VA. VA
SkillBridge provides Active Duty transitioning Service members with
employment training, internship and apprenticeship opportunities during
their last 180 days of service. The program offers valuable civilian
work experience to better prepare Active duty transitioning Service
members for post-separation employment. VA SkillBridge is executed in
partnership with DoD and, since its launch in February 2020, VA has
engaged with 44 organizations that have either established or are
interested in establishing a VA SkillBridge program for transitioning
Service members. There are currently 20 VA entities that have cohorts
in progress for transitioning Service members under the Memorandum of
Understanding.

Additional Post Separation Touchpoints

The last step of the M2C Ready Pathway ensures continuity of
support during the 365 days post-transition and beyond. This step
starts with person-to-person connections via warm handovers, where the
interagency partner acknowledges that an eligible Service member
requires post-military assistance. In agreement, the interagency
partner follows through on assisting the needs of the Service member,
mitigating risk and assisting the Service member in attaining post-
transition goals and a successful transition.
The Transition Service Member Resource Connection (TSMRC) Pilot
launched in May 2022 and has 30 DoD military installation participants.
TSMRC provides a single point of entry for DoD TAP Managers who
initiate a warm handover to VA during Capstone (90 days before
separation). This single point of entry allows for near real-time
tracking and validation of warm handover connections. It also supports
warm handovers to VA in areas of education, disability compensation,
healthcare, housing, mental health resources and other VA services.
During the course of the pilot, 100 percent (116) of transitioning
Service members who needed a warm handover were connected to VA by DoD
TAP Managers. The pilot was recently expanded (on March 1, 2023) to
support DoD's pilot, the Enterprise Individual Self-Assessment (EISA),
which is expected to run until the spring of 2024.

Sexual Trauma Health Care Assistance

The Sexual Trauma Working Group was formally established as a JEC
Independent Working Group in alignment with the VA-DoD Joint Strategic
Plan for FY 2019-FY 2021. In FY 2022, this working group outlined three
priorities to address: Sexual Trauma Health Care Assistance, Sexual
Trauma Benefits Assistance and Sexual Trauma Transition Assistance.
Ultimately, the primary focus of the Sexual Trauma Working Group is to
maintain a standard of coordinated care for Service members who
experience sexual trauma during military service. This focus includes
connections and coordination between DoD Sexual Assault Response
Coordinators and VHA Military Sexual Trauma Coordinators, as well as
annual training to educate Sexual Assault Response Coordinators about
VA services.

Statutory Updates

Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and
Benefits Improvement Act of 2020

On January 5, 2021, the Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D.
Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-
315) was signed into law and included several provisions related to
transition assistance.
Section 4304 requires the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to make
grants available to eligible organizations that specialize in providing
transition services to former Service members who are separated,
retired or discharged, as well as to their spouses. These transition
services consist of resume assistance, interview training, job
recruitment training and related services leading to a successful
transition. VA is working rigorously to meet all requirements of this
section to develop the framework for a robust Veteran Transitional
Assistance Grant Program. VA continues the process to hire staff,
establish a Grants Management Office and implement a technology
solution. We anticipate the program will be fully implemented in early
FY 2024.
Section 4305 requires the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in
consultation with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Labor,
Administrator of the SBA, and the Secretaries of the military
departments, to enter into an agreement with an appropriate entity that
has experience in adult education to conduct a 1-year independent
assessment of TAP. This assessment has been completed and currently is
pending final signatures before submission to Congress.
Section 4306 requires the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in
consultation with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Labor, and
the Administrator of SBA, to conduct a 5-year longitudinal study on
three cohorts who are going through TAP and are defined by specific
attributes. VA is leveraging the Post-Separation Transition Assessment
(PSTAP) Outcomes to meet the requirements of section 4306. PSTAP is a
multi-year study to analyze the effect of TAP participation. It seeks
to assess the long-term outcomes of Veterans in the broad life domains
of employment; education; health and social relationships; financial;
overall satisfaction; and well-being. The first annual Congressional
progress report for section 4306 is pending final signatures for
submission to Congress.

Commander John Scott Hannon Veterans Mental Health Improvement Act
of 2019

The Commander John Scott Hannon Veterans Mental Health Care
Improvement Act of 2019 (P.L. 116-171) was signed into law on October
17, 2020, and includes provisions regarding mental health care and
suicide prevention programs. The Act includes seven titles with 34
sections.
Title I of the Act covers improvement of transition of individuals
to services from VA and requires a 5-year (FY 2015-2020) retrospective,
joint VA/DoD review of records of each former Service member who died
by suicide within 1 year of their release from Active Duty. In
completing this review with respect to a former member of the Armed
Forces, DoD and VA must consider whether DoD had identified the former
member as being at elevated risk of suicide during the 365 days before
separation and, in the case the member was identified as being at
elevated risk, whether that was communicated by DoD to VA via the Solid
Start initiative or any other means. The JEC co-chairs chose to
establish a working group to manage and track this effort because the
requirements crossed various lanes within VA and DoD. Work to date
includes cohort identification, receipt of $2.05 million in Joint
Incentive Funding for DoD contract staff and advances in planning for
data acquisition, analyses and development of the Congressional report.

VA Collaborations

To improve the transition process, VA collaborates with other
agencies across Federal programs, as well as with local and State
agencies and other partners. One large-scale program, the Economic
Development Initiatives (EDI) effort, spans across military and
civilian sectors. EDI aims to connect military members, Veterans and
spouses in specific geographic communities with information and
resources that promote economic well-being. This effort includes
hosting job fairs to link Veterans directly with resources, including
disability claims clinics and career opportunities. EDI also provides
support and employment assistance for military and Veteran spouses.
In FY 2022, VA in partnership with DoD and DoL applied Human
Centered Design to better understand the experiential needs and desires
of transitioning Service members, recently separated Veterans and their
families navigating military transition. The results of this research
are being used to improve and enhance programs and services internally
to VA and across the Federal Government, which also strives to serve as
an employer of choice for Veterans, through statutory hiring
preferences/authorities and workforce initiatives.
On December 13, 2021, President Biden signed Executive Order 14058,
Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to
Rebuild Trust in Government. Soon after the executive order was signed,
five priority Life Experience projects were announced as opportunity
areas for cross-agency partnership. The experience of Navigating
Military Transition was one of the selected lifecycle journeys. DoD,
the Department of Education, the Department of Homeland Security, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, DoL, VA, the General
Services Administration, the Office of Management and Budget, the
Office of Personnel Management, the Small Business Administration and
representation from all military branches have partnered to use Human
Centered Design to understand major pain points and design solutions
that improve and simplify the transition experience.
This cross-agency collaborative currently is working to define a
minimum viable product, that is a digital solution. This solution is
intended to help address three of the four areas of opportunity
identified in research. The cross-agency collaborative will continue
work through the rest of this year in packaging recommendations for
potential solutions that can be developed and implemented in the coming
FY and beyond.
In addition to the cross-agency effort, VA has used the research to
improve its programs and services. The improvements include the
following: developing an OTH discharge Journey Map, developing more
focused communication strategies, modifying the VA TAP curriculum based
on Service member feedback, integrating more quick response (QR) codes
into the curriculum for ease of access to benefits and services and
developing 12 new special emphasis Military Life Cycle modules to
include OTH, LGBTQ+, Military Sexual Trauma and Rural Veterans to name
a few.
This year, VA will host its Second Annual VA Transition Symposium
on July 27-28, 2023. This symposium will build upon last year's
synergies and focus on how VA can connect transitioning Service members
and Veterans with community resources at the State and local levels.
The forum also will provide a platform for VA stakeholders to learn
more about transition supportive programs, identify opportunities to
better coordinate transition services and build and strengthen
community relationships.
Since 2017, VA has worked with TAP interagency partners to host and
participate in the Military to Civilian Transition (MTC) summit. The
MTC Summit brings together stakeholders from the public and private
sectors to discuss the military to civilian transition not only for
Service members and Veterans but also for their families, caregivers
and survivors. VA looks forward to coordinating with DOL, this year's
host.

Opportunities for Enhancement

VA frequently assesses for needed changes and opportunities for
growth. Three areas for improvement include the need for increased:
Collaboration with Veterans Service Organizations (VSOs), Data Sharing,
and Spousal and Family Engagements.

(1) Collaboration with VSOs. VA understands the importance of
collaboration with its internal and external partners,
including VSOs that serve as advocates for the well-being of
the Veteran community and provide exceptional support to
transitioning Service members and their families. We are
working toward enhancing our relationship with VSOs to ensure
we integrate them into the VA TAP curriculum and provide an
avenue for increased connection with transitioning Service
members.

(2) Data Sharing. Currently, there are barriers to interagency
data sharing and data availability that make it challenging to
assess Veteran outcomes. By having the legislative authority to
require other agencies to provide VA with Veteran data, VA will
enhance its ability to assess Veteran outcomes holistically. In
addition, we must continue to formalize and enhance data-
sharing efforts with State Veterans Affairs offices to ensure
that they know when Service members are relocating to their
States and that Service members understand the role their
States can play in their transition plans and overall well-
being.

(3) Spousal and Family Engagements. VA is seeking to improve
messaging and marketing to military spouses and younger
Veterans about the many resources and programs available to
them before, during and after their transition.

Conclusion

TAP has undergone major enhancements since its inception in 1991.
These ongoing modifications have ensured that TAP remains a relevant
program that meets the changing needs of the transitioning Service
member population. We continue to put the transitioning Service member
experience at the center of everything we do. VA is committed to
ensuring that the partnership between VA and DoD is aligned, enduring
and strong, with a shared focus on putting the needs of Service
members, Veterans and their families first. We seek continuous
improvements, recognizing the driving factors are the major life events
impacting Veterans and their families today.
VA shares Congress' goal of ensuring Service members and their
families are supported as they transition from military to civilian
life and will remain dedicated to strengthening our transition
initiatives. Chairman Derrick Van Orden, Ranking Member Mike Levin,
this concludes my testimony. I am happy to respond to any questions you
or the Subcommittee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Margarita Devlin

Introduction

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today on the current state of the Transition Assistance Program
(TAP) across the armed services and the steps that should be made to
continue modernizing and reforming the program. It is always a pleasure
to testify before this Subcommittee. This month marks my 28th
anniversary as a career federal employee, and I am honored to have
served veterans for my entire tenure in government.
After almost two years serving in my current role at the Department
of Labor (DOL) Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS), I have
seen firsthand the passion, talent, dedication, and innovative spirit
of our employees, many of whom are veterans themselves. Our partners
across the interagency space are also incredibly dedicated. We have
worked hard, together, to continue to improve programs in support of
military to civilian transition. And, we will never stop innovating and
improving because our service members and veterans deserve nothing
less.
VETS' mission is to prepare America's veterans, service members,
and military spouses for meaningful careers, provide them with
employment resources and expertise, protect their employment rights,
and promote their employment opportunities. VETS administers programs
designed to address the employment, training, and job security needs of
over 196,000 military service members who transition to civilian life
each year,\1\ 8.8 million military veterans in the U.S. civilian labor
force,\2\ over 770,000 National Guard and Reserve members,\3\ and
nearly 950,000 military spouses (594,110 active duty and 354,255 Guard
and Reserve spouses).\4\ Along with our partners, we are committed to
ensuring the best transition for our service members and their
families.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Department of Defense (DoD), Improvements to the Transition
Assistance Program (TAP) Congressional Report, August 2022.
\2\ Civilian noninstitutional population aged 18 years and over.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) - 2022: https://www.bls.gov/
cps/cpsaat48.htm
\3\ Department of Defense (DoD), Defense Manpower Data Center,
Military Personnel Report, Selected Reserve Personnel by Reserve
Component and Rank/Grade (Updated Monthly), September 2022: https://
dwp.dmdc.osd.mil/dwp/app/dod-data-reports/workforce-reports
\4\ Military OneSource--DemographicsProfile,2021: https://
demographics.militaryonesource.mil/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

TAP Overview

TAP provides training, resources, and assistance to separating and
retiring service members on active duty, Guard, Reserve, and their
spouses, as defined in 10 U.S.C. 1144. TAP is a cooperative effort by
DOL VETS, the Department of Defense (DoD), the Department of Education
(ED), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA), the Small Business Administration (SBA), and the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
Congress originally established TAP in the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year (FY) 1991 (P.L. 101-510). This
enactment authorized the development of a voluntary program consisting
of transition assistance counseling and employment assistance for
separating service members and their spouses. In 2011, the Veterans
Opportunity to Work (VOW) Act (P.L. 112-56) mandated TAP participation
for all transitioning service members--including pre-separation
counseling and completion of courses provided by the newly established
interagency partnerships--to start no later than 90 days prior to an
anticipated date of transition. DOL, DoD, VA, and SBA collaborated to
prepare new curricula and expand training, education, and transition
activities to include Career Readiness Standards, a set of common and
specified activities for service members to achieve.
The most recent legislative change to TAP occurred with the John S.
McCain National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2019 (P.L. 115-232),
which requires TAP classes to occur no later than 365 days prior to an
anticipated date of separation or release from active duty, or 24
months prior to retirement. These requirements allowed TAP to evolve
from a one-size-fits-all program where service members had to
transition to civilian life in a condensed timeframe to an
individualized program tailored specifically to the needs of each
service member under a more suitable timeline.

Service Members Attend TAP Employment Workshops in Record-Breaking
Numbers

In FY 2022, service members and military spouses attended VETS' TAP
employment workshops in record-breaking numbers. TAP employment
workshops provided instruction to 266,127 total participants,\5\ which
is an over 40 percent increase from the previous workshop record of
188,924 total participants in FY 2021. There are three core VETS TAP
employment workshops. VETS is responsible for the delivery of the
Employment Fundamentals of Career Transition (EFCT) Workshop, which is
a mandatory, one-day course for employment preparation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Note that an individual service member may attend more than one
workshop. References to the total number of TAP workshop participants
do not track individual unique participants

One-Day EFCT Workshop: The EFCT lays the foundation for
transitioning from military to civilian life, introducing the essential
tools and resources needed to evaluate career options, gain information
for civilian employment, and understand the fundamentals of the
employment process. In FY 2022, VETS provided EFCT workshops to 149,229
participants, which is a 35.8 percent increase compared to 109,888 EFCT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
participants in FY 2021.

Based on service members' individual needs, VETS offers two
elective tracks to acquire additional skills via a two-day workshop:
(1) the DOL Employment Workshop (DOLEW), and (2) the Career and
Credential Exploration (C2E) Workshop. Service members must elect one
two-day track during their individual counseling; however, they are
encouraged to attend any additional track(s) and attendance to the
courses more than once (as their unit missions allows) to prepare them
for their transition.

Two-Day DOLEW: The DOLEW is intended for those pursuing
the employment track and covers emerging best practices in career
employment, including in-depth training to learn interview skills,
build effective resumes, and use emerging technology to network and
search for employment. In FY 2022, VETS provided DOLEW workshops to
82,253 participants, which is a 21.3 percent increase compared to the
67,762 participants in FY 2021.

Two-Day C2E Workshop: For those on the vocational track,
the C2E workshop offers an opportunity for participants to complete a
personalized career development assessment of their occupational
interests and abilities. Participants are guided through a variety of
career considerations, including labor market projections, educational
opportunities, Registered Apprenticeships, certifications, and
licensure requirements. In FY 2022, VETS provided C2E workshops to
15,341 participants, which is a 35.9 percent increase compared to the
11,284 participants in FY 2021.

In January 2023, VETS launched its revised EFCT and DOLEW curricula
based on participants' feedback. Throughout FY 2022, the VETS TAP
curriculum development team compiled and categorized input from
stakeholders:

TAP service members (through survey results and written
comments);

DOL TAP facilitators;

VETS Federal field staff;

TAP interagency curriculum subject matter experts;

National Association of State Workforce Agencies (NASWA);
and

Veteran Service Organizations (VSO).

The VETS TAP curriculum development team used the stakeholder input
to reorganize workshop content, remove redundancies, and improve
sections on resume writing, federal hiring, interviewing, and salary
negotiation. VETS piloted the revised curricula at several military
installations, and made further refinements based on pilot participant
feedback. VETS is currently following the same process with the C2E
curriculum. VETS will launch the revised C2E workshop in January 2024.
VETS workshops are highly rated by attendees. The FY 2023 first
quarter Transition Assistance Participant Assessment results indicated
that 97 percent would use what they learned in their own transition
planning, and 95 percent reported that the EFCT enhanced their
confidence in transition planning.

VETS Designs and Implements Two Innovative Employment Workshops

In addition to the three core VETS employment workshops, VETS
designed and implemented two other innovative employment workshops to
address the unique needs of military spouses, caregivers, and our
wounded, ill, and/or injured service members:

Military Spouse Employment Curriculum: Of course, our veterans have
not served their country alone. In recognition of this, VETS developed
a course curriculum specific to military spouses who are transitioning
with their service member out of the service or to another
installation. In February 2021, VETS announced the launch of a monthly
series of career workshops to provide employment assistance to
transitioning military spouses, also known as the Transition Employment
Assistance for Military Spouses' (TEAMS) curriculum. The TEAMS
workshops are designed to help military spouses plan and prepare for
their job search in pursuit of their employment goals. Currently, VETS
offers ten TEAMS courses. The courses use a combination of current
curriculum components for service members, such as resume development
and interviewing techniques, and components more specifically tailored
to the needs of military spouses, who often face frequent moves and the
complexities associated with State licensing and credentialing
requirements. In FY 2022, VETS provided 270 workshops to more than
1,200 military spouses and caregivers. And, we continue to work with
our partners at DoD to schedule and promote TEAMS events.

Wounded Warrior and Caregiver Employment Workshop (WWCEW): Each
year, there are approximately 15,000 transitioning service members who
are considered wounded, ill, and/or injured, transitioning either
through their service branch's warrior care or military recovery units
or through the Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES).\6\ In
April 2022, VETS launched the WWCEW for those being evaluated for a
disability rating through IDES as an alternative to the required one-
day EFCT. Disabled service members face barriers to completing the
traditional EFCT, such as coordinating class schedules with medical
appointments, long class duration, working with medical and health
restrictions, and requiring caregiver attendance. The curriculum
includes six self-paced online modules that participants can complete
at their own pace, and the course interface enables users to meet
online with a VETS facilitator to ask questions and to discuss
activities and course content to accommodate the individual's needs. In
FY 2022, the WWCEW provided instruction to 17,000 participants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 2021 DoD Demographics Profile of the Military Community:
https://download.militaryonesource.mil/12038/MOS/Reports/2021-
demographics-report.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two Employment Programs Are Transforming the Interagency Employment TAP
Space

In FY 2022, almost 28,000 separating service members participated
in two interagency employment programs that are rapidly transforming
the TAP employment space, expanding TAP's information-sharing program
to include hands-on training and assistance for service members and
their spouses. 5,369 separating service members and 340 military
spouses participated in the VETS Employment Navigator and Partnership
Pilot (ENPP), and 22,548 separating service members participated in the
DoD SkillBridge Program.

Employment Navigator and Partnership Pilot: The ENPP began at 13
military installations worldwide on April 1, 2021. The ENPP leverages
the Secretary's authority under 10 U.S.C. 1144 to assist transitioning
service members and their spouses with identifying and connecting to
employment and training opportunities. The pilot was designed in
response to feedback from veterans who stated that, while their TAP
classroom experience was educational, they desired a more personalized
approach. ENPP provides one-on-one, tailored services for transitioning
service members and their spouses.
Through our full-time contract Employment Navigator staff and our
employment partners, ENPP clients receive assistance with their
resumes, career direction, as well as referrals to vetted partner
organizations and American Job Centers (AJC) that provide additional
personalized support. ENPP Partners are required to select a primary
service provided across nine possible categories of services, which
include: digital employment opportunity matching, training services,
employment mentorship, hiring events, employment networking, Registered
Apprenticeship opportunities, referrals to employment opportunities,
placement services, and wrap-around services. A list of our current
partners can be found on the VETS ENPP Partner Page,\7\ and
organizations that are interested in partnership with us can submit an
application form.\8\ As of March 31, 2023, ENPP served over 9,279
transitioning service members and 633 military spouses since its
launch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/programs/tap/employment-
navigator-partnership/enpp-partnerships
\8\ https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/VETS/files/tap/
DOLVETSENPPPotentialPartnerApplicationForm.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key component of ENPP is that no later than 90 days prior to
separating, transitioning service members will go through Capstone, a
process by which the military service branch evaluates whether service
members have met the Career Readiness Standards (CRS). To meet the
employment track CRS, a service member must have either a completed
resume or confirmation of employment. If a service member fails to meet
the CRS, they are provided a ``warm handover,'' a person-to-person
connection between the transitioning service member and an AJC, which
connects them to designated services and followup resources as needed.
During a warm handover, Employment Navigators (ENs) connect
transitioning service members to an appropriate AJC point-of-contact,
who verifies with DOL that a client has connected with the AJC. In
addition to being connected with the State AJCs where they reside, many
service members receiving a warm handover also receive services from
our ENs and partners. VETS believes that providing transitioning
service members with additional support from ENs will enable more
service members to meet the CRS and lead to a reduction in the number
of transitioning service members who are required to receive a warm
handover for employment.
According to participant surveys, the ENPP has been a great
success. As of March 31, 2023, 96 percent of ENPP survey respondents
reported positive feelings after meeting with their Employment
Navigator and would recommend ENPP to a friend or colleague.
Additionally, 98 percent felt ENPP partners met or exceeded their
employment related expectations. As one ENPP survey respondent stated,
``The value of the Employment Navigator is having a one-on-one
conversation to go back over the plethora of information you received
in TAP classes and give guidance and recommendations specific to your
situation.'' We are very proud of the progress that has been made
through ENPP and look forward to continuing and expanding this
initiative as time and budget allow.
A particularly noteworthy veteran served by ENPP is Petty Officer
First Class Michael Santiago, who recently separated from the U.S. Navy
in Yokosuka, Japan. Michael was hoping to stay in Japan after
separating from service, but the entire transition process left him
feeling overwhelmed. Michael knew he would need support to navigate the
challenges of staying overseas, so he connected with an Employment
Navigator. The Employment Navigator helped Michael translate his
military experience into civilian terms, tailor his resume to his
desired field, use job search tools, and identify additional services,
as well as connected Michael to ENPP partner, American Corporate
Partners (ACP). ACP matched Michael with a professional mentor, who
shared career advice and guidance to help Michael in his career search.
``Without the constant words of encouragement and support from my
[Employment Navigator], I would have had an incredibly stressful, and
miserable time trying to transition into a new career,'' Michael
shared. ``I thought I was just going to receive basic professional
services, but I received so much more and really owe a lot to my
Employment Navigator for being there for me when I was alone in a
foreign country trying to make it on my own.'' With the help of his
Employment Navigator, Michael accepted a management role with a Fortune
500 company in Tokyo. ``Knowing I could reach out to my Employment
Navigator at any time when I was feeling lost or not confident helped
me feel empowered in my transition,'' said Michael.

DoD SkillBridge Program: SkillBridge connects service members with
industry partners in real-world job experiences, helping bridge the gap
between the end of service and the beginning of their civilian careers.
Employers participate in the SkillBridge program to provide
opportunities for service members through specific industry training,
Registered Apprenticeships, and internships during their last 180 days
of service.
According to DoD, SkillBridge participation increased from 14,336
service members in FY 2021 to 22,548 in FY 2022, which represents the
largest single year of program growth since its inception in FY 2016.
Our Employment Navigators are improving their capability to provide
timely and relevant career exploration support to pair service members
with the most appropriate SkillBridge opportunity. Timely access to the
SkillBridge program and other TAP programs and services is crucial to
the transition process, especially for those who face more challenges
in the civilian sector, such as junior enlisted, service members with
exceptional family members, and those who have unplanned transitions.
DOL is proud to work with our partners at DoD and employers across the
United States to promote the SkillBridge program.
DOL is excited to continue collaboration with Congress, ENPP
stakeholders, the military services, and employers across the United
States to annually increase employment-related TAP outcomes created by
these two emerging interagency TAP employment programs.

Expanding the Off-Base Transition Training Pilot

On January 11, 2022, VETS announced the launch of a five-year Off-
Base Transition Training (OBTT) pilot program, in accordance with
section 4303 of the Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans
Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 (P.L. 116-315),
enacted on January 5, 2021. Section 4303 directed DOL to provide TAP to
veterans and the spouses of veterans at locations other than active
military installations for a period of five years to improve
employment-related outcomes in areas with high veteran unemployment.
The OBTT pilot launched in eight metropolitan areas across five states
(California, Massachusetts, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Texas).
VETS is currently planning for expansion of OBTT to additional states
by the end of FY 2023. VETS will select states with high rates of
veteran unemployment, with preference given to states with a high rate
of Unemployment Compensation for ex-servicemembers (UCX) usage by
recently separated veterans.
OBTT features ten two-hour, instructor-led employment skills and
workforce development workshops. The workshops cover the following
topics:

Marketing Yourself

My Next Move

Resume Essentials

Resume Writing

Employment Rights

Federal Hiring

Interview Skills

LinkedIn Job Search

LinkedIn Profiles

Salary Negotiations

The OBTT workshops are offered in-person at various times and
locations in the pilot states, as well as virtually nationwide. In
2022, 2,116 veterans or spouses of veterans were provided support
through 1,947 virtual and in-person workshops through OBTT. To increase
the number of annual OBTT customers and better meet their employment
needs, Congress may wish to consider expanding OBTT eligibility to
current serving members of the Guard and Reserve, regardless of veteran
status, and their spouses.
Overall, VETS believes that OBTT has been a beneficial resource for
our veterans, especially for those who have been separated from the
military for over 10 years, as TAP was not mandatory for most
separating service members until 2011. As one OBTT participant
indicated in a survey: ``Over the course of years, I have attended a
myriad of workshops and acquired much valuable information during the
presentations. Many of the workshops offered applicable information and
materials. However, I must say that the workshop presented by OBTT,
Marketing Yourself and Other Job Search Tactics, was the most
organized, user friendly, and engaging that I have ever attended. The
format of the workbooks is excellent. They are now my resource books
for future questions. I feel prepared to go out and find employment
that can utilize my skills and interests. Many, many kudos to you and
your team! My wish and desire is that this workshop continues so others
can have the opportunity I was afforded.''

Leveraging Data to Improve TAP Outcomes

Data analytics and research are the key tools we use to understand
the effectiveness of our TAP services and improve employment outcomes
for transitioning service members. Through changes in TAP since the
passage of the FY 2019 NDAA, VETS is transforming its data collection
and analysis capabilities around the transition space. Traditionally,
VETS has only had access to data about TAP workshops and those
workshops' participants. However, new initiatives, such as ENPP, have
enabled VETS to access employment outcome information on our
transitioning service members through the National Directory of New
Hires at the Department of Health and Human Services. Overall, the past
year has been a transformative time for DOL's TAP program.
In FY 2022, TAP employment workshop participation was the highest
on record since the inception of modern-day TAP in 2011. FY 2022
participation in DOL TAP workshops were as follows:

149,229 service members participated in the one-day
Employment Fundamentals of a Career Transition Workshop (EFCT).

82,253 service members participated in the two-day
Employment Workshop (DOLEW).

15,341 service members participated in the two-day
Vocational Workshop (C2E).

17,000 service members participated in the WWCEW
Workshops.

1,200 military spouses participated in the TEAMS
workshops and 1,104 military spouses participated in the three DOL TAP
mandatory workshops.

Last year (FY 2022), VETS updated its data-sharing agreement with
DoD (specifically, the Defense Manpower Data Center) to expand data
transferred to DOL. Through the Veterans' Data Exchange Initiative
(VDEI), which started in FY 2016 with DoD, the Department receives a
daily refresh of information on transitioning service members collected
on the DD2648 form (Pre-Separation Counseling Checklist) and TAP course
attendance information. This data allows VETS to monitor DOL Benefit
briefing attendance, DOL-provided TAP services, and receipt of warm
handovers, and ultimately helps VETS measure program effectiveness.
Additionally, in December 2021, VETS launched its case management
system, the TAP Employment Navigator System (TENS), which is used by
Employment Navigators (who are contracted staff), ENPP partners, and
TAP Team members to capture data, develop reports, and manage ENPP
processes. TENS includes an integrated client request meeting
scheduler, program reporting, policy/guidance storage, and client
record management.
In addition, VETS completed the required data-sharing agreements
with the HHS needed to compare VDEI and ENPP data with wage and
employment information from the National Directory of New Hires (NDNH)
to understand employment-based outcomes for TAP and ENPP participants.
Once the data comparison is completed, VETS can conduct analyses on:
the correlation between employment status and timing and number of TAP
courses taken; overall percentage of TAP participants becoming
employed, and wages earned; the correlation between military occupation
and employment status; and employment outcomes disaggregated by gender,
age, race, ethnicity, and other demographic characteristics. NDNH data
will provide VETS with new and powerful insights about TAP. DOL will
leverage the information collected through VDEI, TENS and NDNH to
improve program delivery and policies that can enhance employment
outcomes for transitioning service members. These data are also being
used for multiple research studies evaluating TAP and ENPP.

Successful Interdepartmental Collaboration

VETS believes that, at its core, TAP is a collaborative program
that requires close coordination between our interagency partners and
with our public-private partnerships to be successful in its mission.
To accomplish this mission, VETS will continue to collaborate with
Congress, its interagency partners, ENPP partners, DoD SkillBridge
stakeholders, and employers to annually increase employment-related TAP
outcomes.
VETS works with its interagency partners to provide program
oversight. In conjunction with DoD and VA, VETS co-chairs the TAP
Interagency Executive Council, the TAP Senior Steering Group, and six
functional working groups. Interagency members meet and coordinate on a
regular basis to ensure the partners are supporting and advancing TAP,
as well as to reduce redundancy, better serve unique populations, and
improve coordination of services across program areas.
VETS, along with all the TAP interagency partners, is participating
in the President's Management Agenda Life Experience Human Centered
Design (HCD) project named Navigating the Transition from Military to
Civilian Life. The project lead is the VA's Veteran Experience Office.
Beginning in September 2022, representatives from VETS and all the TAP
interagency partners worked as a co-design team for the project. Guided
by the HCD model, the first co-design sprint produced a concept for a
digital solution, which will be used to deliver information and
resources based on service members' own transition plans. The cross-
agency collaborative will continue work through the rest of this year
in packaging recommendations for potential solutions that can be
developed and implemented in the coming FY and beyond.
Through the ENPP, VETS has served over 10,000 transitioning service
members and their spouses. Originally launched at 13 locations, the
pilot has since expanded to 26 locations at the request of the military
services and has grown to over 44 partners. Employment Navigators and
installation personnel meet regularly to assist with operational or
policy related needs. Additionally, ENPP partners and VETS' staff meet
monthly to share updates and to address best-practices and challenges.
ENPP would not have succeeded without the great work that our partners
are doing for our service members and their spouses, and for that we
are grateful.
Through OBTT, our full-time contracted Employment Resource
Coordinators (ERCs) are actively engaging with local stakeholders,
including veteran and military spouse organizations. Stakeholder
engagement through OBTT is essential for reaching our target audience.
Each of our sites meets regularly with representatives throughout their
community to leverage information, resources, and to share best
practices.
Each of these emerging interagency employment programs provide
positive employment outcomes that are rapidly transforming the
employment TAP space. Over the next few years, VETS is excited to
continue collaboration with Congress, stakeholders, the military
services, and employers across the United States to annually increase
employment related TAP outcomes created by these two emerging
interagency TAP employment programs and initiatives.

VETS' Federal Administration and USERRA Appropriation

VETS appreciates the funding increases appropriated by Congress for
the TAP program over the past several years. However, Congress did not
proportionally increase funding for VETS' Federal Administration and
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA)
appropriation, which funds our staff, enforcement activities,
performance accountability systems, outreach, engagement, and research
activities for all of VETS' programs, including the TAP program. In FY
2022, the President's Budget request for the VETS Federal
Administration and USERRA was $52.5 million, but Congress only
appropriated $46 million. In FY 2023, the President's Budget request
was just over $53.7 million, but Congress only appropriated $47
million.
The VETS Federal Administration and USERRA funds directly impact
TAP activities because they pay for approximately 37 VETS employees at
the national, regional, and State levels that support TAP activities.
Accordingly, VETS requests that Congress appropriate the FY 2024
President's Budget request\9\ of $347.6 million for VETS, which
includes $34.379 million for TAP and $59.3 million for Federal
Administration and USERRA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/general/budget/2024/CBJ-
2024-V1-10.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conclusion

In conclusion, our long-term strategic goal for TAP is for the
nation as a whole to recognize military service as a path to high
quality civilian careers. The future of the country's All Volunteer
Force across the armed services depends upon this recognition. As the
lead Federal agency on veteran employment, VETS looks forward to
working with this Committee and our many partners and stakeholders to
create opportunities that ensure all veterans can have a good job and
opportunity for advancement.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my statement. Thank you for the
opportunity to be a part of this hearing, and I welcome your questions.
______

Prepared Statement of Dawn Locke

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Brittany Dymond

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars of the United States (VFW) and its Auxiliary, thank you for the
opportunity to provide our remarks on this vital topic.
The critical nature of military transition cannot be understated.
For many transitioning service members (TSMs), the change from military
to civilian life represents a complete personal and professional shift
not previously experienced during adulthood. Additionally, leaving
service often is complicated by injuries or illnesses incurred while
serving, unique family needs, loss of identity and support networks,
and the need for education or training to enter a new career field.
Sadly, the initial year following transition also comes with heightened
suicide risk among new veterans, bolstering the need to ensure all
stakeholders focus appropriate attention to this time period. Access to
well-rounded, quality, consistent, and timely transition support is
vital for the post-service well-being and success of transitioning
service members and often their families.
The needs and circumstances of separating and retiring personnel
vary greatly as well as the levels of preparation necessary to be
successful after service. For instance, those being unexpectedly
separated or retired for medical reasons experience added hurdles like
compressed discharge timelines, little or no opportunities to plan,
potential employment barriers, and even grief or anger. This is in deep
contrast to the majority who separate after finishing their contract or
retire after completing a full career. The latter groups have more
predictability and expanded opportunities to plan, set, and complete
goals before leaving the military, thereby easing some of the
challenges inherent with returning to civilian life.
Fortunately, personnel undergoing medical and physical evaluation
are heavily supported throughout the process, known as the Integrated
Disability Evaluation System (IDES). As warranted, service members in
the IDES receive a preliminary disability rating from the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) and often are directly connected to resources and
programs like VA's Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E). This
comprehensive program helps IDES personnel chart a post-military career
path that accommodates service-connected injuries and illnesses.
Importantly, these service members are entered into the VA system
before discharge, enabling them to begin using the VA benefits and
services for which they qualify once they are separated from the
military.
Being medically separated or retired from service is the closest
one can get to receiving a personalized transition experience, and for
good reasons. Individuals deemed medically unfit for continued military
service have earned and often require that level of support. While IDES
participants must complete the Transition Assistance Program (TAP) like
anyone else, the tools and resources necessary for them to be
successful are brought to them where they are versus having to seek
them out on their own. Notably, IDES service members are removed from
their operational units and are thus able to navigate transition
activities without operational demands. This puts them in a noteworthy
minority. No other service members are afforded the level of care and
attention during transition as those receiving medical separations and
retirements. Non-IDES service members are informed about post-service
benefits and resources during TAP, but must proactively engage them on
their own. Unfortunately, the onus put on regularly separating and
retiring personnel is frequently at odds with operational requirements
and other pressing transition needs like finding a new home and career.
While the VFW knows it is not currently feasible to give every
service member a customized transition experience like the one inherent
with IDES, we know the Department of Defense (DOD) and VA can do better
to ensure more service members receive the support they need and
deserve within the current TAP framework. Providing comprehensive
knowledge of programs and resources and subsequent connections to them
is no less important for regularly separating and retiring personnel
than it is for individuals separating or retiring via IDES.

Transition Assistance Program Background

Attending TAP is mandatory for all personnel approaching separation
or retirement, including those transitioning for medical reasons. Down
from five mandatory days of instruction, the recently overhauled TAP is
comprised of three mandatory days and two additional days, known as
career tracks, that are optional for TSMs whose assigned tier allows
them to forgo attending. The tier system is new, and came about as part
of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 TAP
law reforms. This structure is intended to align TAP more closely to
TSMs' individual goals and needs by assigning them to one of three
tiers. Tier assignment is based on assessed level of transition
preparedness during service members' individualized initial counseling
sessions, which occur before attending the TAP course itself. Service
members assigned to Tier 1 are considered the most prepared to achieve
their transition plan, exempting them from completing a track, while
those assigned to Tier 3 are considered the least prepared, making
track completion mandatory. Tracks are largely optional for Tier 2
TSMs.
Through continuous oversight and improvement, holistic transition
support and services that meet TSMs where they are should be the goal
of Congress, DOD, and VA. The VFW thanks each entity for taking this
responsibility seriously through constant iteration and oversight such
as this hearing. Under the new TAP curriculum, however, program
managers have just three guaranteed days and at most 5 days with the
estimated 200,000 service members who leave the military every year.
This reduced window can by no means accommodate every service members'
individual transition needs. Accordingly, less time with TSMs
necessitates an approach that leverages external stakeholders who can
provide the capacity and capabilities that the current curriculum
cannot accommodate. Also vital, Congress must ensure DOD and each of
the services abides by the TAP law and works to mitigate gaps and areas
of ambiguity. Understanding that not all service members can receive
robust transition support commensurate with what IDES TSMs receive, we
have identified specific areas for Congress to focus its oversight and
subsequent reforms. Such emphasis can bring the transition experiences
of the majority of TSMs into closer alignment with those going through
IDES, albeit via slightly different means.

VA Office of Outreach, Transition and Economic Development

The VFW is very concerned about VA's Office of Outreach, Transition
and Economic Development (OTED) and how it discharges its supposed
mission. We know that OTED recently revised the TAP curriculum but has
never sought input from organizations like the VFW, which is present in
some capacity in TAP on nearly two dozen military installations.
When we have offered support, OTED has ignored our input. This is a
stark departure from how VA operated before OTED's creation. The VFW
had a seat at the table during the VOW Act implementation and again
consistently provided feedback on TAP curriculum up until OTED's
creation. The VFW was eager to work with OTED when the Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA) decided to stand up the office, but we
have been outright disappointed with how the business line has operated
ever since. To be blunt, OTED has appeared before this subcommittee
before and poorly represented VA's position on transition. At this
point the VFW has to ask this subcommittee, what exactly does OTED do?
A prime example of OTED's deficiency is its lackluster
implementation of Congress's mandate under the COMPACT Act for VA to
institute a pilot program through which veterans could elect to receive
information from networks of support after transition. OTED took it
upon itself to develop a mobile application called Getting Results in
Transition (GRIT) to accomplish this objective. In the VFW's opinion,
this resource was hastily developed without constructive feedback from
community organizations like the VFW. Instead, OTED developed the
product in a vacuum, presenting a product that is highly ineffective
and underutilized.
VBA has repeatedly asked our organization to promote GRIT, but we
cannot in good conscience. After reviewing a demonstration of the
product, it seems to be a mobile application nobody asked for to build
a social network that nobody wants.

Benefits Delivery at Discharge Program Access

One of the best resources at service members' disposal during
transition is the VA Benefits Delivery at Discharge (BDD) program
through which individuals can file expedited VA disability claims
before leaving active duty. Using the BDD program (pre-discharge
claims) service members can submit their compensation claims and
complete associated medical evaluations before leaving service, thereby
enabling VA to provide disability ratings upon or shortly after
discharge. Individuals who participate in the BDD program are
subsequently better positioned to engage VA benefits and services, like
IDES personnel, after leaving the military. This means TSMs can
minimize gaps in essential care like mental health counseling and
medication management upon discharge.
The VFW believes there is incalculable value in incorporating VA-
accredited representatives into the TAP curriculum. Specifically, we
would like to see these representatives facilitate complementary course
materials that cover VA benefits and services where practical, with a
particular emphasis on those that can be applied for prior to
separation or retirement. This approach would mitigate instances of
service members missing critical benefits-related details while
enabling more to act on information without needing to find a
representative in their free time outside of TAP. For instance,
military personnel have a very slim window (180-90 days before
separation) in which they are eligible to use the BDD program.
Accredited representatives would not only be able to highlight the
program but also help TSMs file claims once eligible, which is a task
that VA contract employees who largely teach this material are
prohibited from doing. Additionally, the VFW believes the window for
eligible claims should be expanded beyond the window of 180-90 days to
ensure service members have adequate time to file prior to separation.
Service members generally do not learn about the BDD program until
they attend TAP. Yet, individuals across service branches and
installations currently have unreliable access to accredited
representatives during classes, creating barriers to filing pre-
discharge VA disability claims via the BDD program. Accredited
representatives experience wide variability in how, if at all, they can
engage TSMs during TAP. This is because no statute or policy exists
that requires installation commanders and site managers to permit
representatives' entry into and participation in any element of the
curriculum. As a result, site managers vary in their willingness to
allow representatives in TAP and, if entry is permitted, managers also
differ in what capacities they will allow representatives to engage
TSMs. Commonly, they do not see the value in having accredited
representatives present or assert that there simply is not enough time
to allow them to speak to service members. Also common is the belief
that all veteran-and military-serving organizations are created equal,
and if TAP managers allow in one organization, they have to let in all
external organizations. This could not be further from the truth, as
not all organizations are recognized by VA for the purposes of
preparation, presentation, and prosecution of claims before the agency.
Unequal access leads to less TSMs being connected to their benefits
upon separation, thereby endangering connections to VA benefits and
services like mental health care. The VFW asks Congress to either
direct VA to develop a tailored pre-separation benefits course in which
accredited representatives actively participate, or incorporate
representatives into its current TAP presentation to explain benefits
that can be applied for prior to separation. We believe that VA must
utilize accredited representatives as tools in their TAP toolkit to the
maximum practical extent. Details about accredited representatives as
well as a list of groups and individuals who have received
accreditation can be found by visiting benefits.va.gov/vso.
Knowing that the initial twelve months after discharge present
heightened vulnerability for veterans to die by suicide, filing a pre-
discharge claim can quite literally facilitate a lifeline for recently
transitioned veterans. The VA's most recent suicide report suggested a
decreased veteran suicide rate per day (1.0 vs. 6.7) for individuals
having any contact with VBA as compared to those having no interaction
with VBA or the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). This is the first
time VA has provided benefits-related suicide data in its reporting
and, while high level, this suicide rate difference illustrates a vital
link. For example, the Veterans Experience Office recently briefed the
VFW on its customer experience work on TAP, validating that veterans
who connect with VA benefit programs either before or within one year
after separation are more likely to successfully reintegrate into
civilian life. Accordingly, increasing BDD program participation may
potentially reduce suicide deaths among new veterans.
The VFW knows VA health care and benefits improve veterans' lives,
but we need more information regarding the relationship between these
VA services and suicide prevention. We urge this subcommittee to
introduce and pass a House companion to S. 928, Not Just a Number Act,
which would evaluate the role benefits related to economic opportunity
have on suicide prevention.

Connections to Community Resources

The VFW also believes it is essential that Congress clarifies how
it defines resources located in communities as outlined in 10 U.S.C.
Sec. 1142 (2021). As part of the FY 2019 TAP law reforms, Congress
mandated that all TSMs be connected to resources in the communities in
which they plan to live after service. These connections are supposed
to be warm handoffs that are reflective of TSMs' individual needs and
enable smooth transitions to new communities, including to resources
that would provide the social support and camaraderie that is often
lost when exiting the military. However, DOD is not doing this
consistently or effectively. As written, the requirement is too
ambiguous since the statute does not articulate how resources should be
identified or what it means to connect service members. As part of the
VFW's Pre-Discharge Claims program survey, respondents are asked
whether they received community connections. Between September 2022 and
May 2023, one third of more than one thousand respondents indicated
they either were not or did not know if they received connections
during their individualized initial counseling. This is problematic.
The transition program's generalist nature is not a flaw of the system
but rather a feature of the system. TAP is neither designed for nor
able to address everyone's unique needs, so community resources fill
the void that its curriculum cannot. In other words, community
organizations are the transition program's force multiplier.
We question if DOD believes it is currently, at least in part,
satisfying this TAP law requirement via box 10b of the DD Form 2648,
which provides TSMs the ability to opt in to having their information
sent to State agencies. While this would perhaps be a fair start, the
opt-in nature of this approach means less service members will
participate. Also, due to self-selection bias at the outset, requiring
individuals to opt in potentially skews future efforts to evaluate the
effect that facilitating connections has on TAP outcomes. For those who
opt in, simply sending TSM discharge details to state agencies is not
only passive and impersonal, but also not what Congress intended as
being connected to community resources.
One example scenario where DOD's method is wholly inadequate is for
service members with dependents enrolled in the Exceptional Family
Member Program (EFMP). The EFMP provides myriad support services to
military families with special needs, but that support ceases once they
leave the military. In this example, not only would the service members
and their families have to navigate common transition challenges, but
they also would have to identify and arrange equivalent supports in
their new communities without the assistance they had via EFMP. Relying
solely on box 10b would be a complete disservice to these TSMs and
their families, especially since the state agencies on the receiving
end are currently not allowed to engage service members until after
they have been discharged. Regardless of circumstances, service members
and families deserve, and the VFW demands, better.
As the law requires, we would like Congress to ensure connections
are being consistently made between TSMs and resources in the
communities to which they are transitioning, with an emphasis on
specialized transition service organizations that receive federal grant
funding. One existing tool Congress can designate for connections is
the National Resource Directory (NRD), which is housed within the
Defense Health Agency (DHA). A partnership between DOD, VA, and the
Department of Labor, NRD contains a large repository of strictly vetted
organizations that span the transition spectrum from career assistance
to caregiver support.
The VFW insists connections to community resources be specifically
defined and we recommend that the definition include NRD. While it is
not the role of this subcommittee to authorize and appropriate funding
for a DHA program, we believe Congress should evaluate and make sure
the NRD team and website is properly funded and staffed to accommodate
any increased workloads, capabilities, or necessary upgrades.
There are no national transition services in every city and state
that support TSMs who are seeking services across all industries.
However, there are a multitude of organizations that specialize in
certain fields in certain areas of the country. If TSMs are seeking
education opportunities, they should be connected to local Student
Veterans of America chapters. If they are seeking employment in the
technology industry in Texas, they should be connected to organizations
like VetsinTech. If they are seeking to enter the finance world in New
York City, they should be connected to FourBlock. And if they are
service members separating from the Special Operations Forces, they
should be connected to organizations like The Honor Foundation.
Organizations with tailored transition plans for service members and
veterans will not be able to offer the most value if they are
underutilized and TSMs do not know they exist. TAP cannot be everything
for everybody, but there are countless organizations that could offer
specialized services as long as DOD makes the connections to community
resources as required by law.

DOD Adherence to the Law

While our concerns about connections to community resources are
largely grounded in VFW survey responses and anecdotal feedback,
additional VFW survey data are consistent with recent U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO) findings. A December 2022 GAO report
confirmed a suspicion we already had that TSMs have overwhelmingly--at
seventy percent--not been attending TAP at least twelve months prior to
separation or discharge as required by law. Our survey data closely
aligns. Between September 2022 and May 2023, the VFW's survey of TSMs
indicated that sixty-two percent began TAP less than one year prior to
separation or retirement. Of that respondent subgroup, forty-five
percent reported beginning six months or less prior to discharge. These
figures are highly concerning. The intent of the FY 2019 change to the
TAP attendance deadline was to ensure that service members could attend
TAP early and often. This is largely not being done.
Poor course attendance timeliness hinders members' ability to learn
about, use, and/or apply for post-service benefits and programs with
set deadlines, like the BDD program. Not participating in TAP on time
also robs some service members of the ability to make course
corrections to their transition plans as they hone goals and learn more
about their post-service needs. As such, lack of timeliness in
attending TAP negatively impacts service members' ability to access
needed benefits after service such as VA health care, while delaying
elements of the members' transition plans such as career training via
the Post-9/11 GI Bill or the VR&E program. We urge Congress to hold DOD
accountable to ensure TSMs complete TAP on time, while making sure each
service department expeditiously implements GAO's December 2022
timeliness recommendations.
The same GAO report also bolstered our concerns regarding the tier
system. Almost twenty-five percent of TSMs assigned to Tier 3 did not
complete a mandatory two-day track. Meanwhile, nearly thirty-three
percent of VFW survey participants did not even know to which tier they
had been assigned. Under the new system, understanding one's tier is
central to determining transition readiness and related goal setting.
These findings suggest the tier system may not be meeting the intent of
Congress. The VFW recommends evaluating the execution and effectiveness
of the tier system or eliminating it entirely. In the interim, we urge
Congress to make sure DOD urgently complies with GAO's recommendations
regarding track attendance.

Spouse Inclusion in TAP

Our survey data also reveal that of those TSMs with spouses, more
than fifteen percent of respondents either did not know their spouse
could attend TAP or their spouse wanted to attend but could not. Of
those who provided clarifying remarks, the spouse's job, child care
challenges, being geographically separated, and being a dual-military
couple (i.e., spouse has already taken or will take) were cited as
reasons for spouses not attending. Military transition is an endeavor
for families as much as it is for individual service members.
Transition planning as a family is imperative to understand post-
separation benefits, services, and needs like disability compensation,
education and survivor benefits, health care, financial planning, and
even career changes.
While online TAP coursework is now available to spouses and
caregivers, the value of attending the course in person cannot be
understated. Some ways to increase attendance include offering TAP in
the evenings or over weekends when spouses are not working and more
child care options are available. Additionally, TAP stakeholders can
work to accommodate child care needs during regularly scheduled
sessions. We call on Congress to study the factors contributing to
spouses not attending TAP in person and enact legislation that
mitigates or removes the identified barriers. Moreover, we would like
to see Congress create a spouse TAP pilot program that not only
incorporates the findings of the study but also aligns with the unique
needs and challenges experienced during transition.

Incongruent Incentives and Outcomes

Within DOD, military commanders' focus understandably centers
around mission readiness priorities like training, staffing, and
equipment upkeep. Operational requirements generally take precedence
over peripheral efforts that are not considered mission essential. This
all makes sense, of course, as DOD is charged with deterring war and
ensuring our Nation's security. Friction arises, however, when DOD
policies and practices that prioritize and incentivize operational
readiness and effectiveness are incongruent with service members who
are leaving the military. Transition policies and programs are
inherently incompatible with operations. Unit leaders are tasked with
ensuring the mission is accomplished with the people they have,
including TSMs, as service members are expected to simultaneously
fulfill their regular duties and transition requirements. However, this
conflict generally does not exist for personnel being medically
separated or retired via IDES because they are removed from their units
which allows commanders to backfill their positions.
Moreover, the prevailing military culture is not necessarily
accommodating of or sympathetic to separating personnel and related
policies. Evidence can be seen in the Navy's management of the DOD
SkillBridge program. Although it is a lauded transition resource, the
Navy recently restricted SkillBridge access by rank and time until
discharge because service members' participation in the program impacts
unit operations. Not only are commanders authorized full latitude to
approve or deny SkillBridge use, but the tone of this Navy-specific
administrative message, or NAVADMIN, is seemingly adversarial in
nature. The Navy's policy on TSM participation in SkillBridge results
in disparate outcomes among naval service men and women. The value of
programs meant to facilitate smooth transitions cannot be fully
realized if DOD is permitted to restrict them.
The VFW is concerned that disparate experiences are also occurring
within TAP itself. For example, during the September 2022 Military-
Civilian Transition Summit, the Army's TAP manager started his
presentation by noting that each of the services administers TAP ``a
little bit'' differently. Any differences in TAP implementation should
be only in the margins and never interfere with the timely and
equitable access to information, programs, and services. DOD must
ensure any latitude the services have in implementation does not
interfere with the mandates and intentions of Congress.

Transition within the Coast Guard and Reserve Components

Historically, the Coast Guard has been overlooked in discussions
about TAP oversight. It does not always fall under the jurisdiction of
the Armed Services Committees, and it also does not receive the same
level of recognition regarding VA issues. The men and women of the
Coast Guard are often overlooked, but they also serve our Nation and
have needs similar to other members of the armed forces. However, the
VFW has learned the Coast Guard is lacking the proper resources to
administer TAP as effectively as other services. For example, the
website that hosts the Coast Guard transition information has not been
updated since before the FY 2019 TAP changes. We understand it is not
the jurisdiction of this subcommittee to authorize or appropriate funds
for the administration of Coast Guard programs, but we urge Congress to
make sure this service is resourced properly so Coast Guard members are
afforded equitable opportunities.
A large cohort of the armed services that is also often overlooked
in the transition discussion is the reserve component. Members of the
National Guard and Reserve forces do not receive the same out-
processing and instruction as active duty members. Units completing
major deployments are given truncated TAP-style briefings, but standard
personnel who are out--processing in the rest of the reserve component
do not typically receive this instruction. The VFW recommends members
of the National Guard and Reserves be assigned the online version of
TAP to complete before final separation, and annual VA benefits
briefings be administered to units throughout the year during
administrative drill days.
Chairman Van Orden and Ranking Member Levin, this concludes my
testimony. Again, the VFW thanks you for the opportunity to testify on
this important issue. I am prepared to take any questions you or the
subcommittee members may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, the VFW
has not received any federal grants in Fiscal Year 2023, nor has it
received any federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.

The VFW has not received payments or contracts from any foreign
governments in the current year or preceding two calendar years.
______

Prepared Statement of Michael Quinn

Before I talk about the Transition Assistance Program (TAP), you
should understand my story.
I retired from the Army on November 1st, 2017 after a 24 year
active-duty career in Military Intelligence. I was always the top-
performer in my units, first-promoted almost the entire way through
Sergeant Major with some unique assignments in a Special Mission Unit
and as the J2 (leading all physical and personnel security) of the
White House Communications Agency. I fully planned on serving for 30
years, but when my former spouse said ``I'm not moving'' to a list of
assignments we received, I thought the transition was going to be a
breeze for a top-performing intelligence professional like me in the DC
area with a Top Secret clearance.

I couldn't have been more wrong as it ended up being the hardest
year of my life.

I vividly remember my first job fair, walking in prepared with
everything they taught at TAP. I was dressed in my best suit, had
business cards, copies of my resumes, research on every employer and a
well-practiced elevator pitch ready to show every one of the 41
employers that I would be a huge value-add to their company if they
would only give me a chance.
6 hours and 41 rejections later, I walked out dejected, demoralized
and wondering how I was going to find a job and take care of my family
(because SGM retirement doesn't go far in the DC area). Thankfully I
took notes from every rejection and one employer, when I nagged them
for follow-up information, told me to ``connect with them on
LinkedIn.'' So I did, and it opened the world to me.
To me, LinkedIn wasn't ``social media.'' It was a networking tool
that gave me access to professionals with whom I had something in
common all over the country and in every job/industry. Since TAP
couldn't teach me what I needed to know, I resolved to reach out to
thousands of people in industry to learn the ``real truth'' of finding
meaningful employment. After 6+ months of hard work and over 200
informational interviews with people in industry, I finally had the
knowledge, relationships, and insight to frame myself as a ``best
candidate'' and find meaningful employment at the right level for me.
(Note: I'm not paid by LinkedIn, nor do I have any financial interest
in the company)
Once I figured it out, I began to see the struggle of others in the
transition and realized that it was my passion and calling to give
back. Since my retirement from the Army, I have done so by posting tips
and advice on LinkedIn almost every day, now reaching over 1.2M people
(primarily in military & veteran community) a month through LinkedIn. I
also hold 50+ webinars, live sessions, and in-person workshops a year
to stay engaged with our community. I teach LinkedIn & Digital
Networking at the official transition courses for the General Officers
and Admirals of every branch of service, but also speak with the
enlisted communities of every branch - giving me a fairly unique
perspective as my company (HireMilitary) is a veteran and military
spouse staffing company (never any cost to the service member, veteran
or military spouse).
Everything I have done since early 2017 has been to fill the gaps
left from the TAP, so here are my four recommendations to fix the
program:

1. Put someone in charge of TAP

Botom Line: A single Agency needs to be in charge to drive
change.

TAP, as a program, is led by an Interagency Council with the
Department of Veteran Affairs (VA), Department of Labor (DoL), and
Department of Defense (DoD) leading individual sections of the program.
While there are wonderful, hard-working, and caring people at all
locations, nobody is actually in charge of or held accountable for the
performance of the entire program. Each agency handles their own piece,
does their best, but it is hard to tie a failure to one individual
component of the program. It is also nearly impossible to drive change
without someone (person or organization) providing vision and
leadership.
So if you want to improve TAP, the first thing you need to do is
put someone in charge of the program that is going to drive change,
implement your vision, track results, and accept accountability/
responsibility for a program that impacts the lives of over 220,000
transitioning service members every year.
For example, on May 3rd, 2023 I received a briefing from a VA
representative that included rather large percentages of service
members not meeting the Congressionally mandated requirement to start
TAP no later than 365 days prior to their separation from service. The
VA has this information, but what can they do to ensure that the
situation gets fixed?
With each Agency having their own leadership, vision, funding and
contracting vehicles, how can you really develop and integrated
transition assistance program? Even the individual services do it
differently.

2. Ensure the Military Life Cycle Transition Process is Implemented

Botom Line: Congress mandated the program, but it has never
been implemented.

There is too much information associated with a successful
transition from the military into civilian employment for it to be
absorbed and implemented in a multi-day program that pushes everything
through a proverbial PowerPoint firehose. Regardless of the curriculum
or instructor quality, there is just too much information when coupled
with other transition and life stressors. How do we fix this? It is
simple: you provide transition-related training at key touchpoints
throughout an entire career, building knowledge and sharing resources
so that it is not the first time the service member sees it when they
attend TAP.
This is not my idea.
Congress has mandated the Military Life Cycle Transition on several
occasions, I believe starting with the original VOW Act. The DoD TAP
office has the below website covering the Military Life Cycle
Transition:

(from DoD TAP Website: https://www.dodtap.mil/dodtap/app/about/mlc
)

The Military Life Cycle (MLC) is a transition model that begins a
Service member's transition preparation early in their military career.
Service members have various key touch points throughout their MLC that
provide them opportunities to align their military career with their
civilian goals. Service members are made aware of the Career Readiness
Standards (CRS) they must meet before their intended separation and
remain engaged throughout their military careers in mapping and
refining their individual development to achieve their goals. This
enables transition to become a well-planned, organized progression that
empowers Service members to make informed career decisions and take
responsibility for advancing their personal goals.

But regardless of congressional mandates and DoD policies, the
Military Life Cycle Transition is not being implemented. DoD put out a
policy and created a website, but there was no specific requirements
for reporting, dates of implementation, or other requirements to make
sure it happened. And since nobody actually checked, the Military Life
Cycle Transition program does not exist in the services and the first
time we see anything transition-related is when attending TAP.
My recommendation? Give clear guidance to the DoD on expected
implementation of the Military Life Cycle Transition with specific
tasks, dates, and reporting requirements back to Congress. This should
also give the services the opportunity to highlight if they need
additional funding or resources to do so, but at the end of the day
there needs to be confirmation that the program was implemented and is
being delivered to all service members throughout their career.

3. Modernize TAP delivery

Botom Line: We need on-demand training accessible whenever,
wherever by service members on their devices, coupled with
distributed, on-demand live training and support.

While the past few years have been extremely difficult, one thing
that took a giant leap forward was the technology enabling us to work,
meet, and deliver training remotely. This technology, coupled with a
younger generation of digital natives, makes the fact that most
training is delivered in ``brick and mortar'' schools around the world
an incredible waste of resources. The DoL portion of TAP alone has
close to 700 facilitators around the world, the majority of which are
1099 or part-time employees not being paid very much. I've seen many
that just got out of active service and went right into teaching TAP,
which can be unfortunate for those in their class as they have no
relevant experience.
To resolve this, service members deserve access to a vast library
of on-demand, transition-related content that they can watch from their
devices. But since not everyone learns well from online classes, there
should also be a schedule of live webinars they can register to attend
and a remote center of counselors available to guide them through the
process, review documents, provide feedback, and recommend additional
resources.
Doing it remotely enables significant economy of scale, improving
quality because it gives you the ability to hire more experienced
instructors, facilitators, and counselors - while at the same time
letting service members review the courses they want as often as they
want.
(Note: I recommend hiring a company to advise TAP agencies on how
to effectively implement the contracting process for this (it would be
easier if one agency was in charge). This can't be a lowest price
technically acceptable contract, but the money already being invested
in this program, in total, is certainly enough to do this.)

4. Hold DoD Accountable

Botom Line: Take a baseline of annual Unemployment Compensation
for Ex-servicemembers (UCX) expenses for each military service,
then set goals for improvement with fiscal repercussions (same
year budget) if they fail to do so.

Mission first is the priority for the military, and rightfully so.
The problem is that nobody has truly made TAP part of the mission,
explained how every poorly transitioned service member negatively
impacts future military recruiting, or required the services to care
about TAP.
It's somewhat comical to see how Dental Readiness (annual dental
check-up) is prioritized at all levels of Commands. It is tracked by
units, driven by installations, and Command teams get absolutely
hammered if their service members go longer than a year without getting
their annual checkup. Why do they do this? It is because dental issues
can keep service members from deploying and Commanders prioritize it.
But you have a congressionally mandated requirement to ensure all
service members start TAP no later than 365 days before separation
without any of the follow-up or Command engagement that happens with
Dental Readiness. And while there truly are Leaders across the force
that care about TAP, it is not seen as part of the service's mission.
How do we get the Military Services engaged and driving TAP?
There needs to be clear guidance, metrics to track, and
repercussions if they fail to do so.
I recommend analyzing Unemployment Compensation for Ex-
servicemembers (UCX) data, by service, for the past several years and
then developing a glidepath to improvement by setting goals against UCX
expenses. If the services fail to meet their specific UCX goals,
Congress takes back money from their same year budget authorization.
(Something similar occurs in Major League Baseball with the salary cap.
If any team goes over the salary cap, they are penalized (fined)
millions of dollars.)
If the clear guidance, metrics and fiscal penalties are made clear,
the services will implement the programs from the top down, track
attendance and Commanders will become innovative in how they support
the program - as it will become part of the mission.
______

Prepared Statement of Abby Kinch

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting Student Veterans of America (SVA)
to submit testimony on the topic of the Transition Assistance Program
(TAP).
With a mission focused on empowering student veterans, SVA is
committed to providing an educational experience that goes beyond the
classroom. Through a dedicated and expansive network of on-campus
chapters across the country, SVA aims to inspire yesterday's warriors
by connecting student veterans with a community of dedicated chapter
leaders. Every day, these passionate leaders work to provide the
necessary resources, network support, and advocacy to ensure student
veterans can effectively connect, expand their skills, and ultimately
achieve their greatest potential.
SVA greatly appreciates the opportunity to speak to our research
and the experiences of student veterans regarding TAP. We know that a
positive transition experience, beginning with the decision to separate
from military service and continuing through the rest of a veteran's
life, is essential for a successful and meaningful return to a civilian
society.

Transition Assistance Program

An effective transition program is invaluable for those separating
from service at any stage - an E-4 completing a single enlistment to
someone retiring after 20 years of service. However, from our research
both before and after the 2019 reforms TAP has been utilized more as a
bridge from the moment of separation to the moment of employment or
enrollment. Across all transition research, however, the recommendation
is that transition programs be designed beyond that
bridge.\1\
,
\2\
,
\3\
,
\4\
,

\5\ SVA recommends a ``highway'' approach when thinking about
enhancements to TAP. It should carry transitioning servicemembers from
a point well before their date of separation to well beyond their point
of entry into their civilian lives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Blackburn, D. (2016). Transitioning from military to civilian
life: Examining the final step in a military career. Canadian Military
Journal, 16(4), 53-61.
\2\ Hallett, R. E., Kezar, A., Perez, R. J., & Kitchen, J. A.
(2020). A typology of college transition and support programs:
Situating a 2-year comprehensive college transition program within
college access. American Behavioral Scientist, 64(3), 230-252.
\3\ Kintzle, S., & Castro, C. A. (2018). Examining veteran
transition to the workplace through military transition theory. In
Occupational stress and well-being in military contexts (pp. 117-127).
Emerald Publishing Limited.
\4\ Pedlar, D., Thompson, J. M., & Castro, C. A. (2019). Military-
to-civilian transition theories and frameworks. In Military veteran
reintegration (pp. 21-50). Academic Press.
\5\ Zaidi, B., & Morgan, S. P. (2017). The second demographic
transition theory: A review and appraisal. Annual review of sociology,
43, 473-492.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (FY
2019 NDAA) already stipulates that transition services should start no
later than one year from the servicemember's separation date, but SVA
research has found that this is not always the case. After separation,
our research indicates support services do not follow the then veteran
through the continuation of transition. These primary issues, as well
as others, are discussed below.
TAP is intended to be a robust program aiming to provide a
successful holistic transition of military personnel and their spouses
from military to civilian life. As subject matter experts in the
intersection of issues facing veterans and higher education, SVA will
focus on the higher education transition portion of the program. Our
testimony discusses opportunities for earlier intervention, points of
interest in delivery, and the insufficient emphasis placed on
transition into higher education.
Statute lists those responsible for the employment assistance, job
training assistance, and other transitional services that constitute
TAP. Specifically, it requires the Secretary of Labor, along with the
Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs to ``establish and maintain a program to
furnish counseling, assistance in identifying employment and training
opportunities, help in obtaining such employment and training, and
other related information and services to members of the armed
forces...'' \6\ Education is an essential component to finding a career
for most transitioning servicemembers, as we will demonstrate below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 10 U.S.C. Sec.  1144(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The improvements made to TAP with the FY 2019 NDAA resulted in
improved sentiment amongst transitioning servicemembers into higher
education. SVA research prior to 2020 showed most student veterans had
a negative or very negative experience with their transition programs,
and a small portion had no experience with a transition program. Since
the improvements were made, those sentiments have improved. In 2022,
respondents indicated an increase in positive experience with TAP.\7\
The comments aligned with positive feedback were primarily focused on
the increased information available in the education track.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 2022 SVA Census (in process). On file with authors; 2022 SVA
Basic Needs and Wellness Report (in process). On file with authors.
\8\ See id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
About 50 percent of enlistees at the time of enlistment indicate
that they intend to use their G.I. Bill benefits after separation,\9\
but SVA estimates show that number may be closer to two-thirds, though
sparse data on veterans in higher education makes that determination
foggy. Nevertheless, appropriate transition support into higher
education is essential for a large portion of the transitioning
population, stressing the importance of the education portion of TAP.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ From the House Hearing before the Subcommittee on Economic
Opportunity of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, U.S. House of
Representatives, 112 Congress, ``Examining the Re-design of the
Transition Assistance Program (TAP)'' provided September 20, 2012
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ``Education Track'' is a ``two-day workshop designed to assist
servicemembers in identifying the higher education requirements that
support their personal career goals.'' \10\ It ``provides guidance on
choosing an educational institution, preparing for the application
process, and expectations upon attendance...'' \11\ SVA's research
supports this component's mission, in that almost 60 percent of
veterans seeking a higher education degree are motivated by career
goals and aspirations.\12\ Of those, almost 70 percent chose higher
education in lieu of an immediate career because they felt that they
were ill-or under-prepared for employment following military
service.\13\ Less than half of student veterans' future goals align
with their military occupation,\14\ which may contribute to this
feeling of unpreparedness. This further supports the need for a
transition program designed with the lifespan of the veteran in mind.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ DoDTAP. Transition Components. DoD Education Track. https://
www.dodtap.mil/dodtap/app/transition/tracks.
\11\ DoD Instruction 1332.35, 5.1a(4), (6)(b).
\12\ 2022 SVA Census (in process). On file with authors.
\13\ 2022 SVA Census (in process). Question asking respondents why
they chose higher education as a transition medium. On file with
authors.
\14\ 2022 SVA Census (in process). On file with authors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to the program itself, ``this two-day workshop is divided
into the following topic areas: learning the basics, choosing a field
of study, selecting an institution, gaining admission, and funding
higher education.'' \15\ In our longitudinal study on the decision-
making patterns of servicemembers from pre-to post-enlistment, one of
the most striking findings is what we refer to as the ``lost guidance
counselor.'' \16\ As those about to graduate high school and make their
way to college, 18-year-olds around the country may spend upwards of
four years with a guidance counselor discussing career options and
college planning. They choose programs of study, select institutions of
higher learning, explore funding sources, and navigate the admissions
process. Even conservatively, the better part of a college bound
student's junior and senior years are dedicated to regularly scheduled
meetings with a guidance counselor on this impactful life transition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ DoDTAP. Transition Components. DoD Education Track. https://
www.dodtap.mil/dodtap/app/transition/tracks.
\16\ This comes from qualitative findings in response to issues in
the decision-making process from the SVA Lifecycle Atlas project. These
portions of the study have not been published. On file with author.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A two-day workshop cannot replace the support experienced by
traditional students with guidance counselors transitioning into higher
education. Over half of our respondents rated both the on-base
education offices and TAP ``below average'' in providing advising
services.\17\ While on active duty, servicemembers are often not
provided adequate guidance on utilizing Tuition Assistance (TA) with
transfer in mind, but with the idea that they will earn a degree while
serving.\18\ A large portion of the spending on TA goes to three
universities (one non-profit and two for-profit).\19\ Transferability
of courses from these institutions to the schools that veterans most
often select after separation is very low, meaning much of the TA
budget is going to credits that cannot be used to earn degrees that are
not completed while serving.\20\
,
\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ 2022 SVA Basic Needs and Wellness Report (in process). On file
with authors.
\18\ 2022 SVA Basic Needs and Wellness Report (in process). On file
with authors.
\19\ Pulkkinen, L. (September 2021). Getting educated while on
active duty is getting harder as military rolls back benefits. The
Hechinger Report.
\20\ This statement is only applicable to those who start
coursework on TA, do not finish a degree, and then complete a degree at
a different university after separation. However, because a vast
majority of student veterans attend public, nonprofit universities, the
assumption is that this is a common case.
\21\ This is not to say that TA is a wasted benefit; only ill-
advised. TA is a powerful benefit that entices many servicemembers into
service and can be leveraged to continue to draw Americans into
military service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With this gap in service, student veterans arrive on college
campuses with a deficit in planning that leads to a higher likelihood
of program change. Student veterans are almost twice as likely as
traditional students to change their major or program of study multiple
times.\22\ Even with the generous funding from the G.I. Bill, student
veterans find themselves graduating with student loan
debt,\23\
,
\24\ partially due to the lack of proper
preparation and advising. Were proper interventions started sooner and
with more emphasis on education, TA dollars could be more appropriately
used to take courses that transfer or that are housed within the
destination school. This would reduce the number of program changes
made by beneficiaries and allow G.I. Bill funding to be maximized for
use with longer STEM degrees, ensure degree completion, or even support
graduate school.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Unpublished findings from the SVA Lifecycle Atlas project. On
file with author.
\23\ Bhattarai, R., Brees, S., & Oliff, P. (2023). Veterans Borrow
for Private and Public Higher Education Despite GI Bill Benefits. Pew
Charitable Trusts.
\24\ According to the Pew study, this debt is largely to cover
costs associated with living expenses. Over half of student veterans
are married and over half have children. Almost 20 percent are single
parents, according to our research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, what compounds this ``lost guidance counselor'' phenomenon
more is the fact that almost two-thirds of student veterans are first-
generation college students.\25\
,
\26\ Not only do these
students not have the professional college counseling afforded to high
school students, but they also lack familial guidance, which has been
proven to support student transition, retention, and
success.\27\
,
\28\
,
\29\ TAP has the opportunity,
and in our opinion obligation, to fill this gap by working with
college-bound servicemembers in an expanded capacity, replacing the
lost guidance counselor with professional transition services into and
through higher education. The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) should
further leverage the U.S. Department of Education, as part of the TAP
interagency partnership, in providing this guidance, along with the
nuanced approach not afforded currently.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Student Veterans of America uses the U.S. Department of
Education definition of ``first-generation college students,'' or a
student who had parents with no postsecondary education experience.
\26\ This number has been consistent since the implementation of
the SVA Census in 2016. See 2016-2020 SVA Census Reports, 2022 Census
Report (in progress), held with authors. https://studentveterans.org/
research/sva-census/.
\27\ Aruguete, M. S. (2017). Recognizing challenges and predicting
success in first-generation university students. Journal of STEM
Education: Innovations and Research, 18(2).
\28\ Ives, J., & Castillo-Montoya, M. (2020). First-generation
college students as academic learners: A systematic review. Review of
Educational Research, 90(2), 139-178.
\29\ Mehta, S. S., Newbold, J. J., & O'Rourke, M. A. (2011). Why do
first-generation students fail?. College Student Journal, 45(1), 20-36.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More holistically, student veterans find that isolation was a large
contributor to their transition stress. Much research has been
conducted in examining the loss of camaraderie following separation
from the military. The shared-experience, peer-support structure of our
chapters is what makes them so enticing to student veterans on college
campuses. Despite this, our survey feedback on transition to higher
education shows that a vast majority of student veterans felt TAP did
not prepare them for these types of social and psychological struggles
associated with their separation from the military.

``TAP was for getting a job. That's it. I felt like I was
leaving home and heading somewhere where I didn't know anyone.
The SVA chapter...gave me the opportunity to meet people and
make connections. Without it, I would be alone.'' \30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Response to the 2022 SVA Census survey asking respondents to
``please use the space below to tell us any experiences as a student
veteran, military or veteran dependent, or alumni that you wish to
share.'' Report in progress, held with authors.

``Transition assistance program (TAP) was not comprehensive in
addressing the actual struggles of transition out of the
military (primarily psychological, financial, and medical/
disability related ... [sic] did not need help writing a resume
for 3 days).'' \31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Response to the 2022 SVA Census survey asking respondents to
``please use the space below to tell us any experiences as a student
veteran, military or veteran dependent, or alumni that you wish to
share.'' Report in progress, held with authors.

Combatting common feelings of isolation for student veterans with
the camaraderie provided by an SVA chapter on college campuses also
exposes these students to the larger campus community. We've noted
through chapter conversations that student veterans who engage with
their SVA chapter are more likely to engage with other areas of campus:
student government; Greek life; industry organizations such as a
business, law, or music student group; and identity organizations such
as the women's student union or PRIDE student union. Higher education
research has shown that participation in campus organizations increases
student success on all measures, and we have found the same for student
veterans.\32\
,
\33\ Additionally, a survey conducted in 2016
showed that most student veterans have some level of service-connected
disability,\34\ though virtually none utilized disability offices or
accommodations to support their academic experience. In a 2022 survey,
the number of student veterans utilizing these services had increased
to 26 percent.\35\ Not only are SVA chapters a front door to other
campus organizations, but they serve as a gateway to needed campus
services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Foley, C., Darcy, S., Hergesell, A., Almond, B., McDonald, M.,
Nguyen, L. T., & Morgan-Brett, E. (2023). Extracurricular activities,
graduate attributes and serious leisure: competitive sport versus
social-cultural clubs in campus life. Leisure Studies, 1-18.
\33\ Morgan, N. R., Aronson, K. R., McCarthy, K. J., Balotti, B.
A., & Perkins, D. F. (2023). Post-9/11 Veterans' Pursuit and Completion
of Post-secondary Education: Social Connection, Mental Health, and
Finances. Journal of Education, 00220574231168638.
\34\ 2016 SVA Census. https://studentveterans.org/research/sva-
census/.
\35\ 2022 SVA Basic Needs and Wellness Report (in process), held
with authors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most student veterans, unfortunately, do not discover their SVA
chapter until late in their college career.\36\ As trained, student
veterans are focused on the mission - here, graduation is the only goal
- and thus, these students miss out on many opportunities found on
college campuses outside of the classroom. Were SVA and other Veteran
Service Organizations connected with transitioning servicemembers
during TAP, or earlier, this timeline to discovering support from their
SVA chapter may be shortened, and we may see real impact that continues
beyond immediate transition and beyond education. SVA chapters are
often the first social contact on campuses for student veterans.
Chapter members provide advice, resources, and feedback on housing,
childcare, employment, and other necessities of civilian life. These
conversations, should they happen earlier, have the potential to not
only better prepare servicemembers for their transition into higher
education, but reduce the stress caused by that transition. Further,
organizations like the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) and America's
Warrior Partnership (AWP) provide essential services to veterans that
would likewise be better served if they were introduced earlier in the
transition process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ 2022 SVA Basic Needs and Wellness Report (in process), held
with authors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The updated TAP structure also fails to appropriately prioritize
education. A straightforward comparison between the length of online
workshops shows that a more robust curriculum has been developed for
career-related tracks than education. At only 240 minutes, a
transitioning servicemember cannot obtain the needed guidance required
to make informed decisions, particularly those that carry such weight
and impact on their futures. With the addition of Skillbridge, and the
emphasis placed there, as well as other programs offered toward
transitions into careers, servicemembers, again a majority of whom
transition through higher education, are not shown the value or
importance that DoD places on education transition services. There is
simply an imbalance in the emphasis placed on transition tracks.
The prioritization of TAP by the chain of command is also an issue.
Anecdotally and in response to surveys, some student veterans have
reported that the culture of their unit is unsupportive when it comes
to TAP. Some transitioning servicemembers do not understand the
importance of the program because its importance is not stressed to
them. Some within the command structure of the transitioning
servicemember do not see TAP as important. For example, many survey
respondents noted the struggle in making time to complete the education
workshop where requests for that time were denied. This aligns with
Government Accountability Office findings that roughly a quarter of
transitioning servicemembers who needed maximum support did not attend
a two-day class and that, overall, 70 percent of servicemembers did not
begin the TAP process at least one year prior to separation.\37\ While
these are not the most common complaints and were certainly more common
before the FY 2019 NDAA changes to TAP, the persistence of this
mentality throughout the chain of command does not support a successful
transition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ U.S. GOV'T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-23-104538, SERVICE
MEMBERS TRANSITIONING TO CIVILIAN LIFE 11-22 (2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lastly, we would be remiss if we did not take this opportunity to
add that, while TAP is defined as an outcomes-based approach to
transition, the lack of data available on those who make that
transition through higher education - count of individuals degree
choices, successes, debt, and post-graduation earnings - stands as an
impediment to any outcomes assessment of a transition program aimed at
successful transitions through higher education. Data sharing between
the U.S. Department of Defense, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
U.S. Department of Education, and U.S. Department of Labor to identify
the true outcomes of veterans' post-transition is imperative.

The continued success of veterans in higher education in the Post-
9/11 era is no mistake or coincidence. In our Nation's history,
educated veterans have always been the best of a generation and the key
to solving our most complex challenges. Today's student veterans carry
this legacy forward.
We thank the Chair, Ranking Member, and the Subcommittee Members
for your time, attention, and devotion to the cause of veterans in
higher education.
______

Prepared Statement of Jim Lorraine

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and Members of the
Subcommittee - thank you for the invitation to testify before you
today.
The topic of veteran's employment and transition is a very
important one. We all know that transition between jobs is one of most
volatile times in a life, but even more so when it involves a change of
culture. A change of routine. A change of location. The loss of
camaraderie. And sometimes, the loss of a sense of purpose.
Together, this has repeatedly shown to lead to the feeling of
hopelessness. And the loss of hope is one of the largest contributing
factors of veteran suicide.
At America's Warrior Partnership (AWP), veteran's suicide and
suicide prevention are the top priority and focus. Our entire mission
at AWP is ``Partnering With Communities to Prevent Veteran Suicide.''
Part of this effort is understanding the veteran and getting to
know each one in the community. From there, it is assessing their needs
and goals. And without a doubt, meaningful and fulfilling employment is
one of the top goals.
Communities recognize the opportunity veterans, and their families
bring to their counties and regions. Our partner, the Permian Strategic
Partnership (PSP), led by Tracee Bentley, are focused on improving the
quality of life for their residence of the Permian Basin of Texas and
New Mexico to improve both the quality and quantity of their workforce.
In the Permian Basin, AWP is integrating TAP, GI Bill, Apprenticeship,
Skillbridge and ENPP into a recruitment and community development
program. The PSP serves as a model for communities who recognize that
improving the lives of veterans and their families isn't just the right
thing to do, it's the smart thing to do.
Everyone knows veterans are exceptionally disciplined and hard-
working employees. Veterans possess unique skills and experiences that
are invaluable in a workplace. However, ensuring that as servicemembers
are leaving the military, they are made aware of the skills they
possess, the tools and resources available, and opportunities ahead of
them are essential to make sure these individuals match with a career
that fits their skills, needs, and goals.
The greatest indictment of our military is often how we treat our
veterans. And the next generation is watching. The military is
completely dependent on volunteer recruitment, and despite their best
efforts, they are behind. This is happening despite the military being
a ``family business.'' Many who serve have parents or siblings or
grandparents that also served. And when those 15 to 17-year-olds see
how their families and friends are being treated by the Department of
Defense and the VA after service, many quickly chose not to join.
At America's Warrior Partnership, we recognized this immediately.
While many organizations help veterans find jobs, we found that most
companies did not know how to utilize or help the veterans and their
families who were already in the workforce. In response, AWP began the
Corporate Veterans Initiative (CVI). This program was designed to help
take care of veterans' needs in the workplace. Whether it is help with
the VA, help finding local volunteer communities, or help transitioning
into a new community - AWP has programs in place to assist and work
with the company to ensure the military connected employees' needs are
met.
It sounds simple - but it was necessary. And the results have been
terrific. The Corporate Veterans Initiative, powered by AWP's Network
consisting of thousands of partners, raises morale and productivity for
veterans - and helps employee retention and recruitment. A win-win. A
happy employee is much more likely to encourage their friends and
others to join the company. Meanwhile, the veteran's success directly
helps drive an ongoing narrative that veterans are successful post-
service in the workplace and help foster a great working environment.
Highlighting these types of successes can help drive military
recruitment for the next generation.
With Veteran unemployment sitting at a historic low of 2.2 percent
last month, the DOD, working with corporations and nonprofits like AWP,
should shift its focus to the issue of underemployment, which is often
nearly as traumatic for some as unemployment. A bad fit in a company or
being underutilized at a job that does not appreciate their skills and
experience, can be defeating and demoralizing. Learning what resources
are available, and how skills translate to post-military employment, as
well as what industries are hiring and where they have unfilled, good
paying jobs are key to helping address underemployment.
In the end, unemployment, underemployment, and transition
turbulence lead to loss of identity and purpose and combined with
financial insecurity - all contribute to hopelessness. Ensuring
veterans have a purpose and are financially stable are the ultimate
issues that we are here to address today.
Programs led by a coordination of DOD, VA, and DOL have made
significant progress in helping veterans navigate this transition
better.
However, much of this process is DOD heavy. Many of the transitions
happen while service members are still on active duty, so it is natural
that DOD has the greatest sway. However, the DOD must realize that VA
and DOL need more time and resources during that process - once service
members leave DOD, there are few services available to them. Meanwhile,
the VA and DOL will be with these former service members from that
moment on.
At the Department of Labor, Veterans Employment and Training
Service (DOL-VETS), they have a very successful and creative program at
bases around the globe. This program, called the Employment Navigator &
Partnership Pilot (ENPP), is primarily aimed to provide service members
with resources for understanding their skills and securing meaningful
employment in communities where the veterans and their families can
thrive. An important and often overlooked aspect of this program is
that ENPP is also open to spouses. As these service members begin
thinking about their transition, they can utilize ENPP to look at the
job market, research geographic regions, craft resumes, and other pre-
career functions. This program should be expanded with funding and
growth in communities participating in ENPP.
At ENPP, once the service member has an idea of what they would
like to do and where they would like to live, there are many ENPP
partnerships that can assist. These range from Veteran Service
Organizations to major employers. This is important because it is a
first glimpse into what comes next in their career and helps provide a
resource that they can continue to lean on during that transition. ENPP
is harnessing the Sea of Goodwill.
For some service members who need assistance during their military
career, they utilize existing programs such as the USO. Once they begin
to transition out of the military, the USO's partnership with America's
Warrior Partnership provides a warm handoff to ensure they are taken
care in whatever community they choose.
While much has been made about the high-profile use of the GI Bill,
and the ubiquitous use of the program, very little fanfare has been
made of the VA Apprenticeship Program. This program provides GI Bill
like funding for veterans to receive certifications in the trades.
However, college isn't for everyone. And there is a growing need and
demand for skilled labor. But there is minimal use of this program due
to low promotion rate and reduced living stipend as compared to those
using the GI Bill. It is time to update and reform the program and make
it useful for those leaving the military.
One of the biggest changes to the VA Apprenticeship program needs
to be the update to the cost-of-living paid to the students. Currently,
it is a percentage of what is paid to those using the GI Bill. That
needs to end. There should be parity. Second - this program must not in
any way use or draw down from the veterans GI Bill benefits. Many
students would see the potential value of a degree and would shy away
from using it on an apprenticeship - even though it was their desired
career path and numerous, high-paying, jobs available.
Next, more work needs to be done to ensure the costs of the
apprenticeship do not unduly fall on the employers. These include the
costs of the certificates and licensure. While the cost is very small,
some require specific courses to be taken and are currently paid for by
the employers. Then the employers take the students for on-the-job
training. In short-there is a lot required from employers already. And
if opportunities continue, we must eliminate that burden and make it
easier for employers to find and partner with students participating in
the VA Apprenticeship program.
And finally, I am here to thoroughly applaud and commend the
Skillbridge program. We have heard from veterans all over the Nation,
and when the program is done correctly - it has been one of the best
job placement programs we have worked with. To make it more widespread
and effective, I would like to offer several recommended fixes to the
Skillbridge program.
Skillbridge needs to be consistent across the DoD, available
everywhere, and more companies need to know what the program is, how it
works, and can provide no cost opportunities to transitioning service
members without excessive bureaucracy. Every base should offer the
program and every single service member should be able to fully
participate to the maximum. Commanders should have only minimal input
on the program and approval should be mandatory, as this is at the end
of the service members' career - and is focused on transitioning out of
the military. I suggest the program administration moves to the
Department of Labor for full execution and integration into the
Nation's employer space.
Next, more flexibility regarding billets must be given to assist
with Commander's approval and to help better encourage the usage of the
program. DoD must find ways to balance their recruitment and their
separation numbers to ensure every service member has this opportunity.
Every effort must be made to encourage junior enlisted personnel in
addition to senior enlisted and officers who are utilizing the
Skillbridge program at greater rates than E-5s and below. Further, many
service members have issues with cashing out leave at the end of their
service. Current policy forces many to either take leave before the
program or create an unusual pause after the program while leave is
used.
Last, there are legislative changes that must occur to support
veterans in the workplace. Currently, veteran protected status is only
provided to those who served on active duty and are a disabled veteran,
a veteran who served during a period of war, or those within three
years of active-duty discharge. By changing the veteran protected
status to all who served in the National Guard, Reserve, or active-duty
and were discharged in a status other than dishonorable, you would
protect the employee rights of all who served our Nation in military
uniform while empowering the employers to not only know, but
understand, the needs of veterans in their companies who are eligible
for greater support.
Again, thank you to everyone on the Committee for your invaluable
work on the important topic of suicide prevention. We look forward to
working with you all and stand by to assist. Thank you, and I look
forward to your questions.
______

Prepared Statement of Hernan Luis y Prado

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
