- VA REVOLVING FUNDS: ARE VETERANS BEING SHORTCHANGED?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA REVOLVING FUNDS: ARE VETERANS
BEING SHORTCHANGED?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-46

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-926                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia, Chairwoman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana, Ranking
American Samoa                       Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
Florida

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Jennifer A. Kiggans, Chairwoman....................     1
The Honorable Frank J. Mrvan, Ranking Member.....................     2

WITNESSES

Ms. Teresa Riffel, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial
Management Business Transformation, Financial Management
Business Transformation Service, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     4

Accompanied by:

Mr. Leroy Larkins, Executive Director, Office of Revolving
Funds, Office of Management, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Mr. Phillip Christy, Deputy Executive Director, Office of
Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction, U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs

Ms. Julie Matta, Deputy General Counsel, U.S. Government
Accountability Office..........................................     5

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Ms. Teresa Riffel Prepared Statement.............................    21
Ms. Julie Matta Prepared Statement...............................    24

VA REVOLVING FUNDS: ARE VETERANS BEING SHORTCHANGED?

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:50 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jen Kiggans
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kiggans, Rosendale, Mrvan, and
Pappas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Kiggans. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come to
order.
Thank you all for being here today for this oversight
hearing on revolving funds of the Department of Veteran
Affairs. A revolving fund is essentially a business run by a
Federal agency under authority granted by Congress. The
revolving fund contains enterprises that provide services and
collect fees. Instead of the typical model where Congress
provides appropriations to pay Federal employees to perform
tasks, the revolving fund is supposed to be self-supporting. A
fund can recoup its costs and even make a profit, which goes
into its reserves. That is supposed to be competitive and
economical, but in practice it tends to be less transparent.
VA has two large revolving funds, the Franchise Fund and
the Supply Fund, and many other smaller funds. The enterprises
in the Franchise Fund provide accounting, payments, debt
collection, human resources, IT, law enforcement training, and
other services. The enterprises in the Supply Fund are
distribution centers and contracting offices that sell products
like hearing aids, medical equipment, and burial flags, and put
in place contracts other offices can order against.
The revolving funds are big business for VA, and they seem
to be steadily expanding. Each fund took in revenue of about
$1.8 billion last year, but they do not disclose key
information. VA publishes the Franchise Fund's annual report,
but the Supply Fund's financial statements are not public.
These documents do not include basic facts like how much
individual enterprises made or lost, or how much a fund drew
from its reserves. The committee discovered the Supply Fund ran
a $37 million loss last year, but the financial statements
characterized it as a profit. I hope you can see why I am
concerned. This is not transparency.
It has also been a struggle to get information on VA's
agreement with the Department of Homeland Security or U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to process payments
to local healthcare providers who treat detained illegal
immigrants. After several months of Chairman Bost asking
questions, VA did provide the agreement last week. Now that we
have been able to read it, several things have become clear.
The VA has been processing the medical claims for illegal
immigrants for ICE since 2002. ICE pays VA for the healthcare
claims, as well as fees to cover VA's administrative costs and
a profit. The agreement actually covers a half-dozen different
services related to processing the claims. VA collected at
least $124 million from ICE in 2023 through their agreement,
and the VA officials who run the Franchise Fund consider these
profits very important.
These revolving funds have been steadily adding and
expanding business lines over the years, growing their revenues
and their payrolls. There is clearly an incentive to grow the
funds, but they do not always turn a profit. We discovered that
several enterprises within the Franchise Fund have suffered
losses in recent years and the Supply Fund as a whole took a
loss last year. The Canteen Fund had to be bailed out for $140
million during the pandemic. Congress would not know any of
that if not for this hearing.
Revolving funds may be an effective way to provide
services, but they also seem to be a blind spot. Like any other
business, they can be mismanaged or suffer downturns. We always
need to know how they are performing. We need to ensure that VA
is not creating new enterprises for the sake of empire
building, but signing these agreements carefully. I appreciate
our witnesses joining us today to answer these important
questions.
With that, I now recognize Ranking Member Mrvan for his
opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF FRANK J. MRVAN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chair Kiggans. I appreciate the
opportunity to learn more about VA revolving funds today.
Revolving funds are not unique to VA. They are used across
Federal agencies. Congress authorized revolving funds to help
the government run more efficiently. I want to go ahead and
answer the question this committee hearing title--this hearing
title poses: Are veterans being shortchanged by VA revolving
funds?
From my read of the testimony and other materials my staff
compiled ahead of this hearing, no, veterans are not being
shortchanged. In fact, veterans are benefiting from the VA
revolving funds program. As we will hear today, the use of the
VA revolving funds results in government efficiencies and cost
savings that allow VA to focus on what it does best, care for
veterans. VA is able to reinvest the profits from its revolving
funds directly into technology advances, benefiting VA and the
veterans it serves.
VA revolving funds are subject to significant oversight.
The Revolving Funds Board of Directors provides strategic
leadership and ensures accountability and transparency for this
program. Annual independent audits are performed on the funds
and VA has received 16 consecutive clean audits for Supply Fund
and 26 for Franchise Fund.
The Antideficiency Act (ADA) also mandates that the fund
does not incur costs or make payments that exceed the amounts
available in the funds. These guardrails help ensure the
revolving funds operate in the way Congress intended. I was
impressed to hear about the wide range of goods and services
the revolving fund provides through the Supply and Franchise
Funds, all while being fiscally responsible.
VA's enterprise centers, operated through the Franchise
Fund, provided administrative services in the areas of IT,
financial management, personal security, and law enforcement
and human resources. These programs boost productivity and
minimize cost. This is a prime example of good governance.
I want to address recent claims made in the media in regard
to VA's revolving funds. VA and the Department of Homeland
Security have had a fee-for-service partnership authorized
through the VA Franchise Fund for nearly two decades,
specifically between ICE Health Services Corps (IHSC) and VA's
Financial Service Center. Since 2002, IHSC and Financial
Services Center (FSC) have operated independently with
appropriate congressional oversight under multiple Republican
and Democratic administrations alike.
VA has repeatedly informed the public and Congress that it
does not provide or fund healthcare services for ICE detainees.
ICE is solely responsible for determining a patient's
eligibility for care, helping them access care in private
sector, and transmitting bills for processing to FSC. In this
relationship, VA is solely responsible for administrative tasks
which are reimbursed by IHSC.
The argument that this takes away key manpower from
processing veterans claims is blatantly false and intended to
incite outrage against VA and migrant communities. In fact, if
the VA were to end this partnership and work, it would likely
result in enormous cost and administrative burden to the
Federal Government as they would have to contract with a
private company to process these bills. The only way veterans
could be shortchanged here is if my colleagues push to remove
this successful and efficient revenue building program at VA.
Instead of politicizing the facts of a successful VA
operation, we should focus on the real positive outcomes of VA
revolving funds. I hope my colleagues across the aisle also
look at this hearing as an opportunity to learn more about a
program in government that is working well.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Ranking Member Mrvan.
We will now turn to witness testimony. Testifying before us
today on our first panel, we have Ms. Terry Riffel, deputy
assistant secretary for Financial Management Business
Transformation at the Department of Veteran affairs. She is
accompanied by Mr. Leroy Larkins, executive director of the VA
Office of Revolving Funds; Mr. Phillip Christy, the deputy
executive director of the VA Office of Acquisition, Logistics,
and Construction. Finally, we have Ms. Julie Matta, deputy
general counsel at the Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Thank you and welcome. Will the witnesses please stand and
raise your right hand?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. You may be seated. Let the record
reflect that the witnesses answered in the affirmative.
Ms. Riffel, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to provide
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF TERESA RIFFEL

Ms. Riffel. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking
Member Mrvan, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today on the Department of Veterans
Affairs VA revolving funds and how these funds support VA's
mission to care for veterans, their families, caregivers, and
survivors. I am accompanied by Leroy Larkins, executive
director for revolving funds, and Philip Christy, deputy
executive director for acquisitions, logistics, and
construction.
The VA revolving funds, consisting of the Supply Fund and
Franchise Fund, provide high-quality, cost-effective support
services by streamlining processes, optimizing the value of
common administrative services to VA administrations and staff
offices, as well as other government agencies (OGA). Shared
service offerings allow VA revolving fund customers to focus on
performing their mission-critical functions of providing high-
quality care, benefits, and services to veterans and eligible
family members.
Better support to VA employees for common administrative
services means better service for veterans, their families,
caregivers, and survivors. VA is proud to serve as a Federal
shared service provider.
I would like to highlight a few examples where the Supply
Fund and Franchise Fund have successfully improved services to
VA, enhancing support to our veterans. The Financial Services
Center, the FSC, has consolidated 78 field payroll offices to
the FSC. As a result, Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and
Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) can redirect resources
to focus on their core mission of caring for veterans and
family members.
Additionally, the FSC reduced the backlog of veteran
noncommunity care network medical claims by 99 percent and
achieved a 92 percent auto-adjudication rate for dialysis
medical claims with an average of 1.6 processing days. These
efforts resulted in significant improvement in VA provider
relations, directly supporting veterans' ability to receive
medical care.
The Supply Fund Board organizations, which provide
strategic contracting, have delivered over 3 billion in cost
avoidance since 2020 due to robust category management
principles and board-approved business plans.
Oversight for the VA revolving funds is conducted through
the Revolving Fund Board of Directors, which functions as the
principal governance body overseeing the Supply Fund and
Franchise Fund's strategic priorities, goals, and objectives.
It also provides strategic leadership for the Supply and
Franchise Funds' operations, execution, and management of
overall risk and challenges. The Revolving Fund Board of
Directors is co-chaired by the deputy chief financial officer
and deputy chief acquisition officer of the Department, with
board members consisting of six other senior leaders from VA
administrations and staff offices whose participation on the
Revolving Fund Board of Directors ensures revolving fund
resources strategically serve VA's mission.
To emphasize transparency and accountability for a $2.2
billion budget, each Franchise Fund Enterprise Center and
Supply Fund Acquisition Center is required to complete a 2-year
business plan on an annual basis. The Revolving Fund Board of
Directors reviews and approves each business plan, which
details specific revenue and expense projections, full-time
equivalent staffing levels, and contract support requirements
prior to funds execution. Information from the approved
business plans is utilized to develop budget summary data and
is included in part 5 of the VA president's budget submission.
VA revolving fund financial statements are audited by a
private sector public accounting firm annually to provide an
independent assessment of each revolving fund's financial
stewardship. As a result of sound financial management business
practices, the Franchise Fund received 26 and Supply Fund 16
consecutive unmodified clean opinions.
In closing, the VA revolving funds provide shared services
to meet customer service demands effectively and efficiently,
providing significant benefit to VA administrations and staff
offices as well as other government agencies. As the Government
Accountability Office noted in a recent report, GAO 23-104624,
on a similar function in another agency, given the fiscal
pressures facing the Federal Government, consolidating and
sharing services, such as payroll or information technology
services, within and among agencies is one way agencies can
operate more efficiently. Shared services may also allow
agencies to benefit from economies of scale and take advantage
of specialized expertise. VA's revolving funds adhere to this
principle and are consistent with GAO's recommendation.
Madam Chairwoman and other members of the subcommittee,
thank you again for the opportunity to discuss VA's revolving
funds. This concludes my opening statement, and my colleagues
and I are happy to respond to any questions you may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Teresa Riffel Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Ms. Riffel.
Ms. Matta, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to provide
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JULIE MATTA

Ms. Matta. Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss some of the key features of revolving funds, including
how they are established, revolving fund types, and the
applicability of key appropriations law principles. I am
pleased to be able to share some of GAO's expertise in
appropriations law on this topic.
I would like to begin with the fundamental nature of a
revolving fund as a form of appropriation. As the name
suggests, a revolving fund is intended to finance a cycle of
operations. To accomplish that purpose, revolving funds collect
and retain receipts that are then used to finance the fund's
operations. Thus, revolving funds are exceptions to the
miscellaneous receipts statute. This law requires an agency to
deposit any funds it receives outside of congressional
appropriations into the appropriate general fund of the U.S.
Treasury, unless the agency is otherwise authorized to retain
and use the funds. Revolving funds provide such an
authorization.
The structure of a revolving fund is similar to that of a
business. One of the advantages of this structure is that the
fund may become self-sustaining through its cycle of
operations. If that happens, the activities supported by the
revolving fund may no longer need annual appropriations from
Congress. This gives the agency more flexibility, but it may
also reduce the routine congressional visibility into the
fund's operations that the annual appropriations cycle
provides.
The flexibility provided by a revolving fund is not
unlimited. Importantly, the amounts in a revolving fund are
appropriated, including both the initial infusion of working
capital and the operating receipts generated by the fund
itself. This has two significant consequences for the revolving
fund.
First, revolving funds can only be created by Congress
because only Congress can make an appropriation. Agencies have
no authority to administratively create a revolving fund.
Instead, an agency may only operate such a fund where Congress
has provided specific statutory authority. That statutory
authority will specify the receipts that may be deposited into
the fund and the purposes for which those receipts may be used.
Second, the rules that guide the use of appropriations
apply to revolving funds as well. We often think about
appropriations law as having three fundamental characteristics:
purpose, time, and amount. The purpose statute provides that
appropriations can only be used for the purposes for which they
were made. Revolving funds, then, may only be used for the
purposes specified in the legislation authorizing the fund.
With respect to time, revolving funds have a special
characteristic. One of the defining features of a revolving
fund is that the receipts earned by the fund are available
without fiscal year limitation. This means that the receipts
can be used to purchase goods and services that the fund needs
at any time. By contrast, most annual appropriations are
available only for those goods and services an agency needs
during a fixed period of time.
Finally, with respect to amount, perhaps the most important
fiscal statute is the Antideficiency Act. This law prohibits
agencies from spending more than is appropriated to them and
from spending amounts before they receive them. As a result, a
revolving fund may not spend more than the amount contained in
the fund, and receipts cannot be spent until they are
collected.
Revolving funds are also subject to other legal
requirements that apply to appropriated amounts. For example,
obligations made against any appropriation must be recorded. An
obligation is a legal requirement to make a payment, and the
recording statute requires agencies to document their
obligations, keeping track of how much has already been spent.
Importantly, only those obligations that meet certain statutory
criteria can be recorded. These requirements ensure that the
obligations incurred by a revolving fund are proper and within
the fund's means.
Revolving funds strike a balance between agency flexibility
and congressional control of the public purse. They provide a
way to finance cyclical agency operations that may become self-
sustaining while remaining subject to the restrictions that
apply to all appropriated funds.
Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, and members of
the committee, this completes my prepared statement. I am
pleased to respond to any questions that you may have. Thank
you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Julie Matta Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much.
We will now move to questions, and I yield myself 5
minutes.
Ms. Matta, what benefit do revolving funds produce? Is the
purpose to provide services in the most economical way possible
or to turn a profit for the agency?
Ms. Matta. GAO's longstanding case law, looking at
revolving funds as a form of appropriation, talks about a
couple flexibilities with revolving funds, primarily that they
are no longer part of the annual appropriation cycle. They are
a form of permanent appropriation, and typically, the amounts
in the revolving fund are no year. They are provided to the
agency without fiscal year limitations. That provides the
agency a certain amount of flexibility. It is a loosening of
the congressional purse strings, if you would.
We would, if GAO were looking at a particular revolving
fund, look at the exact language of the statute. Revolving
funds can differ and may give an agency more or less
flexibility to retain a balance. Some revolving funds specify
an amount that must be returned to the Treasury. GAO would look
at the language of the statute because each revolving fund
requires a specific authorization.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you.
Ms. Riffel, you explained in a briefing to staff that the
profits generated by the Franchise Fund are very important to
the VA. Where do the profits go and what would be the
consequences of losing them?
Ms. Riffel. Yes, so they are very important. They go into
retained earnings. In those retained earnings, we have
operational reserves as well as capital reserves.
Operational reserves are there in case we were to lose a
customer and we have to all of a sudden bear additional costs
with no income, we would have that to fall back on. The capital
reserve is also used to provide for technology enhancements or
improvements. A customer may come to us with a new requirement.
We would leverage our reserves to support quick delivery of
that customer's requirements.
That is part, really, of the whole idea behind shared
services, that an agency and/or a customer internal to VA may
have a specific business need. They are not able to meet that
business need. They can come to us. If it is a common
administrative service that we offer, we would certainly do
what we need to, to on demand meet that customer's need. Those
reserves are critical for us to be able to do that.
If we were to lose this customer, or lose a customer in
general, anytime a business loses a customer, then you
obviously have less profit, less reserves, and you have to
determine what you are going to do with the individuals that
were performing that duty that is no longer there, which also
becomes a burden to, in this case, a franchise organization.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you.
Ms. Matta, what happens when there is a shortfall in a
revolving fund?
Ms. Matta. The Antideficiency Act prohibits agencies from
incurring expenses in excess of the amount in a fund. An agency
is legally prohibited from incurring additional expenses if
they do not have amounts to cover it.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you.
Mr. Larkins, how many times in the last 3 years has one of
the funds or one of their enterprises produced a loss? How did
you make up that shortfall?
Mr. Larkins. Thank you for the question.
For the Supply Fund we have seen that in 2 years of the
last 5 years, it was in 2020 and then 2023. We have seen that
also in the Franchise Fund. We have only one instance, and that
was back in 2022, for our law enforcement training center. Each
time we are able to utilize the reserves to compensate for
those particular losses.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you.
Mr. Larkins, how much money is in the fund's reserve, and
how much has been drawn down over the last 3 years?
Mr. Larkins. Okay. Thank you for that.
In the Franchise Fund, we have a total reserve of, I want
to say, $678 million, which consists of operating reserves of
$521 million and $157 million in capital reserves. For the
Supply Fund, we have a total of $424 million in the reserve.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you.
Ms. Matta, the VA publishes the Franchise Fund financial
statements, but the Supply Fund financial statements are not
made public. Neither of them contain much information about the
funds reserves or the profits or losses of enterprises within
the funds. Does this lack of transparency present any risks?
Ms. Matta. The Antideficiency Act and the recording statute
both require agencies to keep track of receipts and the
expenses on any form of appropriation, including a revolving
fund. The VA should be able to provide this committee with
those statements at the level of detail that you require for
your oversight at any time.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you.
My time has expired. I will now yield 5 minutes to Ranking
Member Mrvan.
Mr. Mrvan. Ms. Riffel, I want to give you the opportunity
to set the record straight on the relationship between the VA
and the Department of Homeland Security. Please share the facts
that you think are relevant to dispel any of the misinformation
in the media relating to this issue.
Ms. Riffel. I really appreciate the opportunity to respond
to that question. I think there is been a lot of
mischaracterization in the media around the Financial Services
Center's relationship with Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
particularly Health Services Corps. I want to make it really
clear that there is no VA funds nor VA healthcare professionals
that provide any services to those individuals that are in the
custody of ICE. We have been doing this for over 20 years, and
the relationship is solely to process medical claims. IHSC pre-
funds or advance funds the VA or the Financial Services Center
for that work. That is really how simple it is.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. From a cost savings and economies of scale
perspective, why does it make sense for the VA to process these
bills?
Ms. Riffel. Yes. It is because the skill to process
healthcare claims is actually fairly unique. The Financial
Services Center does this service for Veterans Health
Administration and also for this other government agency, IHSC.
I think part of the efficiency is that through economies of
scale, we are able to actually spread the overhead that is
necessary to be able to perform this service. It benefits VA
because IHSC is actually absorbing some of that overhead in
that product line overall, that medical claims processing
product line.
I think it is a good example of shared services across
government where you have more than one agency that is
benefiting from a shared service offering that, in this case,
the Financial Services Center, as part of VA, is able to
deliver.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Larkins, thank you for sharing the information about
the VA revolving funds. This is certainly an interesting
program and clearly a benefit to the VA, the Federal
Government, and taxpayers. How have revolving funds been
instrumental in enhancing operational efficiencies within
government programs? What specific examples can you provide
that highlight the benefits of utilizing revolving funds and
promoting fiscal responsibility and sustainability resource
management?
Mr. Larkins. No, thank you for the opportunity to speak
about the value of shared services, specifically the VA
revolving funds.
When I think about the work that we do across the eight
enterprise centers within the Franchise Fund, one item actually
sticks out to me from the Internal Control Servicing Center,
who provides reviews of state and Tribal government-operated
veteran cemeteries. What we want to do is make sure that they
are maintaining the standards that National Cemetery
Administration (NCA) has been known for. They got a 97 score
related to the American Customer Satisfaction Index. We want to
make sure that we take that off their plate so they can
concentrate on serving the VA cemeteries. At the same time, we
want to make sure that these state cemeteries are up to
standard. We do this.
I think that this is something that is personal to me
because my father, who is a U.S. Army Vietnam veteran, actually
has preselected a state cemetery for his final burial place for
him and my mother. For me, I want to make sure that they are
getting the standards that they are up to.
We talk about the duality of shared services, the
efficiencies that are there, but we are actually taking care of
the veteran as well.
When we think about on the Supply Fund side of the house,
one of the programs that sticks out to me is the Warriors to
Workforce Program that is conducted from the VA Acquisitions
Academy. The 7-month program actually trains service-disabled
veterans and actually trains them to be contract specialists.
Literally, we are using our resources to train veterans to
improve their lives. Actually, this is a shared service
training resource where we have trained 264 interns across the
Federal Government, 44 actually are from other government
agencies.
Mr. Mrvan. Quickly, we have got about 30 seconds. You had
mentioned that there is $678 million in that fund. Can you tell
me, is that--those programs that you mentioned, that fund is
utilized for that?
Mr. Larkins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Larkins. Thank you.
Mr. Mrvan. With that, I yield back. I am sorry.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Rosendale for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Appreciate
it.
The U.S. Department of Veterans affairs has two major
revolving funds, the Franchise Fund and the Supply Fund, that
provide services to VA offices and other agencies on a fee-for-
service basis. Both do not receive annual appropriations from
Congress and instead operate like a business.
While I am glad these revolving funds do not add to our
over $34 trillion debt, the funding mechanism has largely
prevented Congress from providing proper oversight. The lack of
oversight has led to confusion about how the funds are used,
and I am hopeful that this hearing today can clear that up.
Ms. Riffel, several processing functions have been improved
by turning them over to FSC, as you talked about. Do not
disagree with that. I do have some questions about some of
those other practices that you all have taken on, whether it
was by choice or not.
The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement allocated $75
million in fiscal year 2021 and $124 million in fiscal year
2023 for illegal immigrants in ICE detention to receive
healthcare services on the taxpayer's dime. This 65 percent
increase is the direct result of Biden's refusal to secure the
southern border.
Ms. Riffel, where do the dollars come from to pay the
healthcare providers who treat the ICE detainees?
Ms. Riffel. Thanks for that question.
As I stated earlier, Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
IHSC pre-funds for both the Full-time Equivalency (FTE) that
are dedicated for that particular claims processing service, as
well as for the disbursements to reimburse those providers that
are doing that care.
Mr. Rosendale. This is coming directly from ICE's budget
then?
Ms. Riffel. That is correct.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Ms. Riffel, who are the healthcare
providers who treat the illegal immigrants detained by ICE?
Ms. Riffel. Yes. I would actually--so ICE has
responsibility for that coordination of care for anybody in
their custody. VA does not get involved with that. We are
simply processing claims on behalf of IHSC. We are not involved
whatsoever in where or how those individuals in custody are
receiving care.
Mr. Rosendale. I understand that the care is provided by
non-VA providers.
Ms. Riffel. That is correct.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Is it possible that the same
healthcare providers who are part of the VA's community care
network could also be the same providers who treat the illegal
immigrants that are detained by ICE?
Ms. Riffel. There is no analysis to indicate one way or the
other on that. That is not part of any of the agreement that we
have with IHSC in terms of asking for any of that information.
Mr. Rosendale. You are not privy to any of that
information?
Ms. Riffel. We do not analyze----
Mr. Rosendale. I did not ask if you analyze it. You are
privy to it. You have access to the information that shows the
healthcare providers that they are utilizing because you are
processing their collections and payments.
Ms. Riffel. We are processing payments to providers, yes.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Then you know who the providers are
that they are using.
Ms. Riffel. Yes.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Again, the same healthcare providers
who are part of the VA's community care network could also be
the same providers who treat the illegal immigrants detained by
ICE?
Ms. Riffel. Again, we have not done that analysis to
confirm----
Mr. Rosendale. I did not ask you if you did the analysis. I
said, could they be the same care providers?
Ms. Riffel. We would have to confirm that. I do not want to
say yes or no.
Mr. Rosendale. Is it possible? Is it possible?
Ms. Riffel. I would like to take that for the record and
answer it accurately.
Mr. Rosendale. You do not know if it is possible? If
healthcare is being delivered in the same communities that we
have, a veterans community, and you have access to the very--
because of the fact you have to pay them, you cannot say
whether that would even be possible?
Ms. Riffel. I would rather actually answer the question
accurately.----
Mr. Rosendale. I mean, you are not looking good to the
American people right now, okay, the way you are trying to
evade this. It is a pretty simple question.
Ms. Riffel. Well, I appreciate your question. We have not
completed that analysis.
Mr. Rosendale. You just will not answer. Okay. Okay.
This arrangement could result in illegal immigrants
receiving treatment before veterans do. Quite frankly, to this
committee, that is completely unacceptable.
Do you think it is fair?
Ms. Riffel. I am not aware of that.
Mr. Rosendale. Do you think it is fair if that is taking
place, if we have illegal immigrants that are utilizing the
same community care providers that our veterans are supposed to
be utilizing, and it is keeping our veterans from receiving
their care, do you think that that is fair?
Ms. Riffel. That is an assertion.
Mr. Rosendale. Wow. Okay. What can you show me that proves
they are not the same networks and that illegal immigrants are
not being prioritized over veterans? Can you provide me that
information?
Ms. Riffel. We can take that for the record if that is
something that you would like to see.
Mr. Rosendale. I would like to see that. I would absolutely
like to see that.
Madam Chair, I see I am 12 seconds over. I would yield
back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Pappas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pappas. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. I appreciate,
members of the panel, for your comments here this morning.
I think it is critically important that, you know, the way
that you have reinforced the argument about VA being laser-
focused on its mission to deliver care and benefits to the
veterans of this country, and we appreciate that. I think at a
time where we are seeing a historic expansion of care and
benefits through the The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson
Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT)
Act, more than 5 million American veterans have been screened
for toxic exposure, for instance. Veterans should have no
question about the ability of VA to be there for them. I think
any sort of political narrative that is ginned up to try to sow
doubt among veterans is dangerous and is counterproductive to
the work that is ongoing at VA.
I did appreciate the way that you highlighted the benefits
of these programs. I learned a few things today. I did hear,
Ms. Riffel, you talking about the Financial Services Center and
the way that it has played a role in terms of paying claims
through the Community Care Program. It is something that I have
heard a lot about over the years in my district.
A lot of providers that are out there, a few years ago in
particular, were dealing with a huge backlog of legacy claims.
I am wondering if you could talk a little bit more about how
you have worked with the provider community to make sure,
ultimately, that the bill is paid and that these folks continue
to be there to be able to provide care to our veterans.
Ms. Riffel. Yes, so thanks for that.
We have had a relationship with Veterans Health
Administration for quite some time in terms of supporting their
claims processing, particularly around the Camp Lejune Family
Member Program as well as the dialysis--contracted dialysis
claims and then the Community Care non-network claims. We are
not associated with the contract that they have right now, but
the other ones. I would tell you that we were instrumental in
helping them with their initial backlog that they had several
years back that resulted in some concerns from the private
sector community. We feel really honored to partner with them
and to be able to really help those relations that they needed
to ensure that veterans are getting the care they need to in
the community.
We continue to this day to have that relationship with VHA
and certainly would stand by to support any additional claims
that they need us to do for them. Ninety-five percent of our
medical claims processing that we do is in support of VHA. Only
really 5 percent is OGA. Again, our big focus is for Veterans
Health Administration.
Mr. Pappas. Well, we thank you for that. I have seen the
benefit on the ground in my district in terms of the
relationship between providers and VA and the way that they
work for veterans.
I want to highlight another program and the way that it
supports VA's work, and that is around VA's police force. I
understand that the revolving funds program led to the creation
of the Law Enforcement Training Center (LETC). It provides
special training for police officers working in healthcare
environments, which is a pretty specific environment, including
law enforcement personnel working at VA healthcare facilities.
I am wondering maybe, Mr. Larkins, if you want to take this
one, can you share how LETC trains VA police officers and
fosters a safe environment for veterans seeking care at VA?
Mr. Larkins. No, thank you for this opportunity.
It is some great work that is being done at the law
enforcement training center. Specifically, they have a mandate
to train our VA police officers, a very specialized training.
We want to make sure that if a veteran's in crisis, an emergent
situation happens, that we maintain respect for the veteran's
rights and the things that they have earned over time. You
know, things happen, but we want to make sure that we are able
to de-escalate the situation quickly. Right? Get voluntary
adherence to what the police officer is asking.
They have been carrying out this mission now since, I want
to say, 2007, and they have been doing a great job for that--
you know, for this timeframe.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you all for helping us to
understand the bigger picture in terms of these revolving
funds. We look forward to receiving more information, staying
up to date, so that we can do our oversight work.
With that, I yield back my time.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Pappas.
We will now proceed to round 2 of questions, and I will
yield 5 minutes to myself.
Ms. Riffel, the VA has described the ICE agreement as
processing healthcare claims. However, based on the documents
you provided last week, there is a lot more to it. Can you walk
me through the full scope of these services?
Ms. Riffel. Yes, I would be happy to. There is some
ancillary services that happen when you process medical claims.
Like some mailroom stuff and some of the help desk activities
in terms of answering inquiries and whatnot, we did not call
those out directly initially, but they are called out in the
agreement with ICE.
The other main service that is provided is purchase card
services. You would see that on there as well.
Other than that, the other ancillary are really secondary
to supporting the medical claims processing product line, which
is the main product line that we have with them.
Ms. Kiggans. Then, additionally, Ms. Riffel, according to
the VA spokesman, not more than 10 VA staff perform this work
for ICE. Is this just counting the VA Federal employees or does
that number also include contractors?
Ms. Riffel. No, Federal employees. Those are FTE.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay, let us see. Also, did these positions
exist in the VA prior to the ICE agreement, or were they
created to work on the agreement?
Ms. Riffel. That is been, you know, 20-plus years ago. I
think over the years, initially, when we first started, we had
some contractors involved, but as we have gotten very
specialized skill in that area, now we have switched over to
FTE so that we can actually maintain some continuity and
standards in that particular product line.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Then, let us see, in 2021, the
administration reassigned most of the Community Care claims
processing from the FSC to the newly created Integrated
Veterans Care Office. As the FSC processes more and more
medical claims for ICE and fewer and fewer veteran Community
Care claims, how is this ICE agreement benefiting veterans or
the community care program? Ms. Riffel.
Ms. Riffel. Again, I want to just reiterate that 95 percent
of our claims processing is for Veterans Health Administration.
Only 5 percent is represented by OGA.
I think it really is shared services in general. Right? You
have that opportunity to create efficiencies, economies of
scale, by spreading your overhead amongst more than one
customer. It benefits VA, as well as us maintaining the skill
that we need to, to be able to perform that for any other
agency, really, that might come to us and request that service.
Ms. Kiggans. One last question. Committee staff asked the
VA this question prior to the hearing, but we did not receive
an answer. Do you know how many revolving funds there are in
the VA at all levels?
Ms. Riffel. Yes, I will actually defer that to Mr. Larkins
here.
Mr. Larkins. Yes, we have more than a dozen VA revolving
funds that are there, and we are working on now trying to
compile the information, and we will get it to you soon.
Ms. Kiggans. That would be great. Thank you.
I will yield to Mr. Mrvan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Ms. Matta, are there best practices used in other Federal
agencies the VA could adopt to increase transparency for the
revolving funds to address some of the concerns we hear today?
Ms. Matta. Ranking Member Mrvan, I can provide an answer
for the record for you on that. Our experts back at GAO who do
engagements looking at the operations of specific funds can
work with your staff and give you some of that information.
Mr. Mrvan. Mr. Larkins, I was pleased to hear about the
clean audit history of the VA Franchise Fund. Can you please
describe how audits and general oversight of the fund is
conducted?
Mr. Larkins. No--oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Mrvan. What are the guardrails to ensure the fund
remains fiscally responsible?
Mr. Larkins. No, thank you for that.
We, each year, we have a public accounting firm come in to
do an assessment of our financial statements, and they actually
produce an audit report on our behalf, and they go through an
exhaustive list of controls over a period of about 6 months,
and they come to an opinion. Just as mentioned before, we have
26 consecutive clean opinions for the Franchise Funds, 16 for
the Supply Fund.
In addition to that, we actually have other internal
controls within VA to make sure that, again, we are not going
to exhaust the revolving fund. One of the things that my
colleague has helped stand up is the Integrated Financial and
Acquisition Management Transformation (IFAM) system. There are
controls within that system that are going to prevent us from,
you know, overspending what is actually in the reserve.
There is many controls set up. There is actually monthly
monitoring of budget execution to make sure that the plan that
is been laid out, these 2-year business plans that we talked
about before, are actually being executed properly.
There is many controls in place to make sure that we stay
fiscally sound.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Ms. KigganS. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Rosendale for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Larkins, as a former Montana insurance commissioner, I
do understand the need and the purpose for having reserves
available to you. I just did some quick math, and the
organization, your organization has 2,500 employees, roughly.
If we just average that you have $100,000 a year salary across
the board. I am sure some make more, some make less. That is
about $250 million a year of obligation, of true obligation
that you have.
Let us throw some benefits in there, some bonus payments,
whatever goes on, and round it up to $300 million. If you have
$300 million of true obligation and you are sitting on a
balance of your reserves is at 1.64 billion--wait a second, 1.2
billion, excuse me, 1.2 billion in accumulated reserves, that
is four times the amount that is truly, totally obligated.
The balance of your $164 billion that I am showing, $164
billion is your cost going out, $100.8 billion revenue coming
in. Okay? This is your in and out numbers. That is truly an
exercise of the books that you are handling for other people.
If there is a change in that, there is going to be an equal
change in the obligation that goes out.
Your true obligation is about 250-to $300 million a year.
Why I am asking is that at $1.2 billion of accumulated
reserves, you are talking about 4 years' worth of time. You
would certainly be able to modify your business plan, your
business model in a year's time, if there was that dramatic of
a change. I just do not understand why this organization has a
requirement for such a high reserve amount.
I am not sure who is best equipped to answer this question.
This question is for whoever may be able to take it up. I want
to ask you about another revolving fund. It is the Pershing
Hall in Paris.
Pershing Hall was purchased and organized by a group of
World War I veterans and American Legion members as a memorial
and gathering place. Since then, it has been turned over to the
VA. It has become dilapidated and renovated several times, and
most recently leased to a hotel and then to a shoe store.
Today, VA collects the rent and is allowed to spend a portion
of it on receptions.
According to the Legion members in Paris, it no longer
serves any public purpose and its collection of historical
artifacts has been scattered. Are you aware of the situation?
Anybody? Do you think this revolving fund has mutated into a
pure moneymaker and forgotten its original purpose?
Mr. Larkins. Well, first off, I just want to, for the
record, we can provide you some expenses that make up why we
need the reserve that is been there. Typically, for our
Franchise Fund, sir, we keep 1 to 3 months of operating reserve
on task. Again, there is some other expenses there, like you
said, outside of salaries. We are happy to provide, and take
that for the record.
For the Supply Fund, there is about 6 months of operating
reserves. Again, this is information that we can provide to you
so that you can get a clearer picture.
Now, in relation to Pershing Hall, that is not something
that is under our purview today, but we are happy to take this
for the record so that we can address your concerns. You know,
my main oversight is for the Franchise Fund and the Supply
Fund, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. Wonderful. Will you commit with us today
then, Mr. Larkins, that you will get that information and set
something up with committee on Pershing Hall so we can find out
exactly what is going on with that property?
Mr. Larkins. We will take that for the record. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Going back to the reserve funds,
again, the reserve funds, I truly understand when there is a
need for an obligation, but there is not going to be an
obligation. If you have a 4-month operating cost, okay, there
is not going to be that large of a true obligation because you
either have a customer that is having you service their
account, so you have revenue in and revenue going out. If that
customer goes away, you are certainly not going to have the
obligation for that bill to be paid because that customer is no
longer going to be creating that obligation, so you will not
have that revenue.
The true obligation and reserves that are necessary for the
organization is the salary for the employees and to have 4
years of salary requirement in reserve, that is far too much
money.
I yield back.
Mr. Larkins. If I can address that just real quickly. We
will, you know, again, we will get you this information. There
are more expenses out there than just salary. We actually have
buildings, you know, that we are renting, and there is other
overhead that we can definitely be able to explain to you
further. Thank you.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale.
I just have a few more questions, so I will yield a few
minutes to myself.
Mr. Larkins, why does the VA publish the annual report for
the Franchise Fund, but not for the Supply Fund?
Mr. Larkins. No, thank you for that question.
This is actually one of the questions that I asked when I
first took this job in 2019. The Franchise Fund is more of an
enterprise business entity, meaning we are actively selling
services to not only VA, but to other government agencies.
Okay.
The Supply Fund is strictly more so with services to VA.
Right? Therefore, we do not necessarily put together a public
facing document that is, you know, put out there for everyone
to view, but we have access. We have this information, and
anyone who desires it, we can give them access to that
information.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you for that and also for Mr. Larkins.
If the committee had not held this hearing, then how would we
have found out about the Supply Fund loss?
Mr. Larkins. That is a good question. We do put this
information out there in the audit reports. I think this is a
classic thing of, again, like, if you ask, we give you the
information, but you are right, there is probably other areas
where we could provide information on a regular basis if it is
required.
Ms. Kiggans. Ms. Matta, can you provide an example in which
a revolving fund violated the Antideficiency Act?
Ms. Matta. Yes. The Antideficiency Act requires agencies to
have a system of funds control. In fiscal year 2023, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development reported to us that
they had counted the value of reimbursable agreements that they
were anticipating getting and had obligated against those
anticipated receipts before they received them. That violated
the Antideficiency Act's prohibition against obligations before
you receive the amounts. That violation is in GAO's compilation
of ADA reports that we published in December.
Ms. Kiggans. Great. Thank you.
Then, Ms. Riffel, when was the last time that a VA
revolving fund violated the Antideficiency Act?
Ms. Riffel. Yes, I actually am not aware. I will defer to
Mr. Larkins and see if he is aware.
Mr. Larkins. From my aware, we have not had an
Antideficiency Act within the VA revolving funds.
Ms. Kiggans. Mr. Mrvan, you do not have any other
questions?
Great. I think that is all we have for today, so thank you
all for being here today and for answering all of our
questions.
I ask unanimous consent that all members shall have 5
legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks,
and include any extraneous material. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:42 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Teresa Riffel

Good afternoon, Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Revolving Funds and
how these funds support VA's mission to care for Veterans, their
families, caregivers, and survivors. I am accompanied by Leroy Larkins,
Executive Director for Revolving Funds and Phillip Christy, Deputy
Executive Director for Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction.
VA Revolving Funds, consisting of the Supply Fund and Franchise
Fund, provide high-quality, cost-effective support services by
streamlining processes and optimizing the value of common
administrative services to VA's Administrations and Staff Offices and
other government agencies. Shared service offerings allow VA Revolving
Funds customers to focus on performing their mission-critical functions
of providing high-quality care, benefits, and services to Veterans and
eligible family members. Better support to VA employees for common
administrative services means better services for Veterans, their
families, caregivers, and survivors. VA is proud to serve as a Federal
shared service provider.

VA Revolving Funds History

VA's Supply Fund is authorized by 38 U.S.C. Sec.  8121. In July
1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed legislation authorizing a
revolving supply fund to maintain and operate a supply system for VA,
including procurement of goods and services, equipment, personal
services, and the repair and reclamation of used, spent, or excess
personal property. The Supply Fund is authorized to provide services on
a reimbursable basis to VA and the Department of Defense. Additionally,
the Supply Fund uses authorities under the Economy Act and Government
Employees Training Act with other government agencies.
VA's Franchise Fund was established under the authority of the
Government Management Reform Act of 1994 (P.L. 103-356), and the VA and
Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations
Act of 1997. VA was selected by the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) in 1996 as one of six Executive branch agencies to establish a
franchise fund pilot program. VA's Franchise Fund began providing
common administrative support services to VA and other government
agencies in 1997. In 2006, the Military Quality of Life and Veterans
Affairs Appropriations Act, P.L. 109-114, made VA's Franchise Fund
permanent.

Operations and Management of VA Revolving Funds

VA Supply Fund

The Supply Fund is a self-sustaining, revolving fund that supports
the operation of a supply system at VA. As such, no Congressional
appropriation is required. Revenue is realized from fees on
acquisitions of goods and services from both VA and other government
agency customers as approved by VA's Revolving Fund Board of Directors.
The Supply Fund comprises the Office of Acquisition and Logistics
and the Office of Procurement, Acquisition, and Logistics, which are
organizational elements within the Office of Acquisition, Logistics,
and Construction. The Supply Fund is also the funding source for the
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization.
The Supply Fund provides a broad spectrum of acquisition services,
category management oversight, and logistics support operations to VA
customers and other government agencies (6 percent of total revenue in
fiscal year (FY) 2023). Service offerings include awarding and
administering cost-effective multiple award and national contracts to
meet the health care-related information technology (IT), supply, and
equipment needed to operate the largest integrated health care system
in the Nation.

VA Franchise Fund

The Franchise Fund is a self-sustaining revolving fund providing
common administrative services which are funded on a fee-for-service
basis rather than through appropriations. This means organizations,
internal to VA and external agencies, provide reimbursement to the fund
for services received. As such, no Congressional appropriation is
required.
The Franchise Fund is comprised of an administrative office and
eight self-supporting enterprise centers. VA's enterprise centers
provide administrative services in the areas of IT, financial
management, personnel security and law enforcement, and human
resources. The complete list of the Franchise Fund enterprise centers
includes Information Technology Infrastructure Operations, Debt
Management Center, Financial Services Center, Internal Controls Support
Center, Law Enforcement Training Center, Personnel Security
Adjudication Center, Human Capital Services Center, and the Center for
Enterprise Human Resources Information Services. Each focuses on
adopting efficient, standardized business processes resulting in high
customer satisfaction. VA's enterprise centers are accountable to the
Revolving Funds Board of Directors and adhere to guidance on quality,
cost, and customer service.
The Franchise Fund enterprise centers also support the OMB Cross-
Agency Priority Goal of Sharing Quality Services, ``The Government
strives to identify opportunities to improve stewardship of taxpayer
dollars, to create high performing, centralized capabilities for
mission-support functions and to make more resources available for
agency mission-specific work.''
The Franchise Fund enables VA to leverage commercial solutions and
innovative practices to provide high-quality cost-effective solutions
to VA and other government agencies. The enterprise centers are
required to recover all their expenses through revenue collection,
i.e., their operations are totally dependent upon revenues realized
from internal and external customers' purchases of services. In
addition, they also market their services as appropriate to other
government agencies (15 percent of total revenue in FY 2023), including
the Department of Homeland Security, Department of Health and Human
Services, and Department of the Air Force. Providing services to other
government agencies spreads the Franchise Fund's fixed costs over a
larger unit base, which leads to lower costs for all customers,
including customers internal to VA. This economy of scale leads to more
effective use of taxpayer dollars.

VA Revolving Funds Oversight and Best Practices

Oversight for VA's Revolving Funds is conducted through the
Revolving Funds Board of Directors which functions as the principal
governance body overseeing the Supply Fund and Franchise Fund's
strategic priorities, goals, and objectives. It also provides strategic
leadership for the Supply and Franchise Funds' operations, execution,
and management of overall risks and challenges. The Revolving Funds
Board of Directors is co-chaired by the Deputy Chief Financial Officer
and Deputy Chief Acquisition Officer of the Department with board
members consisting of six other VA senior leaders from the Veterans
Health Administration, Veterans Benefits Administration, National
Cemetery Administration, Office of Human Resources and Administration/
Operations, Security, and Preparedness, and Office of Information and
Technology. VA's Administrations and Staff Offices' participation on
the Revolving Funds Board of Directors ensures Revolving Funds
resources strategically serve VA's mission.
To emphasize transparency and accountability for a $2.2 billion
budget, each Franchise Fund Enterprise Center and Supply Fund
Acquisition Center is required to complete a 2-year Business Plan on an
annual basis. The Revolving Funds Board of Directors reviews and
approves each Business Plan which details specific revenue and expense
projections, full-time equivalent staffing levels, and contract support
requirements prior to funds execution. Information from the approved
Business Plans is used to develop Budget Summary data and is included
in Part 5 of the VA President's Budget Submission.
The Revolving Funds Board of Directors also ensures that each
entity complies with their respective Business Plan through monthly
budget execution reviews. Explanations are provided for variances above
or below 10 percent from estimates and briefed to the Revolving Funds
Board of Directors during quarterly meetings. In addition, the
enterprise and acquisition centers establish key performance indicators
each year. These key performance indicators help the Revolving Funds
Board of Directors gauge progress toward achieving customer service
goals and progress is briefed during quarterly meetings.
Finally, VA Revolving Funds financial statements are audited by a
private sector public accounting firm each year to provide an
independent assessment of each Revolving Fund's financial stewardship.
As a result of sound financial management business practices, the
Franchise Fund received 26 and the Supply Fund received 16 consecutive
unmodified ``clean'' opinions.
In closing, VA's Revolving Funds provide shared services to meet
customer service demands effectively and efficiently, providing
significant benefit to VA's Administrations and Staff Offices, as well
as other government agencies. As the Government Accountability Office
(GAO) noted in a recent report, ``Commerce Working Capital Fund: Policy
and Performance Measure Enhancements Could Help Strengthen Management''
(GAO-23-104624), on a similar function in another agency, ``Given the
fiscal pressures facing the federal government, consolidating and
sharing services--such as payroll or information technology services--
within and among agencies is one-way agencies can operate more
efficiently. Shared services may also allow agencies to benefit from
economies of scale and take advantage of specialized expertise.'' VA's
Revolving Funds adhere to this principle and are consistent with GAO's
recommendation.
Madam Chairwoman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you again
for the opportunity to discuss VA's Revolving Funds. This concludes my
testimony. My colleagues and I are happy to respond to any questions
you may have.

Prepared Statement of Julie Matta

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
