- MEMBER DAY: TESTIMONY AND PROPOSALS ON THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBER DAY: TESTIMONY AND PROPOSALS
ON THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-082                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Mike Bost, Chairman................................     1
The Honorable Mark Takano, Ranking Member........................     4

WITNESSES
Panel 1

The Honorable Derek Kilmer, U.S. House of Representatives, (WA-
06)............................................................     2

The Honorable Pat Ryan, U.S. House of Representatives, (NY-18)...     3

The Honorable Keith Self, U.S. House of Representatives, (TX-03).     4

Panel 2

The Honorable Jasmine Crockett, U.S. House of Representatives,
(TX-30)........................................................     6

The Honorable Delia Ramirez, U.S. House of Representatives, (IL-
03)............................................................     7

The Honorable Kim Schrier, U.S. House of Representatives, (WA-08)     8

Panel 3

The Honorable Lou J. Correa, U.S. House of Representatives, (CA-
46)............................................................    10

The Honorable Jack Bergman, U.S. House of Representatives, (MI-
01)............................................................    11

The Honorable Rudy Yakym, III, U.S. House of Representatives,
(IN-02)........................................................    13

The Honorable Abigail Spanberger, U.S. House of Representatives,
(VA-07)........................................................    14

The Honorable Eric Sorensen, U.S. House of Representatives, (IL-
17)............................................................    15

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

The Honorable Derek Kilmer, U.S. House of Representatives, (WA-
06) Prepared Statement.........................................    19
The Honorable Pat Ryan, U.S. House of Representatives, (NY-18)
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
The Honorable Jasmine Crockett, U.S. House of Representatives,
(TX-30) Prepared Statement.....................................    20
The Honorable Delia Ramirez, U.S. House of Representatives, (IL-
03) Prepared Statement.........................................    22
The Honorable Kim Schrier, U.S. House of Representatives, (WA-08)
Prepared Statement.............................................    23
The Honorable Lou Correa, U.S. House of Representatives, (CA-46)
Prepared Statement.............................................    26
The Honorable Jack Bergman, U.S. House of Representatives, (MI-
01) Prepared Statement.........................................    26
The Honorable Rudy Yakym, III, U.S. House of Representatives,
(IN-02) Prepared Statement.....................................    27

APPENDIX--continued

The Honorable Abigail Spanberger, U.S. House of Representatives,
(VA-07) Prepared Statement.....................................    28
The Honorable Eric Sorensen, U.S. House of Representatives, (IL-
17) Prepared Statement.........................................    29

Statements For The Record

The Honorable William R. Timmons, IV, U.S. House of
Representatives, (SC-04).......................................    31
The Honorable Marcy Kaptur, U.S. House of Representatives, (OH-
09)............................................................    31
The Honorable Marilyn Strickland, U.S. House of Representatives,
(WA-10)........................................................    33
The Honorable Brad R. Wenstrup, U.S. House of Representatives,
(OH-02)........................................................    33
The Honorable Marie Gluesenkamp Perez, U.S. House of
Representatives, (WA-03).......................................    34
Letter from The Honorable Rudy Yakym, III to Director Anthony
Colon..........................................................    36
Response from Director Anthony Colon to The Honorable Rudy Yakym,
III............................................................    38

MEMBER DAY: TESTIMONY AND PROPOSALS
ON THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2023

Committee on Veterans' Affairs
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mike Bost (chairman of
the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Bost, Bergman, Self, Takano, and
Ramirez.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE BOST, CHAIRMAN

The Chairman. The Committee will come to order.
It is an honor to be leading the Members Day for the first
time as chairman of this Committee. As all of you know, I am a
proud Marine Corps veteran, and it is a privilege to lead the
Committee on behalf of my fellow brothers and sisters at arms.
As I said before, this is not a duty I take lightly. All of us
owe a debt to those men and women who served and those who
continue to serve our country.
Over the past few years, we have made great bipartisan
improvements to make it easier for our veterans and their
families. This is a trend I plan to continue. Achieving real
success for the men and women who raise their right hand and
serve our Nation is not a mission that can be done alone. We
must work together to address the issues that affect the
veterans in all 50 states and territories. They deserve no
less. Members Day gives us the opportunity to hear from members
that represent those veterans, whether on our Committee or not,
about the issues affecting them and their districts. Every
Member of Congress has veterans in their district, and we want
to ensure every veteran's voice is heard as we work to improve
the delivery of care and services of our veterans.
A veteran in Washington may not face the same obstacles as
a veteran in South Carolina. That is why I am excited to see so
many of our colleagues on both sides of the aisle participating
in today's hearing. Your advocacy on behalf of our veterans and
their families and survivors is vitally important, and we
appreciate you taking the time to come to the Committee today
and share your ideas. I am eager to hear from you about the
solutions and proposals you have to ensure our veterans have
the opportunity to live out the American dream.
Right now, the ranking member is not here, but when he does
get here, we will recognize him for his opening statement.
Right now, we do want to recognize the first panel which is
testifying before us today, who we have. We have Derek Kilmer
from Washington and Representative Pat Ryan from New York, and
Keith Self, who is part of the Committee, will also be
testifying.
Representative Kilmer, you are recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DEREK KILMER

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman. Appreciate the time and
appreciate you taking the time to listen to members.
I wanted to take this time to discuss a bill that I have
introduced called the Housing America's Veterans and Ensuring
They Have Needed Services Act, or as we call it, the HAVENS
Act. I have been honored to partner with our colleague from
South Carolina, Representative Mace, in leading this bipartisan
effort.
We have got a serious problem with veteran homelessness in
our country right now. Over 37,000 of our brave veterans are
without a home. Despite veterans only constituting about 6
percent of our total population, they make up 8 percent of
those experiencing homelessness. It is tough to see these
folks, many of whom are battling challenges, including things
like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or social isolation
or substance abuse, also not having a roof over their heads.
Obviously, the pandemic only exacerbated these issues,
revealing that our system for assisting homeless veterans often
fall short. That is where our HAVENS Act steps in. This
legislation proposes a shift away from some of the traditional
congregate care facilities, which, unfortunately, during the
pandemic, proved to be disease hotspots, toward the creation of
tiny home villages. It is not just about the homes. These
villages will also provide essential wraparound services
onsite, including counseling and job training and financial
management. This model has proved to be successful. Residents
gain a sense of security and independence while the available
services cultivate a caring community, equipping individuals
with the support that they need to secure permanent housing. We
have seen this model work in areas throughout the country.
Importantly, these communities see fewer residents return to
homelessness than conventional shelters as well.
The HAVENS Act calls for a 6 year pilot program through the
VA's existing Grants and Per Diem (GPD) program. We will
allocate five grants totaling $10 million each to construct
these tiny home villages. The funding comes from the current
GPD budget, filling in its case management gaps and expanding
access to crucial resources for veterans.
It is not just about housing, it is also about sustainable
housing. Preference will be given to grant applicants who use
energy efficient building materials, things like cross
laminated timber. Plus, the Act mandates improve tracking of
outcomes for homeless vets, ensuring that we continue to focus
on those who may otherwise be overlooked. We want to make sure,
if this is a pilot program, that we actually do the evaluation
to make sure that it works.
Secretary McDonough said it best when he stated that the
term homeless veteran should not exist in our vocabulary. This
bill, our HAVENS Act, is a leap forward in trying to make that
a reality.
I urge the Committee's support of this legislation and
appreciate you taking the time to hear me out. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Derek Kilmer Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Kilmer. We appreciate that.
Mr. Ryan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAT RYAN

Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you in absentia
to Ranking Member Takano for providing us with the opportunity
to testify today. I also just want to thank and appreciate my
colleague, Mr. Kilmer. I could not agree more and certainly
have seen similar programs in our district work very
effectively.
Mr. Chair, as you and all members of the Committee develop
policies for the 118th Congress, I encourage you to draw from a
principle that I learned as a young military officer I am sure
that you can appreciate and many others through their service.
We have to get resources closest to people on the ground that
understand what is happening in the community, that have those
relationships, and are able to come in and fill gaps in our
current systems. I have three points and ideas that I want to
put forward to that end, but I believe that that is where we
will close some of these gaps when it comes to transition and
employment, mental health and suicide, addiction, and so much
more.
The first point is fairly straightforward. In my district,
which is New York's 18th District, north of New York City and
south of Albany in the Hudson Valley region, we are on the
scene between two major VA centers in New York City and in
Albany, but extremely far from both, and making it very
difficult in a rural and exurban area to have transit. Last
year, veterans in my district faced confusion, uncertainty,
frankly anger and frustration, as reforms that were initially
instituted as part of the VA Mission Act threatened to close
our VA Medical Center at Castle Point. Proudly, I stood with
veterans from across the community to say that it is
unacceptable that we would lose this facility, particularly
given that that would mean folks that are already often driving
an hour plus would now have to drive two plus hours to get the
care that they need as part of our VA system. This at a time
that we are seeing population actually increase and more
veterans come to the region north of New York City.
As I know you agree, as well as the ranking member, our
veterans deserve to know that the care they receive at Castle
Point in the Hudson Valley will be there not only tomorrow and
next month, but in the years to come, so that they can have
that peace of mind.
Second point on getting resources closest to the ground and
to those that can solve the problems. I want to draw your
attention to a program that was actually started in New York
State government by one of our former colleagues, Lee Zeldin,
when he was a State senator. He started something called the
Private First Class Joseph P. Dwyer Veteran Peer-to-Peer
Support Program. It started as a local initiative in New York
in Long Island in 2012. Over the last decade plus, it has grown
and thrived. When I was a county executive in my home county of
Ulster County, I fought to bring this program and expand it to
my region and successfully secured State funds to do so. This
is an exact example of a program that plugs the gaps, offers
peer-to-peer counseling for veterans suffering from PTSD or
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and any other reintegration
issues.
I encourage the Committee to now look at the Federal level
at legislation to expand what has been a successful program now
statewide, federally, through the PFC Joseph P. Dwyer Peer
Support Program Act, which has been introduced now and is
working its way through the Committee with bipartisan support.
This is actually run by a group that I know well of fellow
veterans at the Hudson Valley National Center for Veteran
Reintegration. These are all veterans themselves that pour
their heart and their soul into taking care of veterans and
filling the gaps. We have seen firsthand--and we do not have
time to share the stories, but moving stories of saving lives
through this outreach and this grassroots initiative. I
encourage the Committee to move that bill forward as quickly as
possible.
Finally, I want to commend other similar initiatives that
the Committee and the Congress has undertaken to really flow
funds to these Veterans Service Organizations (VSOs) and other
nonprofits and community groups that have shown the ability to
innovate, to be creative, to fill these gaps, and to close that
sort of last mile to support our veterans. I want to commend
the Staff Sergeant Fox Suicide Prevention Grant Program. Proud
that one of my counties, Duchess County, New York, was one of
the first grant recipients of that. That has been going
extremely well. Commend that program, would love to see it
expanded and continued.
My closing point is these groups need to know that they do
not have to fight every year for these funds, that they can
plan, that our veterans will have the support.
I am out of time. I appreciate the time and I appreciate
you and the ranking member's commitment to our veterans.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Pat Ryan Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Ryan. Mr. Self, before I
recognize you, I am going to recognize the ranking member for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Takano. Well, thank you, Chairman Bost, for your
courtesy.
I do not have much more to say than I really appreciate our
annual Bipartisan Member Day hearing and look forward to
hearing all of the ideas that we have from both sides of the
aisle.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Self, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEITH SELF

Mr. Self. Thank you, Chairman Bost and Ranking Member
Takano.
I do this as a 25 year veteran, and I share alma mater with
my colleague across the aisle, Mr. Ryan. Thank you for being
here today.
Thank you for the opportunity to address my bill. The U.S.
Congressman Sam Johnson Memorial VA Clinic Act. This bill would
rename the VA Outpatient Clinic located in Plano, Texas, after
Congressman Johnson. It is an honor to follow in his footsteps
in Texas Congressional District 3, and I am honored to present
this today.
Prior to his 27 years as a Congressman, Sam Johnson was a
member of the U.S. Air Force for 29 years, where he served as
director of the Air Force Fighter Weapons School and flew the
F-100 Super Saber with the Air Force Thunderbirds Precision
Flying Demonstration Team. He was a decorated fighter pilot--75
combat missions. He was a member of the Thunderbirds as well. I
believe that he flew the slot with the Thunderbirds.
While flying over North Vietnam in April 1966 his plane was
shot down. He suffered a broken arm and back. He was held as a
prisoner of war for nearly 7 years, including a stent at the
Hoa Lo Prison, known as the Hanoi Hilton. He was part of 11
U.S. prisoners known as the Alcatraz 11, a group of prisoners
separated from other captives for their resistance to their
captors. He left the service with two Silver Stars, three
Legions of Merit, the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Bronze
Star Medal, and two Purple Hearts.
After his release in 1973 he returned home, established a
real estate business. In 1985 he began his service in the Texas
House of Representatives until he was elected to this House in
1991. He retired in 2018. During his time in Congress, he sat
on the House Ways and Means Committee and he received the
congressional Patriot Act in 2016. I believe that was the
inaugural Congressional Patriot Act.
Currently, this bill to rename the VA Outpatient Clinic in
Plano, Texas has the support of 30 members of the Texas House
delegation, both Senators Cornyn and Cruz, and three of the
largest VSOs in the Lone Star State. Renaming the Plano VA
Clinic after Congressman Sam Johnson is a fitting and deserved
recognition for such an exemplary veteran public service and
bona fide American hero.
Thank you for consideration of this important bill and I
yield back the remainder of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. I have not commented on anybody's
bill, but I am good to hear. If you did not serve with Sam
Johnson, you missed a golden opportunity to find one of the
greatest heroes that this Nation has ever known. He was very
humble and he always had a smile on his face.
Thank you for that and thank you this panel. We thank you
for being here. It is a day that is kind of hectic and we have
several of our other panels that are coming along, but we are
going to wait on them and we will recess waiting on the next
panel.
[Recess]
The Chairman. We are going to go ahead and kind of shift
the order around a little bit and so the members that are here
do have the chance.
Representative Crockett, if you would like to come forward,
we would be glad to hear your testimony at this time.

STATEMENT OF JASMINE CROCKETT

Ms. Crockett. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I really do
appreciate the opportunity to sit here before you today.
I want to say first of all that I am grateful for all of
our service women and men and what they have done for our
country. When these individuals complete their service, there
are certain things that they should not have to worry about,
two of which are critical when transitioning back to society--
healthcare and housing. I know Veterans Affairs works hard to
provide our service women and men the help they deserve.
As the representative for Texas 30th Congressional
District, I represent the Dallas VA Medical Center, an
institution that not only treats Dallas veterans, but veterans
across the state of Texas and veterans living in surrounding
states. I have had the privilege to visit the Dallas VA Center
and I know that the care it provides is second to none. I am
extremely proud of the work that they do to help our veterans.
As we all know too well, veterans come back with scars of
war. Some of these scars, of course, are invisible, but they
demand the same level of medical attention that any physical
injury would require. Unfortunately, about a quarter of our
veteran population today resides in rural areas. In addition to
the inconvenience of driving longer distances to access medical
care compared to the rest of their veteran counterparts, rural
facilities treating veterans may not have the complete set of
resources or care that other more urban settings may provide.
That is particularly true when it comes to mental health
services. While the VA has provided telehealth services for
veterans prior to the pandemic, it appears that the
availability of mental health resources via telehealth vary by
location and provider. Given that veterans are almost twice as
likely to die by suicide than non-veterans, we must make sure
that they have access to this particular service. This is
especially important for our homeless veterans, who are at an
even higher risk.
Despite difficulties in accurately accounting for how many
persons live without permanent shelter, we are fortunate enough
to have a rough underestimate thanks to thousands of volunteers
who go out on a single night every other year to perform a
point in time count. According to the 2022 point in time count,
over 33,000 veterans are homeless in this country. Most
homeless populations do not have reliable access to internet.
Even if they did have the technology like a smartphone, to
access the internet, they also do not have reliable electricity
to charge it or adequate means to protect it from weather
conditions like rain or snow. This means they cannot access
telehealth services that they really need. These are men and
women who put their lives on the line to protect the American
way of life, to protect our freedoms.
I say men and women, but let us be honest, these are kids.
Fresh out of high school these kids sign up to serve their
country and all too many bear the high price. I personally
believe that all people ought to have a right to permanent
shelter. However, I think everyone can agree that if anyone
deserves a place to call home, it is our returning veterans.
Not only is this unfathomable indignity we are allowing them to
endure, but it puts their lives at risk. It should come as no
surprise that when you do not know where you are going to lay
your head at night, when you do not know when or where you will
have your next shower or next meal, it is harder to get a job.
If you remember nothing else today, what I want everyone in
this committee room to know is what I want every American to
know, is the physical and mental toll that the lack of
permanent housing has on our veterans. Homeless veterans were
almost twice as likely to die than housed veterans. This
Committee has to do more.
In the cities experiencing acute lack of housing, where so
many of our homeless vets live, we do not have to sit idly by.
Many of these cities have a VA clinic that are under our
jurisdiction. Over the last few years, many individual clinics
have gone above and beyond to try to house every veteran they
can. We must follow this lead. As an easy start, we could have
the VA staff work as service coordinators and advocates for
veterans to take advantage of the existing resources. This, of
course, means ensuring the VA has sufficient discretionary
funding to achieve these goals. Or we could fully lean in and
have the VA building housing for veterans with wraparound
services to secure employment, treat addiction and more.
The point is, we must do something. This Nation owes a debt
to our returning service members. This Committee is responsible
for every veteran struggling with mental health and a lack of
permanent housing.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to ensure that
all veterans have access to care that they need and the comfort
of a place called home. It is the least that we must do.
Thank you so much.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jasmine Crockett Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Representative Crockett.
Ms. Ramirez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DELIA RAMIREZ

Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman Bost and Ranking Member
Takano. We are really grateful that you are convening on
Members Day where I get to speak to you about the importance of
supporting our student veterans.
This critical issue needs your attention now more than
ever. As too many of our Nation's heroes are not getting the
support they need and they deserve student veterans often face
financial difficulties, academic challenges, mental health
issues due to their service in the Armed Forces and those
issues can become even more harder to deal with without proper
support for our veteran population. It is up to us, all of us
in the room today, to ensure that every single student veteran
receives the assistance they need so that no one gets left
behind.
Early this Congress I was proud to introduce H.R. 1767, the
Student Veteran Benefit Restoration Act, which includes
Republican approved amendments to establish an across the board
process for student veterans to restore their GI Bill education
benefits in qualifying instances, such as when a student
veteran has been defrauded by an educational institution.
In April, this bill passed with bipartisan support during
our Economic Opportunity Subcommittee markup. This bill
reflects years of bipartisan advocacy led by the members on
this Committee and the student veteran community, including
advocates like Student Veterans of America and Veteran
Education Success, who have been unfairly impacted by a long-
standing inequity in the law.
Our veterans have rightfully earned their GI Bill benefits.
Let me repeat that, our veterans have rightfully earned their
GI Bill benefits, and they should rightfully be restored when
bad actors have targeted our vets to make a profit off of them.
They deserve our support for their academic aspirations and our
bill seeks to provide that support in a meaningful way.
That is why today I urge the Committee to continue all
efforts to support this crucial legislation and bring H.R. 1767
to the full Committee during our next markup to guarantee that
my constituent voices like Carrie, like Christopher, Andy,
Brian T., and Brian W. are all heard. I am committed to
advancing this bill forward urgently and have prioritized
listening and working across the aisle with my Republican
colleagues to make critical compromises to ensure that this
bill reflects the Committee's bipartisanship commitment to
veterans and have earned the support of the Hispanic
Association of Colleges and Universities, Veterans Education
Success, and Student Veterans of America.
What I ask today is that you join in supporting our student
veterans and passing this bill with the Republican inspired
amendments. Let us work together for a brighter future for all
our veterans and our Nation. Thank you.
With that, I yield my time back. Thank you, Chairman.

[The Prepared Statement Of Delia Ramirez Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Representative Schrier, You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF KIM SCHRIER

Ms. Schrier. Thank you very much, Chairman Bost, and thank
you, Ranking Member Takano, for the opportunity to testify
before your Committee about the needs of our veterans and how
we can better meet them.
We have over 500,000 veterans in Washington State, with
roughly 50,000 in the 8th District. I firmly believe that if
you devoted your life to serving our country, then it is our
responsibility to make sure you receive the best service and
care possible.
As a physician, I mean that quite literally. Access to care
is of utmost importance to me. I was proud to stand with my
colleagues last Congress and vote for the Honoring Our Promise
to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act or Honoring the PACT Act,
which is now law. This means that over 3 1/2 million veterans
exposed to toxic substances during their service will get the
healthcare that they deserve.
My ask at this point from the Committee is oversight. I
have heard concerns in my district about how to get enrolled to
receive this care. I have heard concerns about whether we have
workforce readiness to meet the increase in patient demand. I
know that there is work being done on the ground in my state,
including a focus on hiring and the creation of a performance
dashboard which allows for transparency. Patients can see the
types of claims newly available to them and the wait times
associated. I stand ready to support efforts like this and make
this transition as smooth as possible. I am happy to work with
you. We just need to make sure that everyone eligible is
covered. Please, please consider me a partner in this effort.
Now, it is not just the physical health of veterans that we
need to be concerned about, it is also their mental and
behavioral health. I have long advocated for increased
screenings for veterans as they move through the Transition
Assistance Program, or TAP, to look for signs of social
isolation, which is a predictor of mental health issues and the
potential to end up unhoused. I want to tell you that I share
the concern that my colleague Jasmine Crockett just spoke so
beautifully about. I have recently learned that the addition of
a spouse at TAP sessions can improve adherence and health
outcomes and successes. I hear from the District often the need
for mental and behavioral health support. Whether it is
building up our workforce, easing access, or moving care
upstream, again, I stand ready to work with you to deliver for
our veterans.
Another issue that I have come to this Committee about
several times is about the Electronic Health Record
Modernization program. The Cerner Go-Live started out at Mann-
Grandstaff VA Medical Center in Spokane, Washington, in 2020. I
will note that as a physician I use Cerner in my own
capabilities. Now a satellite of Mann-Grandstaff is at the
Community Based Outpatient Clinic, or CBOC, in Wenatchee,
Washington, in my district. The CBOC was included as part of
this rollout and it was a disaster. The attempted upgrade of
the electronic health record at the VA has gone poorly, and
that is understated. A pilot of Cerner, used successfully in
the military and in my office in hospitals and clinics across
the country, failed in its rollout at the VA. Orders went
unseen, appointments were not scheduled, the computer system
was crashing many times a day, and doctors and nurses were
having to devote their time to tech support and navigating the
health record instead of serving our veterans.
I was very glad to join the chairman and ranking member on
their bipartisan proposal, the Reset Act, to include a number
of changes to improve issues with patient safety, staff
dissatisfaction, and overall management failures since creation
in 2018. I was glad to see the VA itself pause the Go-Live to
work out the issues that I have noted here. This rollout has
endangered our veterans, and I just want to make sure that any
future Go-Lives anywhere in the country center around lessons
learned, including provider training, better tracking of
patient outcomes, and making sure that it works well, because
our veterans deserve the best.
Finally, I just want to uplift the Vietnam Era Veterans
Pinning ceremony. This has been one of the great honors of my
time in Congress. We started during the pandemic doing these
thanking and welcoming home ceremonies at doorsteps, and I have
continued that tradition. It is so special to meet the
veterans, to hear their stories, to thank them for their
efforts, and to meet their families. I just want to tell you
and commend you on this program.
Thank you again, Chairman Bost, and Ranking Member Takano,
for considering the needs of Washington's 8th District as you
continue your work, this Congress and I stand ready to work
with you.
Yield back.

[The Prepared Statement Of Kim Schrier Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you for being here. Just so
you know, in our Committee, I think--well, definitely in my
home, if children, my grandchildren around my home say the word
Cerner, I cringe. It is like a cuss word.
We are going to stand in recess while waiting on other
members.
Thanks.
[Recess]
The Chairman. Come out of recess. I would like to recognize
that my good friend and colleague, Lou Correa, who I have
traveled the world with, and representative, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LOU CORREA

Mr. Correa. Mr. Chairman Bost, first of all, I want to say
it is an honor to appear before you as chairman of this
Veterans Affairs Committee, one that I served with honor in the
past. Thank you for your good work.
Not going to take a lot of your time, sir. I just wanted to
talk a little bit about some good common-sense measures that I
have worked on. First one probably for 15 years. When I was
chair of the Veterans Affairs Committee in Sacramento,
California, as a State senator, one of my goals was to listen
to veterans, to ask them, what is it that you need from us as
government? Slowly, quietly, but firmly, I started getting a
stream of veterans that said, we suffer from PTSD, we do not
want those pills, we prefer cannabis. Throughout the years, I
have worked on the VA essentially doing research into what
cannabis is good for and what it is not good for. It is not up
to Lou or to us to determine what our veterans need or want, it
is up to them to tell us what they need. The vast majority of
veterans, in my opinion, are using cannabis. All my legislation
asks for is for the VA to do some research into what is
cannabis good for and what is it not good for. We are simply
asking the question, and we want the VA to answer the question.
That is what H.R. 1003 asks to do, essentially, mandating,
that the VA do the research. I do not like mandates, but we
have asked the VA to do this for a number of years now. I get
it. There is more important things out there, but this is
important for veterans. I just ask for your strong
consideration, sir, of this legislation.
Simple, straightforward, give the veterans what they want.
Mr. Chairman, my second ask is, of course, another one,
which is to honor some of our veterans that served our country
with honor that have been honorably discharged who are not U.S.
citizens. A lot of these veterans come back from battle. I met
one of them that was on ten tours in Afghanistan, came back
with a lot of challenges. He was a green card holder. Of
course, what happened to him happens to a lot of veterans. He
got in a fight, got his green card pulled, and was deported.
Now he lives in another country, Mexico, and the only time he
can return is when he dies. Once you are dead, since you are
honorably discharged, you have the right to be buried in a
national cemetery, but you cannot come back before you die.
Our legislation, Takano-Correa, will be considered,
hopefully by this Committee. It is a common sense one. All
those that served our country and have been willing to pay the
price. Many made the ultimate sacrifice, and many others have
given a lot, we should respect them as well and give them the
opportunity to live in this country.
Those are my two asks, sir. If you have any questions,
thoughts, more than happy to work on these pieces of
legislation, sir.

[The Prepared Statement Of Lou Correa Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. As always, I know you serve your veterans
well and I appreciate the opportunity, appreciate you coming
and giving testimony today, and we thank you for that. Each one
of those will definitely be considered, and we will take
everything you have said to note.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. The General here and myself, we are
also working on some other legislation, and we hope you will
consider that one. It is not my legislation, but I will let him
tell you a little bit more about it.
Mr. Bergman. I am going to praise the virtues of your
leadership.
The Chairman. Thank you, General Bergman . Thank you.
General, you are recognized for 5 minutes, as you just came
in----
Mr. Bergman. Fresh off NDAA.

STATEMENT OF JACK BERGMAN

Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a member of this Committee, I am grateful for the
opportunity to discuss two of the most pressing issues facing
veterans and the Committee today.
First, private assistance in veteran disability
applications and the VA accreditation reform. Earlier this
year, I introduced the Preserving Lawful Utilization of
Services (Plus) for Veterans Act, H.R. 1822, along with my dear
friend Lou Correa of California and my fellow Committee member,
Nancy Mace of South Carolina. This bipartisan bill will
reimplement penalties for unaccredited agents, modernize the VA
accreditation system, and protect the right for veterans to
seek help from the private market when filing for their
disability benefits.
As a representative of the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW)
stated before the Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs
Subcommittee on March 29 of this year, ``If a company is able
to be accredited or their individuals are able to be
accredited, then they are part of the VA oversight, and the VFW
would support that.'' The PLUS Act seeks to accomplish just
this, incorporating businesses into VA accreditation so that
veterans can be protected and bad actors can be punished. I am
encouraged to hear of the ongoing negotiation among members of
the Senate VA Committee to build off the PLUS Act and draft
their own version. I have received constructive input from
veterans, businesses, stakeholders, and certain VSOs that are
looking to create the best solution possible for those who
served and not just engaged in political grandstanding.
However, several points of possible disagreement remain
that I feel compelled to speak on.
First, any imposed fee caps that an accredited agent may
charge must be set at a level designed to protect veterans from
abuse, but not at a level that effectively sets the price for
the entire market. Veterans should be allowed to choose
whatever option they decide that is in their best interest,
filing on their own, going through a VSO, or through a private
business. Draconian fee caps will only limit the number of
choices available to them.
Second, any solution we consider must avoid creating
barriers to entry for companies wishing to assist veterans,
both those currently operating in the space as well as any new
businesses that may come along with innovative ideas to improve
outcomes for our veterans. This is especially relevant when
discussing the effective date of legislation and how long it
takes VA to approve new accreditation applications.
Congress must make sure the VA does its job for veterans
and those who want to assist them by improving the
accreditation application process and establishing a system for
provisional accreditation.
Finally, I am concerned of the level of hostility the VA
has shown toward private businesses, many of them veteran
owned. These businesses have a long history of successful
outcomes and grateful veterans that have chosen to seek their
services. My office has recently been made aware of veterans
who have been harassed and questioned by federal agents simply
for choosing to receive assistance from a private business.
While we must identify and punish those entities who try to
take advantage of veterans, we cannot tolerate persecution of
businesses that are doing the right things for our veterans.
Any accreditation reform bill must include measures that would
stop a potentially hostile and weaponized VA from going around
congressional intent to limit veteran choice and access to
private assistance.
I look forward to continuing our work and Committee to
advance effective accreditation reform that protects our
veterans and their rights.
The second issue is access to psychedelic assisted
therapies. These breakthrough treatments, and I repeat,
breakthrough treatments, offer an extremely promising
opportunity to address the ongoing suicide and mental health
epidemic among service members and veterans, with thousands of
success stories so far in treating PTSD, depression, and
addiction. Last year, I co-founded the Psychedelics Assisted
Therapies Caucus, or PATH Caucus, with my friend Congressman
Lou Correa, with the goal of improving understanding and
knowledge of these therapies among Members of Congress and
their staffs. Yesterday, I had the opportunity to support
Congressman Luttrell's amendment to establish a Department of
Defense (DoD) study on psychedelic therapies as part of the
(National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). Today, I am calling
for the VA and the House VA Committee to do their part. I am
glad the Committee has begun to place a greater focus on these
breakthrough therapies, including through the recent Health
Subcommittee Roundtable. I am very grateful to Chairman Bost
for attending the recent PATH Caucus briefing, where we heard
several Navy SEALs and a couple of Marines share their stories
and experiences with psychedelics, the very positive stories.
The House VA Committee must now focus on furthering VA
research into psychedelics, training mental health
professionals in the VA system to utilize these new therapies
successfully, and to ensure veterans have access to them once
they receive Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval.
Those who risk their lives in defense of our country
deserve positive and fulfilling lives, and the Federal
Government has the responsibility to assist them in their
endeavor.
Again, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak on these
issues today, and I look forward to continuing our work on the
House VA Committee under Chairman Bost's leadership to get the
best possible outcomes for all of our veterans.
Thank you and I yield back.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jack Bergman Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, General. I do thank you for your
leadership on these new programs that hopefully will find the
cure for the post traumatic stress.
Thank you.
Representative Yakym, welcome to Committee, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RUDY YAKYM

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for giving
those of us who are not members of the VA Committee the
opportunity to present our priority issues to you and to your
Committee.
Veteran care transcends district and party lines. All of us
want to ensure the best care for those who risk their lives to
defend our freedoms. I have only been in Congress for a few
months, but the large number of veterans in crisis is quite
alarming. I hosted a veteran town hall in early May and mental
health was the most discussed issue. Veterans said local VA
mental healthcare was disorganized, short staffed, and plagued
by long wait times.
In the wake of these jarring reports, I sent an inquiry to
the VA Northern Indiana Healthcare System, or VANIHCS,
inquiring about their mental health appointment wait times,
staffing, as well as other information. VANIHCS responded that
it has an 18 month it has 18 mental health related vacancies.
Mr. Chairman. that is far too many.
I would like to enter both my letter and the response from
VANIHCS into the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To put a face on this acute problem and the impact that it
has, I want to share the story of one of my constituents,
sergeant Ted Grubbs. Ted served honorably in the Indiana Army
National Guard as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2008 and
2009. After returning from duty, he was diagnosed with service-
connected, complex PTSD and complex TBI. On April 22, Ted
experienced a severe mental health crisis. He was sitting on
his couch and decided to put a pistol into his mouth.
Thankfully, Ted put the pistol down, but only after realizing
it was the day before his daughter's birthday. Ted did the
right thing and he reached out to a medic he served with.
After this incident, everyone, including the VA,
acknowledged that Ted required in person appointments only, but
the soonest the VA could get him in person was June 26, 2
months later. That might as well be forever for a veteran in
crisis. Today is June 22, so Ted would not have even had his in
person VA appointment as of this date. Fortunately, Ted found
more immediate in person help with an outside specialist. Now
Ted's fighting with the VA because they will not reimburse him
since they offered telehealth appointments. Ted feels that the
VA failed him, and I cannot blame him.
I hope that the Committee can drill down into this to
understand where these shortfalls exist and why.
All of Ted's children have served in the Armed Forces with
honor. Ted and his family represent the best of America, and we
owe it to him and to his children to fix the VA mental
healthcare system.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, Mr. Chairman, and
I yield back.

[The Prepared Statement Of Rudy Yakym Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Yakym. Also, we hear these
stories and that is why we are here and why we are trying to
correct those problems.
We want to welcome Representative Spanberger and thank you
for being here before the Committee today. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ABIGAIL SPANBERGER

Ms. Spanberger. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Bost. Thank
you, the ranking member and members of the Committee for the
opportunity to speak this morning a bill that I care about
very, very deeply.
In 2019, a 39-year-old veteran Air Force firefighter
contacted my office about having been denied the VA benefits he
had earned. Mike Lecik served as an Air force firefighter
deploying twice to the Middle East. After coming home to
Powhatan County, he proudly served in his local volunteer fire
department as a chief fire inspector at Fort Lee. Mike was
diagnosed with multiple myeloma, an aggressive and rare type of
cancer that attacks the body's plasma cells. When he went to
the VA for care, he was told that the VA would not cover
treatment costs for his illness because they do not recognize
the service-connection between military firefighting and deadly
diseases like Mike's. However, studies show that these
firefighters are more likely to suffer certain diseases and
chronic illnesses due to the harsh nature of their work. During
fire suppression activities, firefighters inhale carcinogenic
toxins, their turnout gear and firefighting foam also contains
high levels of Per- and Polyflyoralkyl Substances (PFAS), which
have been linked to various types of cancers. In fact, Congress
recognized these potential harms when we passed the Fiscal Year
2020 NDAA, which require the Department of Defense to phaseout
firefighting foam that contains PFAS. Due to these factors,
firefighters experience higher rates of cancer than the general
U.S. population. In fact, a 2018 study from the American
Association for Cancer Research found that exposed firefighters
had roughly twice the risk of developing multiple myeloma
precursor diseases as the general population.
We know that Mike's service to our country, his devotion to
our Nation's strength and security, led to his multiple myeloma
and that is what makes the VA denial of his benefits all the
more shameful.
In March 2021, Mike passed away at 41 years old, leaving
behind his wife Tiffany and his three bright, beautiful
daughters. Today, I will be reintroducing the Michael Lecik
Military Firefighters Protection Act for the third time,
alongside my colleague Don Bacon, himself a former U.S. Air
Force chief. Our bill would finally, finally recognize the
connection between the occupational hazards military
firefighters face and these deadly diseases.
Last year, Democrats and Republicans voted to pass, and the
President signed into law the Honoring Our PACT Act, which
extended healthcare to 3.5 million veterans. We also passed the
Federal Firefighters Fairness Act which created the presumption
that Federal firefighters who become disabled by certain
cancers contracted the illness on the job. These reforms were
the right thing to do and they were long overdue. We need to
harness this momentum and ensure that our military firefighters
and their family have the same coverage and same presumption.
Today, I urge my colleagues and the Committee to do the
right thing by bringing forward the Michael Lecik Military
Firefighters Protection Act.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.

[The Prepared Statement Of Abigail Spanberger Appears In
The Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Congresswoman. Congresswoman, I
thank you as the chairman of the Committee for you giving this
testimony and as a veteran and as a firefighter, by the way.
Thank you for being here.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Sorensen, welcome to the Committee, and
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC SORENSEN

Mr. Sorensen. On behalf of our 17th congressional District
and our veterans who call Western Illinois home, thank you,
Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano, for allowing me the
opportunity to testify here today.
We all owe a debt of gratitude to the men and women who
served our country honorably. That means making sure our
veterans have access to healthcare, employment, and housing
when they return home. Today, I would especially like to call
attention to the importance of ensuring the homes of veterans
with disabilities are safe, accessible, and comfortable.
I recently introduced a bill with Ranking Member Takano,
H.R. 4047, the Autonomy for All Disabled Veterans Act. It would
increase financial assistance to veterans and active-duty
service members for medically necessary home improvements and
structural alterations. Specifically, my bill would increase
the VA's Home Improvements and Structural Alterations Grants, a
program that provides financial assistance to eligible veterans
for home modifications to improve their accessibility, such as
installing guardrails or lowering sinks and countertops. While
the cost of materials and labor has risen by 40 percent over
the past decade, the grant rates have not been updated by
Congress since 2009. Currently, the lifetime limit for a Home
Improvements and Structural Alterations (HISA) grant is $6,700
for veterans with service-connected disabilities and $2,000 for
all other veterans, especially the elderly, with non-service
related conditions. Our bill removes the disparity between
service and non service-connected conditions and increases the
lifetime limit to $10,000 for disabled veterans. It would also
index the benefit amount to inflation to keep those rates
current. These changes will help ensure that HISA grants more
closely match current needs and that we are doing our part to
provide veterans with the best quality of life when they return
home from service.
I look forward to working with this Committee and our VSO
partners to move this bill forward on behalf of veterans not
only in my district, our State, but our great country.
Thank you for your time and attention today.

[The Prepared Statement Of Eric Sorensen Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Sorensen, for your testimony
today. Appreciate that.
We will be in recess while waiting on a few other members
to show up. Thank you all.
[Recess]
The Chairman. For everyone's attention here, we are back in
for just a moment. All other members have contacted us told us
there will be no more ones that were coming forward to test
give testimony. We want to thank the ones that were here to
give testimony today.
With that, I ask unanimous consent that all members shall
have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their
remarks and include any extraneous material.
Hearing no objection--because I am not objecting--so
ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:53 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witness

----------

Prepared Statement of Derek Kilmer

Good morning, Chair. I'd appreciate a moment of your time to
discuss the Housing America's Veterans and Ensuring they have Needed
Services Act, or as we call it, the HAVENS Act. I've been honored to
partner with my good colleague from South Carolina, Representative
Mace, in leading this bipartisan effort.
Look, we've got a serious problem with veteran homelessness in our
country. Right now, over 37,000 of our brave veterans are without a
home. Despite veterans only constituting about six percent of our total
population, they make up eight percent of those experiencing
homelessness. It's heart-wrenching to see these folks, many of whom are
battling tough challenges like PTSD, social isolation, unemployment, or
substance abuse. The pandemic has only exacerbated these issues,
revealing that our system for assisting homeless veterans falls short.
That's where our HAVENS Act steps in. This legislation proposes a
shift away from the traditional congregate care facilities, which
unfortunately have been disease hotspots during the COVID-19 pandemic,
toward the creation of tiny home villages. But it's not just about the
homes; these villages will provide essential wraparound services
onsite, including counseling, job training, and financial management.
This model has been proven successful - residents gain a sense of
security and independence, while the available services cultivate a
caring community, equipping individuals with the support they need to
secure permanent housing. Importantly, these communities see fewer
residents return to homelessness than conventional shelters.
The HAVENS Act calls for a six-year pilot program through the VA's
existing Grants and Per Diem program. We'll allocate five grants
totaling $10 million each year to construct these tiny home villages.
The funding comes from the current GPD budget, filling in its case
management gaps and expanding access to crucial resources for our
veterans.
And it's not just about housing - it's about sustainable housing.
Preference will be given to grant applicants who use energy-efficient
building materials, such as cross-laminated timber. Plus, the Act
mandates improved tracking of outcomes for homeless veterans, ensuring
we continue to focus on those who may otherwise be overlooked.
Secretary McDonough said it best when he stated that the term
``homeless veteran'' should not exist in our vocabulary. Our HAVENS Act
is a leap forward in making that a reality. I urge you to support this
critical legislation.
Thank you.
______

Prepared Statement of Pat Ryan

Thank you, Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano for
providing us with the opportunity to testify today

As you develop policies for the 118th Congress, I
encourage you to draw from a principle I learned as a young officer: it
is essential to get resources to the people on the ground who are doing
the critical, day-to-day work. In the 118th Congress, I request that
the Committee prioritize programs that direct the VA to maximize the
success of our community VAMCs, non-profits, and VSOs. I urge you to
send steady resources to organizations, especially those organizations
in the Hudson Valley that provide quality, consistent care for our
veterans.

Castle Point:

Hudson Valley Veterans need to know that our
community will always take care of them. Nothing is more
essential to that care than Castle Point VA Medical Center

Last year, veterans faced confusion and uncertainty
as reforms instituted by the VA MISSION Act threatened the
closure of Castle Point.

This was an unacceptable proposal and I ask the
Committee to ensure that no veterans will see a reduction in
health care access.

I support efforts to update VA health care facilities
and provide the best care possible for our veterans, but that
can't come at the expense of misguided policies or loss of
care.

Our veterans deserve to know that the care they
receive at Castle Point will be there tomorrow, next month, and
next year.

Scaling Local Programs:

I'd also like to bring the committee's attention to
local programs that could benefit veterans across the nation,
if brought to scale.

One such program is the PFC Joseph P. Dwyer Veteran
Peer Support Program, which started in New York in 2012.

It cannot be that in the United States of America,
veterans returning home do not have access to adequate mental
health care.

The Dwyer Program plugs the gap, offering peer-to-
peer counseling for veterans suffering from PTSD or TBI and any
veteran looking to reintegrate into civilian society.

If properly resourced, efforts like the Dwyer Program
can save veteran lives. It's that simple. As Ulster County
Executive, I recognized that success and fought to bring the
program to Ulster, where it has flourished since.

I encourage the Committee to support the PFC Joseph
P. Dwyer Peer Support Program Act, which would bring this
successful New York pilot program to communities across the
country.

Another excellent program is the Hudson Valley
National Center for Veteran Reintegration, which works to give
veterans the tools they need to survive and thrive in civilian
life.

Much like the Dwyer program, this is a successful
model of care and support for veterans that should serve as a
guiding light for the Committee as they set policy.

It's through these innovative programs that take
evidence-based principles and apply them to local communities,
that we will be able to reduce veteran suicide and ensure all
veterans can integrate comfortably and safely into civilian
life.

Commend the VA and Expand Programs

The Committee should also direct to VA to maximize
the success of existing grant programs like the Staff Sergeant
Parker Gordon Fox Suicide Prevention Grant Program which has
benefited organizations in Dutchess County, in my district.

The SSG Fox Suicide Prevention Grant Program
enables the VA to provide resources to community-based suicide
prevention efforts such as screenings and referrals, assistance
with VA benefits, and therapy programming.

The tested, evidence-based non-profits and VSOs in
our communities need predictable funding streams and the
knowledge they will be able to operate in a community and
expand their footprint for years to come.

It's wonderful to see these programs change veterans'
lives for the better, but we must act with urgency to help
veterans that have not yet been reached and ensure that steady
funding can continue for successful nonprofits so that they can
provide for those who fought for us. I look forward to working
with you on these efforts and I thank you for the opportunity
to testify today.

Thank you and I yield back.
______

Prepared Statement of Jasmine Crockett

Thank you Mr. Chairman for the opportunity to come before
this committee to talk about an issue that impacts my district, my
constituents, and the country as a whole.

I first want to take the opportunity to say that I am
forever grateful for all that our service women and men have done for
our country.

When these individuals complete their service, there are
certain things that they should not have to worry about - two of which
are critical when transitioning back to society--Healthcare and
Housing.

I know the Department of Veterans Affairs works hard to
provide our service men and women the help they deserve. As the
Representative for Texas' 30th Congressional District, I represent the
Dallas VA Medical Center - an institution that not only treats Dallas
veterans, but veterans across Texas and veterans living in the
surrounding states.

The care they provide is second to none, and I am proud
of the work they are doing at this facility to help our veterans.

As we all know too well, veterans come back with the
scars of war. Some of these scars, of course, are invisible, but they
nevertheless demand the same level of medical attention that any
physical injury would require.

Unfortunately, about a quarter of our Veteran population
today reside in rural areas.

In addition to the inconvenience of driving longer
distances to access medical care compared to the rest of their veteran
counterparts, rural facilities treating veterans may not have the
complete set of resources or care that other more urban settings may
provide.

This is particularly true when it comes to mental health
services. While the VA has provided telehealth services for veterans
prior to the pandemic, it appears that the availability of mental
health resources via telehealth vary by location and provider.

Given that veterans are almost twice as likely to die by
suicide than non-veterans, we must make sure that they have access to
this service. This is especially important for our homeless veterans,
who are at even higher risk.

Despite all the difficulties in accurately counting how
many persons live without permanent shelter, we are fortunate to have a
rough underestimate thanks to the thousands of volunteers who have gone
out on a single night to perform a Point in Time Count every other
year.

According to the Point in Time Count in 2022, over
thirty-three thousand veterans are homeless in this country.

When you are homeless, you don't have reliable access the
internet. But even if you have the technology like a smartphone, you
don't have reliable electricity to charge it, or adequate means to
protect it from the conditions like rain and snow. This means they
can't get access to the telehealth services they need.

These are men and women who put their lives on the line
to protect the American way of life.

I say men and women, but let's be honest - these are
kids.

Fresh out of high school, these kids sign up to serve
their country, and all too many bear a high price.

I personally believe that all people ought to have a
right to permanent shelter.

However, I think everyone can agree that if anyone is
deserves a place to call home, it is our returning veterans.

And yet, at least 33,000 veterans are homeless.

Not only is this an unfathomable indignity we are
allowing them to endure, but it puts their lives at risk.

It should come as no surprise that when you don't know
where you're going to lay your head at night, when you don't know when
or where you'll have your next shower or next meal, it is harder to get
a job. It is easier to fall into the criminal justice system. It is
harder to reintegrate back into every day society and get your life
back on track.

If you remember nothing else today, what I want everyone
in this committee room to know - what I want every American to know--is
the physical and mental toll that the lack of permanent housing has our
veterans.

Homeless veterans were almost twice as likely to die than
housed veterans.

This committee has got to do more.

In the cities experiencing acute lack of housing, where
so many of our homeless vets live, we do not have to sit idly by.

Many of these cities have a VA Clinic in them under our
jurisdiction.

Over the last few years, many individual clinics have
gone above and beyond and have shown the difference that a concerted
effort to house every veteran can make.

As an easy start, we could have VA staff work as service
coordinators and advocates for veterans to take advantage of existing
resources. This, of course, means ensuring the VA has sufficient
discretionary funding to achieve these goals.

Or we could fully lean in and have the VA building
housing for veterans with wraparound services to secure employment,
treat addiction, and more

The point is, we have to do something.

This nation owes a debt to our returning soldiers.

This committee is responsible for every veteran
struggling with mental health and the lack of permanent housing.

I look forward to working with my colleagues to ensure
that all veterans have the access to care they need and the comfort of
a place called home. It is the very least we must do.
______

Prepared Statement of Delia Ramirez

Thank you, Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano for convening a
Members Day where I am here to speak to you about the importance of
supporting our student veterans. This critical issue needs your
attention now more than ever, as too many of our Nation's heroes are
not getting the support they need and deserve.
Student veterans often face financial difficulties, academic
challenges, and mental health issues due to their service in the armed
forces. Those issues can become even harder to deal with without proper
support for our veteran population. It is up to us--all of us in this
room today--to ensure that student veterans receive the assistance they
need so that no one gets left behind.
Early this Congress, I was proud to introduce H.R. 1767, the
Student Veteran Benefit Restoration Act, which includes Republican
approved amendments, to establish an across the board process for
student veterans to restore their GI Bill education benefits in
qualifying instances, such as when a student veterans has been
defrauded by an educational institution.
In April, this bill passed with bipartisan support during our
Economic Opportunity Subcommittee markup. This bill reflects years of
bipartisan advocacy led by the Members on this committee and the
student veteran community, including advocates like Student Veterans of
America and the Veterans Education Success who have been unfairly
impacted by a longstanding inequity in the law.
Our veterans have rightfully earned their GI Bill benefits and they
should rightfully be restored when bad actors have targeted our vets to
make a profit off of them. They deserve our support for their academic
aspirations. Our bill seeks to provide that support in a meaningful
way.
That is why I urge the Committee to continue all efforts to support
this crucial legislation and bring H.R. 1767 to the full committee
during our next markup to guarantee that my constituents' voices--like
Carrie, Christopher, Andy, Bryan T., and Brian W.--are heard.
I am committed to advancing this bill forward urgently and have
prioritized listening and working across the aisle with my Republican
colleagues to make critical compromises to ensure that this bill
reflects this Committee's bipartisan commitment to veterans and have
earned the support of the Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities, Veterans Education Success, and Student Veterans of
America.
Please join me in supporting our student veterans and passing this
bill with the Republican-inspired amendments. Let us work together for
a brighter future for all of our veterans and our Nation.
Thank you for your time and I yield back.
______

Prepared Statement of Kim Schrier
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
______

Prepared Statement of Lou Correa

Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and other distinguished
members of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, it is an honor to
appear before you today to testify in support of my bill, H.R. 1003 The
VA Medicinal Cannabis Research Act of 2023.
My work with veterans started while I was serving in the California
State legislature. I met veterans with both visible and invisible
wounds from war and they explained to me that they didn't like being
prescribed opioids and other medications. They wanted to be able to
access cannabis to ease their pain without the same side effects or
addictive properties. When I came to Congress, I wanted to continue my
work to provide our veterans with the treatments they want.
While data is limited, the American Legion, a congressionally
chartered Veteran Service Organization, commissioned a nationwide
survey in October 2017 on a portion of its approximately 2.2 million
veteran members and found that 92 percent of all respondents support
medicinal cannabis research and 82 percent of all respondents support
legalizing medicinal cannabis. The survey also found that ``22 percent
of veterans are currently using cannabis to treat a medical
condition.'' Therefore, medical research into the safety and efficacy
of cannabis usage for medical purposes is timely, necessary, and widely
supported by the veteran community. Veterans in 38 states can purchase
medicinal cannabis and recreational cannabis in 23 states- more than
even just 2 years ago. Although they can discuss cannabis with their VA
healthcare provider, VA providers are not allowed to recommend cannabis
as treatment. This raises serious questions as to how effective these
discussions are. As so many veterans are currently using cannabis for
medicinal purposes, it is important that clinicians be able to fully
advise veterans on the potential impacts, harms, and benefits of
cannabis use on post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and chronic pain.
In a Senate Veterans Affairs hearing in June 2021, the written
testimony provided by Dr. Upton stated that the VA is ``already
dedicating resources and research expertise to study the effects of
cannabis on conditions affecting veterans,'' but they have serious
ground to make up given that one of these two studies doesn't even look
at THC, we need to ensure that vets aren't left in the dark in terms of
cannabis knowledge. The VA Medicinal Cannabis Research Act of 2023
requires research into the safety and efficacy of medicinal cannabis
usage on veterans diagnosed with PTSD and chronic pain.
The VA Medicinal Cannabis Research Act of 2023 is a pragmatic and
bipartisan piece of legislation that would advance our understanding of
the impacts of medicinal cannabis usage and could improve the lives of
veterans and other Americans. This bill passed out of the Senate
Veterans Affairs Committee unanimously in February.
Please join me in helping to make sure we're looking after our
veterans and giving them the safe and effective treatments that are
demanding.
______

Prepared Statement of Jack Bergman

Thank you, Mr. Chairman
As a member of this committee, I am grateful for the opportunity to
discuss two of the most pressing issues facing Veterans and the
committee today.
First, private assistance in Veteran disability applications and VA
accreditation reform.
Earlier this year, I introduced the PLUS for Veterans Act - H.R.
1822 - along with Lou Correa of California and my fellow committee
member, Nancy Mace of South Carolina. This bipartisan bill will
reimplement penalties for unaccredited agents, modernize the VA
accreditation system, and protect the right for Veterans to seek help
from the private market when filing for their disability benefits.
As a representative of the VFW stated before the Disability
Assistance and Memorial Affairs subcommittee on March 29th of this
year, quote: ``if a company is able to be accredited, or their
individuals are able to be accredited, then they are part of the VA
oversight, and the VFW would support that.'' The PLUS Act seeks to
accomplish just this - incorporating businesses into VA accreditation
so that Veterans can be protected and bad actors can be punished.
I'm encouraged to hear of the ongoing negotiations among Members of
the Senate VA committee to build off the PLUS Act and draft their own
version. I've received constructive input from Veterans, businesses,
stakeholders, and certain VSOs that are looking to create the best
solution possible for those who served, and not just engage in
political grandstanding.
However, several points of possible disagreement remain that I feel
compelled to speak on.
First, any imposed caps on fees that an accredited agent may charge
must be set at a level designed to protect Veterans from abuse - not at
a level that effectively sets the price for the entire market. Veterans
should be allowed to choose whatever option they decide to be in their
best interest - filing on their own, going through a VSO, or through a
private business - draconian fee caps will only limit the number of
choices available to them.
Second, any solution we consider must avoid creating barriers to
entry for companies wishing to assist Veterans - both those currently
operating in the space, as well as new businesses that may come along
with innovative ideas to improve outcomes for our Veterans. This is
especially relevant when discussing the effective date of legislation
and how long it takes VA to approve new accreditation applications.
Congress must make sure the VA does its job for Veterans and those who
want to assist them by improving the accreditation application process
and establishing a system for provisional accreditation.
Finally, I am concerned of the level of hostility the VA has shown
toward private businesses - many of them Veteran-owned - that have a
long history of successful outcomes and grateful Veterans that have
chosen to seek out their services. My office has recently been made
aware of Veterans who have been harassed and questioned by federal
agents simply for choosing to receive assistance from a private
business. While we must identify and punish those entities who try to
take advantage of Veterans, we cannot tolerate persecution of
businesses that are doing the right things for our Veterans. Any
accreditation reform bill must include measures that would stop a
potentially hostile and weaponized VA from going around Congressional
intent to limit Veteran choice and access to private assistance.
I look forward continuing our work in committee to advance
effective accreditation reform that protects Veterans and their rights.
The second issue is access to psychedelic-assisted therapies.
These breakthrough treatments offer an extremely promising
opportunity to address the ongoing suicide and mental health epidemic
among service members and Veterans, with thousands of success stories
so far in treating PTSD, depression, and addiction. Last year I
cofounded the Psychedelics Advancing Therapies, or PATH, caucus with my
friend, Congressman Lou Correa, with the goal of improving
understanding and knowledge of these therapies among Members of
Congress and their staffs.
Yesterday I had the opportunity to support Congressman Luttrell's
amendment to establish a DoD study on psychedelic therapies as part of
the NDAA in the Armed Services Committee. Today, I am calling for the
VA and the House VA Committee to do their part.
I'm glad that the committee has begun to place a greater focus on
these breakthrough therapies, including through the recent Health
subcommittee roundtable. I'm also grateful to Chairman Bost for
attending the recent PATH Caucus briefing where we heard several Navy
Seals share their positive experiences with psychedelics. The House VA
committee must now focus on furthering VA research into psychedelics,
training mental health professionals in the VA system to utilize these
therapies, and ensure Veterans have access to them once they receive
FDA approval. Those who risked their lives in defense of our country
deserve positive and fulfilling lives, and the federal government has
the responsibility to assist them in their endeavor.
Again, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak on these issues
today, and I look forward to continuing our work in the House VA
committee to get the best possible outcomes for all Veterans.
______

Prepared Statement of Rudy Yakym

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving those like myself who are not
members of the VA Committee the opportunity to discuss our priority
issues with you in this forum. Veterans' care transcends district and
party lines. All of us want to ensure the best care for those that risk
their lives to defend our freedoms.
I have only been a Member of Congress for a few months, but a
disturbing trend that has been all too apparent is the number of
veterans in crisis in my district that are unable to secure timely
mental health care from the VA. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), 17 veterans tragically take their own
lives each day. Our community in northern Indiana has unfortunately
borne witness to this too many times.
In early May, during a veteran town hall, mental health was the
most-discussed issue. Veterans portrayed a bleak picture of VA mental
health care plagued by long appointment wait times, staffing shortages,
and overall disorganization. These failures have a real impact on
veterans. In the wake of this jarring town hall, I sent an inquiry to
the VA Northern Indiana Health Care System (VANIHCS) inquiring about
their mental health appointment wait times, staffing, and other
information.
VANIHCS delivered a prompt reply, to their credit, but it was
disturbing. The system has a total of 18 mental health-related
vacancies, which is far too many to adequately address the need in the
local veteran community. We need more oversight of this problem to
understand why such shortfalls exist and where they exist.
I want to share the story of one of my constituents, Sergeant Ted
Grubbs, whose personal experience illustrates the VA's failures. Ted
served honorably in the Indiana Army National Guard as a part of
Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2008 and 2009. After returning from duty, he
was diagnosed with service-connected complex PTSD and complex TBI.
On April 22 of this year, Ted experienced a severe mental health
crisis. He was sitting on his couch and decided to put a pistol in his
mouth. Thankfully, Ted put the pistol down but only after realizing it
was the day before his daughter's birthday. Ted did the right thing and
reached out for help from a medic he served with.
After this incident, everyone, including the VA, acknowledged that
he required in-person appointments only. However, a VA therapist said
that the soonest they could get him an in-person appointment was June
26th - over 2 months later. They could only offer telehealth
appointments until then.
Since he could not go to the VA for an in-person appointment, he
got outside help with a specialist, who told him that she has three
qualified friends that have applied for positions at the understaffed
VA, but they have received no responses to their applications.
Ted feels that the VA failed him, and I agree. He told my staff
that if it were up to the VA, he would not be with us today.
To add insult to injury, the VA said that since they offered
telehealth appointments, they will not be reimbursing Ted for his
outside care.
Two of Ted's sons are active-duty Marines, and his two other
children, a daughter and a son, are Navy veterans. Ted and his family
represent the best of America, and we owe it to him and his children to
fix VA mental health care. Brave men and women, like Ted, have given so
much of themselves up for their fellow Americans. The absolute least we
can do for them as a nation is make sure that they get the help they
need in a timely manner.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
______

Prepared Statement of Abigail Spanberger

Thank you, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the
Committee for the opportunity to speak this morning about a bill that I
care about very deeply.
In 2019, a 39-year-old veteran Air Force firefighter contacted my
office about having been denied the VA benefits he had earned. Mike
Lecik served as an Air Force firefighter, deploying twice to the Middle
East. After coming home to Powhatan County, he proudly served in his
local volunteer fire department and as Chief Fire Inspector at Fort
Lee.
Mike was diagnosed with multiple myeloma, an aggressive and rare
type of cancer that attacks the body's plasma cells. But when he went
to the VA for care, he was told that the VA would not cover treatment
costs for his illness--because they do not recognize the service
connection between military firefighting and deadly diseases like
Mike's.
However, studies show that these firefighters are more likely to
suffer certain diseases and chronic illnesses due to the harsh nature
of their work. During fire suppression activities, firefighters inhale
carcinogenic toxins. Their turnout gear and firefighting foam also
contain high levels of PFAS, which have been linked to various types of
cancers. In fact, Congress recognized these potential harms when we
passed the Fiscal Year 2020 N-D-A-A--which required the Department of
Defense to phaseout firefighting foam that contains PFAS.
Due to these factors, firefighters experience higher rates of
cancer than the general U.S. population. In fact, a 2018 study from the
American Association for Cancer Research found that exposed
firefighters had roughly twice the risk of developing multiple myeloma
precursor disease as the general population.
We know that Mike's service to our country--his devotion to our
nation's strength and security--led to his multiple myeloma. And that's
what makes the VA's denial of his benefits all the more shameful.
In March 2021, Mike passed away at 41 years old, leaving behind his
wife Tiffany and his three bright, beautiful daughters.
Today, I'm reintroducing the Michael Lecik Military Firefighters
Protection Act - for the third time - alongside my colleague Don Bacon,
a former U.S. Air Force Chief. Our bill would finally--finally--
recognize the connection between the occupational hazards military
firefighters face and these deadly diseases.
Last year, Democrats and Republicans voted to pass - and the
President signed into law - the Honoring our PACT Act, which extended
healthcare to 3.5 million veterans. We also passed the Federal
Firefighters Fairness Act, which created the presumption that Federal
firefighters who become disabled by certain cancers contracted the
illness on the job. These reforms were the right thing to do - and long
overdue.
We need to harness this momentum to deliver justice to our military
firefighters and their families. Today, I urge my colleagues on the
Committee to do the right thing by bringing forward the Michael Lecik
Military Firefighters Protection Act.
Thank you, and I yield back.
______

Prepared Statement of Eric Sorensen

On behalf of Illinois' 17th District and our veterans who call it
home, thank you Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano for allowing me
the opportunity to testify here today.
We all owe a debt of gratitude to the men and women who served our
country honorably and that means making sure our veterans have access
to health care, employment, and housing when they return home.
Today I would especially like to call attention to the importance
of ensuring the homes of veterans with disabilities are safe,
accessible, and comfortable.
I recently introduced a bill with Ranking Member Takano, H.R. 4047,
the Autonomy for All Veterans Act, which would increase financial
assistance to veterans and active duty servicemembers for medically
necessary home improvements and structural alterations.
Specifically, my bill would increase VA's Home Improvements and
Structural Alterations (HISA) grants, a program that provides financial
assistance to eligible veterans for home modifications to improve
accessibility, such as installing guardrails or lowering sinks and
countertops.
While the cost of materials and labor has risen by 40 percent over
the past 10 years, the grant rates have not been updated by Congress
since 2009.
Currently, the lifetime limit for a HISA grant is $6,700 for
veterans with service-connected disabilities and $2,000 for veterans,
usually the elderly, with non-service-related conditions.
Our bill removes the disparity between service and non-service
connected conditions and increases the lifetime limit to $10,000 for
all disabled veterans.
It would also index the benefit amount to inflation to keep the
rates current.
These changes will help ensure that HISA grants more closely match
current needs and that we're doing our part to provide veterans with
the best quality of life when they return home.
I look forward to working with the Committee and our VSO partners
to move this bill forward on behalf of the veterans in my district and
across the country.
Thank you for your time and attention.

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of William Timmons

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today and taking
the time to hear about a bipartisan bill that addresses a major problem
in our veteran community--access to credit.
Veterans and active-duty military personnel face unique barriers to
accessing credit. Prolonged military service comes with certain
stressors, like frequent relocations and potential overseas
deployments. These disruptions make it difficult to maintain a
relationship with one particular financial institution. As a result,
these brave individuals are displaced from the conventional credit
system for long periods of time. And worse, approximately six percent
of all veterans are unable to obtain a VA-guaranteed mortgage loan due
to insufficient credit histories with little collateral to compensate.
That is why I, along with my colleague Congressman Mike Levin, have
introduced the Building Credit Access for Veterans Act, to help expand
credit options for veterans and members of the Armed Forces who are
eligible for Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) housing or small
business loans, but have an insufficient credit history due to their
prolonged service.
Under this bill, the VA will be required to implement a pilot
program to assess the feasibility and advisability of using alternative
credit scoring information or models to improve the determination of
creditworthiness of certain individuals and to increase the number of
veterans who are able to obtain VA housing and small business loans.
The inclusion of such alternative financial data--such as rental and
utility payments--in credit reporting has the power to help an
estimated two and a half million veterans gain access to greater
financial opportunities. Furthermore, a recent study by PERC, a think
tank studying credit, found that ``including energy utility data in all
consumer credit reports increases the acceptance rate by 10 percent,
and including telecommunications data increases the acceptance rate by
9 percent.'' Simply put, adding this data into their credit reports
will improve the lives of veterans and active-duty military personnel
by increasing their access to affordable credit.
Too frequently, our creditworthy servicemembers are being denied
access to the mortgages they deserve. This bill would expand both
veterans' and active-duty military personnel's access to mortgage
credit in a safe manner while simultaneously benefiting VA lenders by
increasing the pool of qualified borrowers purchasing a home. Expanding
credit access for veterans makes it easier for them to buy a home and
establish roots in their community. It also shows recognition for the
impact that homeownership can have in successfully reintegrating our
veterans back into society.
The stakeholders supporting this legislation include the American
Legion, National Association of Federally Insured Credit Unions
(NAFCU), Credit Union National Association (CUNA), Housing Policy
Council (HPC), TransUnion (TU), Experian, Consumer Data Industry
Association (CDIA), Equifax, Defense Credit Union Council (DCUC),
VantageScore, and Veterans of Foreign Wars Of the United States.
Mr. Chairman, the Building Credit Access for Veterans Act will help
put the dream of owning a home or starting a business within reach for
more of America's heroes, and I humbly ask for its consideration before
this Committee.
______

Prepared Statement of Marcy Kaptur

Rep. Kaptur: ``Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and
distinguished Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before your Committee
today and I look forward to working with you to reform these proposals.
As a former Member of this Committee, I am grateful for the critical
work this Committee undertakes to ensure that the brave men and women
of the U.S. Armed Forces are afforded the respect and recognition their
service has earned when they return home as distinguished veterans.
I wish to address two issues for which I seek inclusion as your
Committee develops its 118th Congress authorizing legislation--first,
to authorize the Administration to:

1) Strike a new service medal entitled ``Last Servicemember
Standing''; and

2) To authorize an unmarried, only child of lifelong service
members the opportunity, at their own expense, to be cremated
or conventionally interred above or alongside their career
military parents who are interred in military cemeteries.

First, on the Medal I seek your Committee's endorsement and
collaboration for the Administration to perform the necessary research
and create criteria--including character, circumstance, nature of the
battle, war wounds and medical records--to define, strike, and
administer the award of a new category of Service Medal acknowledging
the heroism and exceptional valor of the ``Last Servicemember
Standing.''
Presently, the military only processes medals for servicemembers
who have served in battle if there are two living witnesses, that can
verify their service. For soldiers who served in horrific battle with
all soldiers dead but one remaining alive and critically wounded and
yet standing ground, this regulation simply makes no sense.
In furtherance of this objective, I have the distinct privilege and
responsibility of sharing a story with your Committee, that serves as
an example of the situation that would warrant the Medal I am
proposing. It both will acknowledge enormous loss of life in battle but
does not deny the ``Last Servicemember Standing'' the meritorious medal
award they are due for extraordinary service. I respectfully ask for
this soldier's story's inclusion for the Record. It is a true story of
the late Army Cavalry Platoon leader and Vietnam War veteran Sergeant
John Eade of Toledo, Ohio. His story well illustrates why I believe
such a Medal deserves a place in our Nation's military service awards.
His meticulous, handwritten maps and battle notes methodically
recount his recollections as an Army combat soldier who fought against
the Vietnamese Regular forces at LaDrang Valley/Landing Zone Albany,
beginning November 17, 1965. That battle is recorded as the costliest
battle of the Vietnam War.
His notes state: ``There is controversy about this battle. My
statement does not engage these issues. The lack of intelligence, our
sketchy mission order, timely transport helicopters were unavailable,
why hours passed with no air or artillery support, why did the Brigade
Commanders believe as they did... there are a thousand questions. I can
only say that more than 1000 American and North Vietnamese infantrymen
died in what is called the most savage one day battle of the Vietnam
War.''
In his detailed war notes, Sgt. Eade remains precise and
passionless. Having had the privilege of knowing his character and
despite his severe, lifelong physical infirmaries, his dignified,
soldierly bearing always radiated strength and composure. Our community
is very proud he is a son of our hometown of Toledo, Ohio. He was its
Golden Gloves champion of 1962, as well as Phi Beta Kappa and Summa Cum
Laude baccalaureate graduate of the University of Toledo then earning a
Master's degree in Architecture from Miami University in 1984 with
Alpha Rho Chi medal. Despite his medical challenges, he became the
chief inspector for the city of Boston, Massachusetts.
For his valor in battle at age 21, as a fire team leader in 2d
Platoon, Alpha Company, 2d Battalion, 7th Cavalry Regiment, on November
14, the single deadliest day for American forces during the war,
Sergeant Eade and his team became pinned down in ferocious hand to hand
combat, badly outnumbered in the jungle at Landing Zone Albany. Poor
intelligence placed them all in harm's way as the enemy proved to be
the North Vietnamese regular forces, not the Vietcong. By the end of
the day, Sergeant Eade was the only surviving member of his platoon. He
had sustained lifelong disabling injuries with shrapnel wounds to his
legs, was struck by napalm, and had been shot in the shoulder, abdomen,
and face--resulting in the loss of his eye, with nasal throat, and
vocal chord impairment, with grenade shrapnel in is leg and foot making
walking impossible.
Sergeant Eade refused to withdraw, continuing the battle, and
repeatedly exposing himself to the onslaught, exhausting his
ammunition. His resolve and determination ultimately ensured U.S.
forces held the southwestern flank.
Sergeant Eade was awarded the Purple Heart and Bronze Star, but he
was not eligible for additional medals because DoD regulations state
``there were not two living witnesses who survived'' to attest to his
fierce fight to subdue the enemy and protect his platoon. All were dead
as the unit was overwhelmed by superior enemy forces and forced to
fight hand-to-hand combat for hours exhausting their ammunition. Left
for dead, he was discovered, rescued, and flown out by US forces three
days later. His initial recovery in US military hospitals took over a
year as he bore serious war wounds lifelong. I never heard him complain
once.
Second, on the request for burial of unmarried children of a career
veteran U.S. soldier and spouses buried in military cemeteries. The
unmarried, only child should be afforded burial rights if the applicant
pays for burial expenses. My proposal suggests that on a case-by-case
basis the cemetery would make decisions on space constraints and
whether cremation or traditional burial is suitable and whether a
nameplate of the child could be affixed to the parent's grave marker.
Current law prevents them from having the chance to be buried with
their closest and only family members. Our national cemeteries are
dedicated to the brave men and women who have fought and died for our
nation's freedom, and that of their families and future generations. It
is morally unjust to prevent loved ones from being buried with them
when there are no other surviving family members.
Thank you, Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano, for the
opportunity to speak to your committee today about these vital matters.
I look forward to working with you and your staff to develop these
proposals and move them across the finish line.
______

Prepared Statement of Marilyn Strickland

Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and members of this
distinguished Committee, thank you for allowing me to testify today
about the importance of fully supporting our veterans and their
families.
Our nation is built by the bravery, dedication, and sacrifice of
our men and women in uniform. As a daughter of a veteran, I understand
the many challenges veterans experience. It is an imperative that we
fairly compensate and care for those who served.
The Department of Veterans Affairs provides essential services to
our veterans and their families. Both currently serving and veteran
families often rely on the single income of their serving family
member, in many cases for the better part of their lives. Adequate life
insurance policies are essential to ensuring our military families have
the financial security they need to navigate the loss of a loved one
with dignity. For nearly two decades the maximum coverage of the
Servicemembers Group Life Insurance and Veterans' Group Life Insurance
programs remained stagnant, even as the cost of housing, goods, and
services rose. Therefore, I strongly urge the Committee on Veterans
Affairs to consider H.R. 2911, the Fairness for Servicemembers and
their Families Act of 2023. This bill would ensure that the
Servicemembers Group Life Insurance and Veterans' Group Life Insurance
programs are periodically reviewed, and that their value sufficiently
reflects the contemporary consumer price index.
Thank you for your longstanding support of veterans and their
families, and for the work you do to provide for their care. I look
forward to working with you to help better protect their financial
security.
______

Prepared Statement of Brad Wenstrup

Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano,
Thank you for holding this Member Day Hearing. Caring for our
veterans is one of Congress's most sacred duties, and I was extremely
proud to spend the first five years of my time in Congress serving our
nation's veterans on this distinguished committee. While I may no
longer serve on this committee, I will never stop serving America's
veterans. Today, I am here to advocate for two pieces of legislation
which I believe will improve the care and benefits that the Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides to veterans.
Rep. Lauren Underwood and I have introduced H.R. 2398, which will
prohibit smoking in all Veterans Health Administration (VHA)
facilities, and repeal the antiquated 1992 law that requires the VHA to
furnish and maintain designated indoor or outdoor smoking areas.
Fortunately, former Secretary of Veterans Affairs Robert Wilkie
implemented a VHA Smoke Free policy in 2019 which prohibits smoking by
patients, visitors, volunteers, contractors, vendors and employees
while on VA property. However, I believe it is important that we codify
this policy to prevent any challenge that could overturn this policy.
Notably, a union representing VA employees has filed a grievance
against the smoke free policy and was successful in challenging the
policy as a violation of VA's collective bargaining agreement with the
union. While this has not resulted in changes to the policy itself, it
illustrates that the directive implementing Smoke Free VA could be
vulnerable to legal challenges. I believe that this is a perfect
illustration of precisely why Congress needs to assert its authority
and make clear once and for all that smoking is unacceptable in the
medical facilities where our veterans seek care every day. I hope that
the committee will consider this bill at a future Health subcommittee
legislative hearing.
Next, I wish to highlight my bill, H.R. 3738, the Veterans'
Education, Transition, and Opportunity Prioritization Plan (VET OPP)
Act of 2023. Far too often, people think that veterans return from war
defeated and with skills that are not applicable to the civilian world.
This ``broken veteran narrative'' could not be further from the truth.
Our veterans are strong, dependable leaders, and our commitment to
programs that promote opportunity and success reinforces their ability.
I believe our servicemembers should have a plan from the day they
enter the military to the day they transition out and beyond. Our
veterans are soldiers for life, and we need to put as much emphasis and
attention on their success after service as we do during it.
Currently, the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) is
responsible for all VA benefits provided to veterans outside of
healthcare and cemetery services. While there are many different
benefits that VBA provides, the bulk of staffing and resources have
been, understandably, directed toward the administration of disability
compensation and pension claims. This has resulted in a lack of
attention on the administration of other VBA benefits, such as the
Forever GI Bill, Vocational Rehabilitation, Home Loan benefits, and
VA's portion of the Transition Assistance Program. We cannot let these
benefits fall by the wayside, especially those that empower veterans
and help set them on the path to a successful civilian life.
By aligning transition, education, and employment programs in a
Fourth Administration within the VA, the VET OPP Act will modernize the
department and ensure that these opportunity-focused programs get the
high priority they deserve, and the oversight they need to better serve
veterans.
I want to thank Representative Levin, the Ranking Member of the
Economic Opportunity Subcommittee, for leading this bill with me for
the third successive Congress. I hope that the Committee will pass this
bill as it has done each of the previous two Congresses, and that the
full House will lend its support as well.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to testify.
______

Prepared Statement of Marie Gluesenkamp Perez

Thank you, Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano, for the
opportunity to testify today.
Following recent meetings with veterans in Lewis County, I am
deeply concerned about a number of issues impacting constituent
veterans who receive care through the VA Puget Sound Health Care
System. We have an obligation to ensure veterans receive the health
care they need, and it has become apparent to me that the VA Puget
Sound Health Care System is not keeping up their end of the bargain.

Clinic Closure

First and foremost, veterans in Lewis County have seen their access
to care reduced dramatically in recent years.
The 2021 closure of the Chehalis Community-Based Outpatient Clinic
cut many veterans off from nearby care. In the most rural parts of East
Lewis County, travel times to the nearest VA facility went from around
an hour to more than two hours to get to a VA Puget Sound facility.
After the VA cut decided to close this clinic, they offered a
Mobile Medical Unit, the so-called MMU. We were given the impression
that this MMU would provide walk-in appointments, keep vets connected
to their doctors, and ensure availability throughout the week.
That's not the deal we got. We got a MMU that spends one day per
week in Chehalis. It is available on Wednesdays from 8am to 4pm. Eight
appointments are available each day, and the only services offered are
primary care and laboratory work.
The VA Puget Sound Health Care System did not follow through on any
of their stated priorities when standing up the MMU, and veterans are
worse off as a result.
In a rural community with sparse specialty and mental health care
options to begin with, the closure of a full CBOC and replacement with
a MMU has put lifesaving care out of reach for many veterans.

Phone Delays:

To make matters worse, veterans who need services are stuck waiting
on hold for hours to reach the VA Puget Sound.
In Lewis County, veterans have reported to me that they regularly
wait on hold for more than two hours for basic scheduling needs or to
speak to a nurse. Oftentimes, around the two-hour mark, the line cuts
out and they must start the call and hold process all over again. Some
veterans reported spending upwards of six hours on hold.
These wait times are unacceptable. The rest of my district is
served by the VA Portland Health Care System. Notably, I have not heard
similar complaints from constituent veterans served by them.

Issues with Community Care

Given reduced access to care, veterans should be able to rely on
Community Care providers as well. While veterans seem to be satisfied
with the services provided through Community Care, the same cannot be
said of the VA's handling of these appointments.
In one case, a veteran in my district was referred to Community
Care, and after waiting on hold for an hour and a half, they were
finally able to get through to the VA Puget Sound's Community Care
Department. The department scheduled an appointment for them and
notified him of this appointment by mail. This notice was mailed out
eight days after their appointment had already passed.

Access to Staff

My job as a Member of Congress is to oversee federal agencies. I
have had difficulty receiving timely or adequate responses to the
questions my staff and I have posed to the VA Puget Sound Health Care
System staff.
I expect an open line of communication to discuss the
aforementioned issues, among other problems facing veterans in Lewis
County.
Again, my staff and I do not have these issues with the VA Portland
Health Care System. The problem seems to be limited to the Puget Sound
facility, and this deserves congressional oversight.

Conclusion

In return for their service to our country, we have made a promise
to our veterans that we must uphold. It is our responsibility to ensure
they have the access to health care necessary to lead a full and
healthy life after their time in the armed services has ended.
Taken in sum, I am concerned that the VA Puget Sound Health Care
System is not upholding this promise and serving veterans in Lewis
County well.
Thank you.
______

Letter from Rudy Yakym to Anthony Colon
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

Response from Anthony Colon to Rudy Yakym
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
