- VA'S FIDUCIARY PROGRAM: ENSURING VETERANS' BENEFITS ARE PROPERLY MANAGED

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA'S FIDUCIARY PROGRAM:
ENSURING VETERANS' BENEFITS.
ARE PROPERLY MANAGED

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY
ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-220                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas, Chairman

C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida           CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire,
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona                  Ranking Member
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
KEITH SELF, Texas                        Pennsylvania
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Morgan Luttrell, Chairman..........................     1
The Honorable Chris Pappas, Ranking Member.......................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Kevin Friel, Deputy Director, Pension & Fiduciary Service,
Veterans Benefits Administration...............................     3

Ms. Lisa Van Haeren, Director, Claims and Fiduciary Division,
Office of Audits and Evaluations, Office of Inspector General..     5

APPENDIX
Prepared Statement Of Witness

Ms. Lisa Van Haeren Prepared Statement...........................    25

Statements For The Record

Mr. Kenneth Smith................................................    31
Disabled American Veterans (DAV).................................    36
Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA)..............................    39

VA'S FIDUCIARY PROGRAM:
ENSURING VETERANS' BENEFITS
ARE PROPERLY MANAGED

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Disability Assistance & Memorial
Affairs,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Morgan Luttrell
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Luttrell, Ciscomani, Self, Pappas,
Deluzio, McGarvey, and Ramirez.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MORGAN LUTTRELL, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Luttrell. The subcommittee will come to order. Good
morning. Welcome back, Mr. Friel. Good to see you again as
always. Ms. Van Haeren, how are you?
Ms. Van Haeren. I am doing well.
Mr. Luttrell. I like to mix things up a little bit.
Ms. Van Haeren. Great.
Mr. Luttrell. Today we will be taking a closer look at the
VA's Fiduciary Program. The Fiduciary Program at VA is
responsible for appointing and overseeing the men and women who
assist veterans and other beneficiaries that are unable manage
their VA benefits on their own. Over 67,000 veterans use
fiduciaries. The last time the committee looked at the program
was in 2015. I believe it is time that we take another look at
this program to ensure it is meeting the needs of today's
veterans' community.
In Fiscal Year 2022, the program oversaw $2.6 billion in
benefits. A program this size requires effective oversight to
ensure that beneficiaries are being taken care of, especially
because these beneficiaries are typically our Nation's most
vulnerable veterans. The subcommittee has also heard directly
from VA regional offices' employees who are directly
responsible for the oversight of the fiduciaries and
beneficiaries about potential instances of fraud and misuse in
the program.
A fiduciary should be using a beneficiary's VA funds for
the beneficiary's care or the care of the dependents. VA should
be doing a better job of preventing, investigating, and
remedying these instances of fraud and misuse to protect
veterans first and foremost. That being said, some of these
instances are not the result of malicious or on the part of
fiduciaries, but simply because Veterans Affairs has not
provided family members acting as fiduciaries proper access to
support resources they need to properly manage the
beneficiary's benefits.
Frankly, the program seems somewhat disorganized and we
need to hear from the VA about how they are going to fix it. To
that end, we will be hearing from our Office of Inspector
General (OIG) on the recommendations on how VA can better
oversee the Fiduciary Program as well as updates from VA on
what steps they are taking to do so. Again, I would like to
thank everyone for being here today. I am looking forward to
our conversations about what we can do to prevent the misuse of
veterans' hard-earned benefits, enhance the VA Fiduciary
Program, and ensure the misused funds are returned to the
veterans they earned in a timely way. With that, I yield to the
Ranking Member Pappas for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHRIS PAPPAS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
you holding this hearing, and thank you to our panelists for
joining. VA's Fiduciary Program has a long history dating back
to its establishment in the 1930's. The program provides
oversight and protection of VA's most vulnerable beneficiaries.
These are veterans and survivors who are unable to manage their
VA benefits or their own affairs. The Fiduciary Program is
incredibly important to our Nation's veterans and their
families. Fiduciaries are trusted to manage VA benefits in the
best interests of these beneficiaries. Accordingly, Pension and
Fiduciary Services' oversight of VA appointed Fiduciaries to
ensure the beneficiaries' needs are met is absolutely vital.
However, over the years, the program has faced persistent
challenges, including instances where fiduciaries entrusted
with veterans' finances have breached their duty. This has led
to financial hardship and distress for some beneficiaries,
highlighting the need for robust oversight and accountability
within the program. As ranking member of the subcommittee, it
is my job to ensure that the Fiduciary Program is taking every
measure and has the support necessary to fully safeguard
beneficiaries' assets.
At today's hearing, we will seek to assess whether further
congressional action is needed to ensure that our most
vulnerable veterans are afforded the highest level of
protection possible. Recently, OIG has issued several reports
on the Fiduciary Program. These underscore the benefits of the
program, but they also point out deficiencies, wait times and
misuse of benefits that have hampered effective oversight of
the program.
For example, an OIG report published in 2021 brings to
light issues of timeliness in Veterans Benefits Administrations
(VBA's) Fiduciary Program operations. Delays in determinations
and reimbursements of misused funds pose a significant
challenge. To address this, the OIG recommends that VA
implements streamlined procedures, enhanced training, and
advanced tracking mechanisms. These measures are essential for
bolstering the program efficacy and safeguarding the financial
interests of veterans.
A second report published in 2023 highlights a critical
concern within the program, the timely return of funds
belonging to deceased beneficiaries. The issue at hand
underscores the necessity for rigorous verification processes
and suggests that improved protocols and technology integration
can also enhance the program's oversight, ensuring a more
efficient and responsible handling of beneficiaries' finances.
These two reports are concerning to me. I look forward to
hearing more about VA's progress toward implementing the OIG's
recommendations. Further, my staff has heard from numerous
fiduciary hub employees about insufficient authority to ensure
beneficiaries are receiving their benefits or are properly
being taken care of. VA employees also have noted that
guidelines within the program are too broad and are left up to
interpretation, making it difficult for these employees to do
their jobs.
The program is particularly vulnerable to fraud and abuse.
It is VA's job to prevent that to the extent possible. It
should be noted that the problems around fraud and misuse are
not representative of all fiduciaries. The vast majority of
fiduciaries are doing an honorable and honest job taking care
of our veterans who cannot handle their affairs, many of whom
are family members themselves. The need for robust oversight is
clear and cannot be overstated.
I am interested in hearing more from our witnesses about
the present challenges and concerns facing this program, how we
might work together to address them, especially how to improve
the reimbursement of beneficiaries when fiduciaries misuse VA
funds. We must leave here today with a better understanding of
where VA currently stands in the management of this program for
our most vulnerable veterans and what further assistance
Congress can provide in these efforts. To that end, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate you holding this hearing, and I yield
back my time.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. Our witnesses today,
Mr. Friel from the Veterans Affairs, the Deputy Director of
Pensions and Fiduciary Services. Also, we have with us today
Ms. Van Haeren. Did I say that correctly, ma'am?
Ms. Van Haeren. Yes.
Mr. Luttrell. Who is the Director of Claims and Fiduciary
Division for the Office of Audits and Evaluations from the
Office of Inspector General. Would you both please rise? I ask
the witnesses on our first panel to stand physically and raise
your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Luttrell. You may be seated. Thank you. Let the record
reflect that the witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
Thank you all again for being here today. Mr. Friel, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN FRIEL

Mr. Friel. Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss the Department of Veterans
Affairs Fiduciary Program and the vital role we serve in
protecting vulnerable beneficiaries. Mr. Smith sends his
regrets that he is unable to attend today.
In August 2023, Legal Instrument Examiner Terry Smith of
the Salt Lake Regional Office received a call from a veteran in
our Fiduciary Program. Her mother was her appointed fiduciary
but was in the hospital with a poor prognosis. The veteran
requested funds to visit her mother before she passed. Mr.
Smith spoke to Field Examiner Roland Parrish.
Mr. Luttrell. I am sorry, Mr. Friel, can you move closer to
the microphone?
Mr. Friel. Yes, sorry about that, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. We can barely hear you. Thank you, sorry.
Mr. Friel. You are welcome, sir. The veteran requested
funds to visit her mother before she passed. Mr. Smith spoke to
Field Examiner Roland Parrish, who personally drove to the bank
with a fiduciary agreement to withdraw funds so that she could
be with her mother in her final hour. Concurrently, Salt Lake
City staff began a successor fiduciary appointment process to
coordinate uninterrupted benefit payments to the veteran
through her time of need. Mr. Smith and Mr. Parrish
demonstrated through action the highest values of VA; veterans
are at the heart of everything we do.
These employees' commitment and advocacy helped to offer
the veteran peace and support in time of need and ensure her
dignity going forward through prompt appointment of a new
fiduciary. I am proud to represent them and more than 1,200 VBA
staff who work every day to protect our most vulnerable
veterans and survivors.
With values demonstrated by our Salt Lake City fiduciary
hub in mind, I would like to describe key tenets of the
Fiduciary Program, whose mission is to protect the over 104,000
beneficiaries who are unable to manage their VA benefits
because of injury, disease, infirmities of age, or being under
the age of majority. The decision to appoint other person to
manage a beneficiary's funds is never taken lightly. VA always
presumes competency, unless clear and convincing evidence
states otherwise.
A potential fiduciary must be qualified, willing to serve,
and the appointment must serve the beneficiary's interest. VA
thoroughly investigates the proposed fiduciary's criminal
background and credit history to assess suitability. VA will
also assess the input and needs of the beneficiary and their
dependents. There are approximately 83,000 fiduciaries who are
responsible for ensuring that the beneficiary funds are used
for the sole purpose of meeting the needs, security, and
comfort of the beneficiary and their dependents.
Except in certain circumstances, fiduciaries are required
to submit either an annual accounting or a biannual fund usage
report. VA investigates any credible allegation or finding of
misuse of VA funds swiftly to protect all beneficiaries. VA
will remove a fiduciary from service and appoint a successor if
the allegation of misuse is substantiated, if the fiduciary
refuses to respond to VA's auditing requirements, is unwilling
to serve, or is found unfit through annual criminal background
investigations.
In Fiscal Year 2022, VA conducted more than 2,000 misuse
investigations and removed 817 fiduciaries. VA referred 25
cases to the Office of Inspector General for investigation, of
which 15 resulted in conviction, with more than $1.7 million in
restitution ordered to the beneficiaries.
Since the establishment of the Independent Pension and
Fiduciary Service in 2011, VA consolidated all fiduciary
activities to six regional fiduciary hubs, revised its
regulations to align VA policy with current law, clarified the
rights of beneficiaries, and refined the roles that VA and
fiduciaries play to ensure that VA monetary benefits are
managed in the best interest of the beneficiaries.
In Fiscal Year 2021, the Fiduciary Program implemented a
comprehensive plan to reduce unnecessary intrusiveness in the
lives of VA beneficiaries and their families, while also
improving oversight. For example, VA streamlined the interview
and investigation process to improve VA's fiduciary appointment
timeliness and access to benefits. As of August 31, 2023, VA
reduced the average days awaiting an initial appointment field
exam from 38 days at the end of Fiscal Year 2020 to 26 days as
of August 31, 2023. VA also migrated from a legacy IT system to
the Veterans Benefit Management System, allowing for more
effective delivery of Fiduciary Program services with more
improvements planned.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss these
valuable services to veterans and their survivors. I am
prepared to respond to any questions you or other members of
the subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Kevin Friel Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Friel. The written statement
of Mr. Friel will be entered into the hearing record. Ms. Van
Haeren, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LISA VAN HAEREN

Ms. Van Haeren. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Luttrell,
Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the OIG's oversight of VBA's
Fiduciary Program.
Given VA's commitment to serving vulnerable veterans and
the large amount of money dispersed by the Fiduciary Program,
the need for effective oversight is vitally important. Our
recent reviews have found gaps in VBA's program management and
internal oversight processes. These gaps have contributed to
delays in determining whether a fiduciary is warranted,
reimbursing veterans when their benefits have been misused, and
issuing deceased veterans' VA derived funds to their heirs or
back to VA. In addition to this oversight work, the OIG's
Office of Investigations is involved in criminal cases to help
deter and investigate fiduciary fraud to reduce its impact on
victims.
In a report released last month, we substantiated
allegations that VA derived funds were not always promptly
dispersed to the deceased beneficiary's heirs or returned to
VA. We focused on two fiduciaries who had not released the
funds, with delays in distribution ranging from 19 months to 12
years. There is not a statute or VA regulation that sets a
timeliness standard for disbursement. However, as stewards of
taxpayer dollars, VA should be promptly reclaiming funds when
there is no valid will or heir to receive them. Heirs also
should not have to wait excessive periods to receive funds to
which they are entitled.
Although not statutorily required, VBA is not prohibited
from verifying funds are disbursed due to deceased
beneficiaries' estates. Such verification would not only ensure
heirs receive funds to which they are entitled, it would also
help identify funds that must be returned to VA.
The OIG made three recommendations to VBA to clarify their
internal procedures, implement stronger electronic controls,
and better track workload. These recommendations are not yet
implemented, and we will monitor VBA's progress through the
follow-up process. We also recommended VBA consider
reimplementing the procedure to verify that funds are dispersed
to veterans' heirs. VBA responded that they did consider the
recommendation, but do not intend to implement the change since
there is no legal requirement to do so. We closed this
recommendation because while we consider it a best practice,
VBA is ultimately responsible for making this management
decision.
Our prior oversight also showed that insufficient
monitoring and program management not only led to significant
delays in essential Fiduciary Program processes, but also
increased the risk that beneficiaries would be vulnerable to
fraud, theft, or financial loss. In 2020, while assessing the
merits of a Fiduciary Program hotline allegation, we discovered
VBA had not finalized a veteran's incompetency proposal despite
receiving medical evidence that the veteran was not capable of
managing their VA benefit payments. We expanded our review to
identify broader process issues and found that over 4 years,
VBA had not finalized incompetency proposals for over 200
beneficiaries. We provided VBA with these records so they could
determine whether further action was needed.
In a July 2021 report, we examined whether program staff
properly addressed allegations of benefit payments being
misused by fiduciaries and if VBA reimbursed beneficiaries as
required. Our team found instances of significant wait times
for staff to make determinations and reimbursements. For
example, one beneficiary waited 19 months for staff to complete
a negligence determination. VBA then reimbursed the beneficiary
over $20,000.
We concluded that VBA should consider whether the average
number of days taken to complete each type of misuse action is
acceptable. We also found VBA needed to better monitor all
follow-up actions on reported misuse as they were unaware of
many of the unprocessed negligent determinations we identified.
We made two recommendations to ensure prompt completion of
determinations and reimbursements. In response, VBA implemented
new technology that allowed for electronic monitoring of these
processes. Both recommendations have been closed as
implemented.
OIG teams have found that the Pension and Fiduciary Service
should ensure effective program management and internal
monitoring processes are in place. This, in turn, will help
beneficiaries receive the program support to which they are
entitled. The OIG is committed to continuing its oversight work
of the Fiduciary Program and criminal investigations into
potential fiduciary fraud that affects program beneficiaries
and hinders the most effective use of taxpayer dollars. Mr.
Chairman, this concludes my statement, and I would be happy to
answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee
may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Lisa Van Haeren Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Haeren. The written statement
of Ms. Haeren will be entered into the hearing record. We will
move on to questioning. I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Van Haeren, is it true that VA does not monitor or
track with any electronic controls whether a fiduciary returns
the funds of a deceased beneficiary?
Ms. Van Haeren. Yes. We found monitoring issues when it
came to specific tracking of the dispersed funds to veterans'
heirs. This was a best practice that we recommended that they
implement, or reimplement. This was once a requirement.
Mr. Luttrell. No longer?
Ms. Van Haeren. No longer.
Mr. Luttrell. Mr. Friel, is not the VA supposed to ensure
that taxpayer dollars are going where they are supposed to go?
Is not VA a steward of taxpayer dollars? If that is the case,
why does not the VA make sure that a fiduciary gives a deceased
beneficiary funds to the veteran's heirs or back to the VA?
Mr. Friel. Thank you for that question. As it relates to
back to the VA, we do a notification of death. We will
institute a requirement for a----
Mr. Luttrell. If you get a notification of death?
Mr. Friel. When we get notification of death.
Mr. Luttrell. What happens if you do not get a
notification, which----
Mr. Friel. Well, typically, sir, we have installed several
different mechanisms within our systems to get the
notifications of death. We have a direct feed from Social
Security so that we get their indications of notices of death
so we can activate them. We also work with Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) if the veteran happened to die in a VA
medical facility so we can activate it there. We are constantly
seeking other opportunities to get notifications of death. We
are dependent upon third party notification because we do not
have the mechanism to be, you know, there all the time to see
what is happening. We also require, you know, look to the
fiduciary to provide us notice of death when the beneficiary
passes away.
Once we have the notice of death, we will determine whether
or not heirs have been identified or if there is a will for the
estate. In those circumstances, we have the fiduciary will
establish a trust so that the funds are available basically on
the decisions of the estate and whether there is a probate
court involved and the decisions they made about how the funds
should be distributed. If the funds need to be returned to VA,
then we work with the fiduciary to have those funds returned to
VA. We have----
Mr. Luttrell. Just so I understand, but you do not track
the program of work on notice of death. The VA does not----
Mr. Friel. We do track the program.
Mr. Luttrell. You do?
Mr. Friel. Yes, we do.
Mr. Luttrell. Are you 100 percent sure on that one, sir?
Mr. Friel. Sir, yes, sir. As I said, we have mechanisms in
place for notices of death, right? When the first notice of
death is triggered within our systems, whether it be we receive
information from Social Security, whether we receive a call
from a third party letting us know that the beneficiary is
deceased, whether we receive something from VHA, we have
numerous avenues. We get notifications of an individual--of a
potential veteran's death.
We will then trigger that within our system. Within
Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS), what happens now is
that creates a trigger to the fiduciary hub, and the fiduciary
hub is given notification. They create a task to then determine
whether or not an accounting needs to be done and if we have
information about to determine where the funds will go. If the
funds are to escheat to the state, then VA will reclaim those
funds. If the funds are to be distributed to an heir or have to
go through probate court then we have the fiduciary will
establish a trust so that the funds will be available.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay.
Mr. Friel. I would say in--I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. I am tracking.
Mr. Friel. Okay.
Mr. Luttrell. Why are not fiduciary cases in the National
Work Queue (NWQ) for assignment and tracking? I will give you a
little grace, the National Work Queue is, I would not say a
dumpster fire, but it has its issues. The amount of money that
is going out the door from VA through our fiduciaries is
substantial. I am curious why it is not a part of the National
Work Queue.
Mr. Friel. Sir, with the recent migration into VBMS, we
have been in VBMS for about 2 years now. Prior to that, we had
a beneficiary fiduciary field system which did not allow for
us, it definitely restricted us on the data flow and the data
sharing. Now that we are in VBMS, all the records are
available.
We are working with our NWQ partners as well as Office of
Information and Technology (OI&T) to see about the potential to
move the fiduciary workload into an NWQ type environment.
However----
Mr. Luttrell. When you say see, what do you mean by that?
Mr. Friel. Excuse me?
Mr. Luttrell. You said, we will see if we are able to do
that. What does that mean?
Mr. Friel. Well, there are certain restrictions within the
Fiduciary Program that would limit what we can do within NWQ.
For example----
Mr. Luttrell. Is that legislation?
Mr. Friel. No, it is not, sir. It has to do with the way
that the work is distributed within the field examiners, right?
Field examiners are regional or have specific areas that they
are responsible for. The NWQ workload would not benefit. We
distribute that workload via----
Mr. Luttrell. Fiduciaries cannot go in the National Work
Queue because it is dispersed across the country and it needs
to stay in one particular spot.
Mr. Friel. Right. We believe parts of it can, like the
accounting pieces, we believe there is a potential for putting
them into a national because we do not have a need to
particularly go out to a beneficiary from the accounting
perspective.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay.
Mr. Friel. As far as the field exams, we are restricted in
that, you know, we have people assigned to take care of
specific areas so that work is distributed that way and cannot
be distributed nationally.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay, thank you. I now recognize the ranking
member for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Friel, I want to
ask about the process of determining the most appropriate
fiduciary for a beneficiary. I recently heard from a
constituent who had a relative pass away, and upon their
passing, he learned that this family member had been already
assigned a fiduciary. In this case, there was a power of
attorney on file for the beneficiary. Yet, when VA proposed to
appoint a fiduciary for the beneficiary, the person with the
power of attorney was not contacted or informed about the
proposal to appoint a fiduciary, nor were they considered for
this appointment. Instead, a private law firm was appointed
without any notice to the family.
My question is, when there is a power of attorney on file
for a beneficiary, is this considered? To what extent is the
Pension and Fiduciary Service required to consider a family
member as a potential fiduciary when there is this power of
attorney that already exists?
Mr. Friel. Yes, sir. As it relates to the appointment of a
fiduciary, upon the final decision of incompetency, we will
initiate a field examination. Part of that field examination
will be an individual from VA, a field examiner, going out and
meeting with the beneficiary. One of the things that we strive
to do is seek if the beneficiary has anyone that they would
like appointed as their fiduciary. We try to make that
relationship happen first. If there is a relationship that
would work, we would do that.
In that, we also hold that fiduciary responsible to meeting
the same requirements. We do a criminal background
investigation. We do a credit check to ensure that there would
be nothing that would bar that individual from meeting the
fiduciary.
Sometimes, sir, we do not know what the family relationship
is. If the family is not, you know, they are not connected and
the beneficiary may not want to appoint one of their family
members. In that case, where we cannot find somebody that has
that type of relationship, we will seek to look at a
professional fiduciary where we will go out and we appoint
attorneys or some other organization or an individual who does
multiple fiduciaries who is professional. In that space, when
we have a professional fiduciary, we do limit them. Their fee
cannot exceed more than 4 percent of the beneficiary's
entitlement.
Mr. Pappas. Just getting back to this specific case and
maybe we can follow up----
Mr. Friel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pappas [continuing]. on some of the details because I
know you cannot get specific here for this individual. This was
a veteran who had a family member as a power of attorney. This
individual was not even consulted or notified that the veteran
was appointed a fiduciary. There is no requirement to consider
a close family member who has power of attorney?
Mr. Friel. To your point, sir, without knowing the
specifics, because that power of attorney, if it is not
designated in our system, we may not be aware of it. It may not
have been raised by the beneficiary that there was a power of
attorney appointed outside of the VA space.
Mr. Pappas. Yes, I believe in this case it was on file, but
we will follow up----
Mr. Friel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pappas [continuing]. with you on that.
Mr. Friel. Appreciate it.
Mr. Pappas. I appreciate it. Mr. Friel, in my opening, I
mentioned being concerned about the authority that fiduciary
staff have when it comes to monitoring beneficiaries. The
question is, how is VA empowering employees to ensure
beneficiaries' well-being? If they determine that a once yearly
virtual visit is not enough to protect a beneficiary, what
other steps are taken?
Mr. Friel. We have within our purview, as I stated in my
opening statement, we tried to increase our oversight while
also reducing our intrusiveness, you know, into the
beneficiary's life. Previously, if a beneficiary wanted to give
funds to a grandson or granddaughter for graduation from high
school, they would have to clear it with VA, and we did not
think that was appropriate. If the funds are there and they
have that ability, then we do not see a reason we should be
that intrusive to say no.
What we have done is we have streamlined our processes
somewhat. Now we have the video, the ability to do video, which
we did not have prior to COVID, but we give the leeway to the
fiduciary hubs. If they feel that something, you know, is amiss
and they should go out and do a field exam, they have the right
to do that. We do not restrict that. It is based off their
decision. However, we do try to limit how much time we spend,
you know, intruding into a beneficiary's life.
Mr. Pappas. For our most vulnerable beneficiaries, those
with severe mental illness, maybe those who may not be in a
position to report suspected fraud or misuse, that is taken
into account?
Mr. Friel. Yes, it is. We limit the--and, sir, I believe
you are referring to the annual written contact that we have
where we send a letter. That letter, though, is restricted,
right? We do not open it up to the entire population. The only
individuals who are open to receive that type of contact are
where we have a spouse fiduciary, who is appointed, and we have
a good standing relationship. We have a custodial parent of a
child who is a minor. Or they are in a state or federal
institution, or they are in a VA institution where the
government has oversight of that individual in that facility.
Mr. Pappas. Okay, thank you for that. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. Mr. Self, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At your hubs, how many
total employees do you have managing 108,000 beneficiaries?
Mr. Friel. Total is approximately 1,200.
Mr. Self. Twelve hundred. You just talked about intrusive.
Fiduciary is financial, right?
Mr. Friel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. Is there not some way to audit this, because this
is elder and disabled, very open to abuse. Let us just face it,
regardless of who the fiduciary is. This is a system that is
open to abuse. It looks to me like the audit, without being
intrusive, I agree you should not be approving every spending
line, but there has got to be an audit. I am getting to the
point that almost every hearing we have with VA, we hear a lot
of process. There is a lot of process here the way I understand
it.
There are also people behind every process. Something that
I did not see in the notes that I was given is it says we were
supposed to figure out how someone qualifies as a fiduciary,
whether it be an individual or an entity. How do you qualify
them?
Mr. Friel. Sir, thank you for the question. We will first
go out and as I said, meet with the beneficiary and see if the
beneficiary has someone they would like, right? Once we have
that, what we look for qualifications is we do a criminal
background check on every fiduciary before we appoint them. We
are looking to see if there is any triggers that would say this
person should not be a fiduciary. We also do a credit check on
them to see if they have had any credit history issues that
would also say that they should not be a fiduciary. That is up
front.
Once they are in place, we continue to monitor. If a
beneficiary receives more than $10,000 a year in VA funds, the
fiduciary is required to do an annual accounting, which means
every 12 months they have to submit all the statements from us
from the bank, as well as any big-ticket receipts. We will do
an audit of that account.
For those who do not meet that process, 2 years ago--
several years ago--excuse me--3 years ago, we instituted the
Funds Under Management Review. In that period, what we do is we
look at 3-month periods biannually for all fiduciaries to see
and evaluate to make sure that they are spending the funds
properly.
Mr. Self. Okay. Now, it also says that the regional offices
do not track all work through the National Work Queue. Does
anyone?
Mr. Friel. We are able to track the work. We do not use the
National Work Queue for work distribution because of the way
that the fiduciary hubs were established to be regional. We
separate the work by zip code, basically, and the work is
assigned to the fiduciary hubs based on the zip codes that they
are responsible for.
The fiduciary hubs as well as the Office of Field
Operation, as the Office of Pension and Fiduciary Service now
have access, since we have moved into VBMS. We have access,
more sufficient access to the data, we have better oversight of
the workload and are able to monitor it in a much better way.
Mr. Self. Is there some way to simplify this process?
Mr. Friel. Sir, that is a good question. I think we are
continuing to strive to look for opportunities to improve it.
What we have done in the last couple of years with the move
into VBMS, as well as the review and the streamlining of our
oversight, and looking adding the funds under management review
which did not exist properly, adding the additional background
check or the--yes, the background check for sitting
fiduciaries, which had never happened before, are all things
that we are looking to do to continue to provide oversight,
improve our oversight and ensure we are doing the right things.
Mr. Self. Mr. Chairman, I think we need to--because this is
a recurring theme, the complexity of the VA. Everything we hear
is just the complexity. I think we ought to recommend somehow
trying to figure out how we simplify this whole place. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Self. Mr. Deluzio, you are
recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Deluzio. Mr. Chairman, thank you and good morning. Ms.
Van Haeren, start with you. What is your estimate of the
percentage of fiduciaries who are committing fraud in the
program?
Ms. Van Haeren. I work for the Office of Audit and
Evaluations. That is more of a question for our Office of
Investigations that do that work and look into more of the
fraud aspect of it. I can take that question back and get back
to you.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you. Mr. Friel, do you have a sense of
what that number is?
Mr. Friel. Sir, there is--we distinguish between fraud and
misuse.
Mr. Deluzio. Right.
Mr. Friel. We, in Pension Fiduciary Service, we determine
fraud that is an Inspector General (IG) investigation because
that is more of a legal determination. We look into misuse as
where a beneficiary--where the funds for the beneficiary are
not being used specifically for the beneficiary.
I can tell you so far as of August 30 in 2023, we have had
1,164 allegations. Of those, we have only found 167 cases where
misuse actually occurred. We continue to monitor that and the
misuse allegations can come from anyone as well as from the
oversight that we provide.
Mr. Deluzio. So, 167, I mean, we are talking sub-1 percent.
Mr. Friel. Less than 1 percent, sir.
Mr. Deluzio. Okay. Do you think that your--actually, I will
ask Ms. Van Haeren first. Is VA's oversight here whether it can
be improved or not, I think we suspect here it can be improved.
Do you think it is part of keeping that number as low as it is
at the moment?
Ms. Van Haeren. Sure. Based on what we found in our
targeted reviews that we have done, we found program
deficiencies with internal oversight. I think it is a
continued, theme that we have seen, but I think it is something
that, can continually be improved with monitoring of programs
and so forth, and procedures.
Mr. Deluzio. Mr. Friel, if we head to a government shutdown
on October 1, how will that impact your ability to conduct
oversight here?
Mr. Friel. Sir, if we stay to the same manner that we did
with the last shutdown, the field individuals, employees
responsible for claims and that oversight at that level will
continue to work. They will continue to provide the oversight
and the claims processing that we have to do, right, to meet
the needs of the veterans.
The oversight, as far as, you know, the central office may
be minimized somewhat due to staffing because we are not
considered the essential part of actually producing claims and
providing that level of oversight. We will have the opportunity
to work with the field and monitor the field as far as what is
happening and making sure the right things continue to happen
even during the shutdown.
Mr. Deluzio. At a minimum, you are expecting some of
leadership and central oversight to diminish if we are shut
down?
Mr. Friel. As a minimum, yes, sir.
Mr. Deluzio. Do you think that will impact the ability to
find misuse or fraud allegations?
Mr. Friel. I do not, sir. Typically that misuse allegations
and that finding happens at the field level, right? It is our
1,200 employees who are engaged within the fiduciary hubs who
are out there doing the work every day, those are typically the
individuals who identify that. Even in cases where we have the
IG fraud and the investigation, the majority of those are
triggered by the field identifying that there was, in fact,
misuse, and then forwarding that information to OIG so that
they can take action.
Mr. Deluzio. I guess walk me through then what the impact
of the folks you have just described who will be impacted or
would not be considered essential, what is their role in this
oversight process and machinery?
Mr. Friel. Within a central office function, we have the
responsibility for providing quality oversight. We do quality
reviews on the work that happens, you know, at a national
level. We also do special focused reviews to look at specific
areas within programs to identify if there is any deficiencies
in there or opportunities for improvements, as well as we do
site visits. We go out to the field and we will visit the
offices and when someone----
Mr. Deluzio. Okay. Let me ask, then--I see. Would the lack
of quality reviews, do you think, impact the effectiveness of
your program?
Mr. Friel. I do not. This year, the fiduciary hubs are
performing at the exceptional level for their quality, and I do
not see any reason why that would not be maintained. So, I----
Mr. Deluzio. Ms. Haeren, do you have the same view?
Ms. Van Haeren. I cannot----
Mr. Deluzio. Ms. Van Haeren, excuse me.
Ms. Van Haeren. That is Okay. I cannot speak to the quality
review percentage at this time, but I think it is important
that they continue to monitor this type of work.
Mr. Deluzio. Would you recommend eliminating the quality
review and the central office functions that would be impacted
during a shutdown, in general? Would you ever recommend
removing those folks?
Ms. Van Haeren. We have not done any work in that area, and
I cannot speak to that.
Mr. Deluzio. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Deluzio. Mrs. Ramirez, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman Luttrell. I want to thank
the witnesses for joining us today as well. We have been
talking about fraud and how do we make sure the beneficiaries
are actually getting their funds. I may have missed this
question, but I want to just jump into some of the questions I
have around that, and then I want to move into the dependents
of the beneficiaries.
Mr. Friel, how long does it currently take the VA to recoup
stolen benefits and return them to the veteran who is
rightfully entitled to them?
Mr. Friel. Thank you for that question. The recoupment of
the benefits is not a key factor in making the beneficiary
whole. We are able to make the beneficiary whole once we have
finished the misuse determination and determined how much funds
were misused. We have an internal negligence determination
requirement that we have to meet.
Once those two items are in place and we have completed
them and the review is done, typically we initiate trigger to
the field to submit to reimburse those funds within 14 days of
the final.
Ms. Ramirez. So, about 14 days once that has happened.
Mr. Friel. Yes.
Ms. Ramirez. How long on average is it taking?
Mr. Friel. Currently from misuse allegation to
determination is about 80 days. The turnaround time for the
negligence determination is probably another 10 days or more,
so.
Ms. Ramirez. It could be up to about 90 days?
Mr. Friel. It could be, yes.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. In the state legislature, I chaired the
Child Welfare Committee. As we are talking about the
beneficiaries, one of the things that comes to mind for me is
also its own dependents. As we are discussing this issue, I
want to talk about the children impacted by fraud.
Specifically, I am concerned with foster youth.
It has come to my attention that this committee asked the
VA in 2022 how they were tracking vulnerable population. The
answer was, and I quote, ``the VA does not currently track the
number of children in foster care, and so it is not aware of
any data points that would allow for an accurate estimation of
this number.'' Here is why that is concerning to me. I am
concerned for children, especially young children, who are
unlikely to detect and report fraudulent behavior.
Question, Mr. Friel, can you tell me how the VA tracks
which dependents of veterans are in foster care? If you do not,
what are your next steps to ensure that this population is
being tracked and protected?
Mr. Friel. Currently, we do not have the ability to
distinguish what the current status of the child is. We do,
however, appoint a fiduciary for those individuals in foster
care that we monitor with all of our--as we would with any
other fiduciary. I will let you know that we have had internal
discussions, and we are working toward a requirement for our
Office of Information and Technology to actually identify an
opportunity within our system to be able to add that as a field
where we can track that in a better manner.
Ms. Ramirez. In my State of Illinois, there are children of
deceased veterans who are currently in foster care and they are
receiving benefits. I know this because we checked in with the
Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, and they
confirmed that they produce and submit a quarterly report on
the children to the VA. My question to you is, Mr. Friel, as
you are discussing internally how you are able to better
understand and track that information, what are you doing with
the data from states like Illinois who are providing this
information? I know that it may not be the case that every
single state is providing this information, but I am interested
in knowing what you are actually doing with the information you
are receiving from states like Illinois.
Mr. Friel. Yes, ma'am. I do not have that information
readily available. I believe it is probably a factor that they
work with the fiduciary hub within their space. I will take
that back, and we will work to get you an answer.
Ms. Ramirez. Chairman, I just want to put this on the
record, and I appreciate that. As we are talking about our
beneficiaries and the fraudulent behavior that we see from many
of the fiduciaries, I am concerned by the number of veterans,
particularly as we talk about veterans who are experiencing
homelessness or veterans who have passed away and their
children are in foster care, that the various agencies that are
supposed to be their fiduciary or manage their benefits or the
fiduciary person responsible for their benefits, in fact, may
be engaging in fraudulent behavior, and these children are not
getting their benefits. I do want to make sure that we continue
to follow up on this because there are a number of children who
I am concerned have no process in making sure that these
allegations are followed up with. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mrs. Ramirez. Mr. McGarvey, you
are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all very
much for being here. As you know, my district in Louisville,
Kentucky is home to one of the VBA's seven fiduciary hubs. It
services six states, along with D.C. and Puerto Rico. The
Louisville hub, like each of the fiduciary hubs, is responsible
for handling oversight of the fiduciaries in those states and
administering the program. The hub's dedicated public servants
are doing their best to ensure that veterans and their benefits
are protected. I want to thank them for their service. As you
know and see in this committee, this is something we all want
to do and all want to protect to make sure our veterans get
their benefits they have earned and they deserve.
I do want to note that they need funding. They need
resources to carry out their mission and ensure that our
veterans are not being defrauded and that the Fiduciary Program
is working as it is intended. Mr. Friel, how does the VBA
monitor fiduciaries and what does the oversight look like? I
guess the big question is, is it enough?
Mr. Friel. Thank you for that. In monitoring, we use
several mechanisms. We do for a fiduciary, as I stated earlier,
has a beneficiary that receives over $10,000 a year in benefits
from VBA or they are rated 100 percent, we will require an
annual accounting from that fiduciary so that we can audit and
make sure that the expenditures are being made correctly.
For those who do not meet that criteria, we also have the
biannual review where we do an audit of 3 months' worth of
benefits every 2 years to ensure that those are, in fact,--
their benefits are being used properly. We also have the
ability to react to any instances where we are provided
information, someone provides information that there may be an
allegation of misuse. The field examiners have the ability to
go out and investigate and to see to ensure that everything is
happening correctly.
Additionally, we instituted back in 2020, we instituted a
standing background check for all sitting fiduciaries. Prior to
that, once you were appointed, until somebody told us
something, we did not know. Well, now we run a background check
on every fiduciary. This year we identified 958 fiduciaries
that were flagged that had under previous checks or at
appointment, did not have any indicators. Well, they have been
flagged and we are working now to replace them because we have
information that says they should not be sitting in that
position as a fiduciary.
Mr. McGarvey. I appreciate that. You talk about 2020,
though. We do know that in the OIG reports, there were
deficiencies found in both 2021 and 2023 showing that the
Fiduciary Program is susceptible to abuse. The steps you have
outlined, are these some of the steps that you have taken to
fix some of those specific issues in those reports? If so, what
more can you do? How can you take the lessons that have been
learned into the future and do better?
Mr. Friel. Sir, our goal is to be 100 percent oversight and
100 percent ensuring the security of our beneficiaries. We know
there is bad actors out there. We have instituted that. The
move to VBMS has allowed us to provide better oversight.
I will call into reference, you know, in particular the IG
report that indicated the funds sat there. Those funds were all
prior to our move into VBMS, right? We now have better
oversight. On top of that, you know, even if we go back how
long it took us, the fiduciary was aware of the
responsibilities. Those funds were available when we reached
out to see where they were at. We were able to recoup or
distribute those funds as appropriate, you know, when the IG
brought it to our attention. Our Fiduciary Program as far as
the appointment and the directions and the understanding of the
fiduciary responsibilities is evident there that they knew what
they were supposed to do with the funds.
Mr. McGarvey. I guess the question is, I mean, because what
you see is we are all on the same team, right? We want our
veterans to get the care they deserve. Just tell us in the
remaining time, are there additional resources or support from
Congress that are necessary to protect beneficiary funds and
prevent future misuse? What changes do you recommend? How can
we be of better help?
Mr. Friel. Yes, sir. We would appreciate support for
Representative Connolly's bill, H.R., I think it is H.R. 4108.
That bill would fix an issue that was created by the Isakson
and Roe Act. Basically, when they allowed us to make all
fiduciaries whole, which is something that we wanted--all
beneficiaries whole, excuse me, which is something that we had
been wanting to do prior to that act, we could make certain
beneficiaries whole and other beneficiaries it was dependent on
the negligence requirement.
That act allowed us to make all beneficiaries whole. What
it did, though, is it actually slowed down our process because
now it mandated that we do a negligence determination for every
claim or every misuse that occurs, which has no impact on the
funds that are going to be dispersed to the beneficiary.
With the proposed bill, it would push the responsibility of
the negligence determination down to the field, which would
basically allow them to more quickly get those benefits out. It
would make the oversight of that, it would make it at the
pension and fiduciary level, at the national level, it would be
more of an oversight feature than an actual having us make the
determination.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey. We are going to move
into our second round of questioning at this time.
Mr. Friel, do you have a rough guesstimate on the dollar
amount, let is just say the last 2 years that have been lost in
the Fiduciary Program?
Mr. Friel. This year, I do have the data for this year.
This year to date, as I said, we found 167 misuse cases, and
the funds that have been reissued was just in excess of 618
million, or excuse me, $618,000.
Mr. Luttrell. Six hundred 18 thousand, just this year?
Mr. Friel. Just this year, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. Is it true that fiduciaries must only
account for 3 months of expenses every 2 years?
Mr. Friel. Not all fiduciaries, sir. It is only fiduciaries
where they do not meet the threshold for the requirement to
report annually. If the funds under management, the funds that
they are being disbursed yearly for the veteran exceed or the
beneficiary exceed $10,000 or the veteran is rated 100 percent,
they are required to report annually. Outside of that,
previously, we had no accounting requirement. One of the things
that we instituted was the 3-month Funds Under Management
Review. That happens biannually so that we can continue to
evaluate those individuals to make sure those funds are being
spent properly.
Mr. Luttrell. That is individuals in those particular areas
going out just to speak directly with the fiduciary? Or is it a
letter, an email?
Mr. Friel. So, they----
Mr. Luttrell. How are we tracking that?
Mr. Friel [continuing]. they actually are required. We will
trigger a letter to the fiduciary letting them know they are
responsible to provide an accounting. Then we let them know
that accounting needs to include the last, you know, 3 months
of bank statements, as well as receipts for any big-ticket
items. We will evaluate those bank statements to see if there
is anything that we see in there that should not have occurred.
Then we will work with the fiduciary to figure out how it
happened and why it happened.
Mr. Luttrell. Ms. Van Haeren, in your opening statement,
you had three ideas you wanted to pass off to the VA that might
help increase the--or the loss of not only money, but
responsibilities for the fiduciaries. Can you tell me those
three again?
Ms. Van Haeren. Sure. The recommendations were to update
the procedural requirements to help verify funds for
dispersing, to help staff verify funds for those that are
dispersed to heirs or back to the regional office, or excuse
me, yes, back to the regional office. Another one was to
establish electronic controls to monitor that workload. They
had a system in place, but they were unable to consistently
find or be able to track that type of workload and those funds,
whether they are being dispersed back to VA or to the heirs.
Last, it was to determine the methodology on how they plan to
monitor.
Mr. Luttrell. How long ago was that report given to
Veterans Affairs?
Ms. Van Haeren. The report was published in August 2023. We
have a robust follow-up process. About 90 days from when it is
published, we will reach back out to VA and----
Mr. Luttrell. How far along are you, Mr. Friel, on engaging
those?
Mr. Friel. We have started to look at those.
Mr. Luttrell. What does that mean, started to look at?
Mr. Friel. We are working on, so, some of it is an IT
solution. We are working on developing the requirements to get
the system enhancements and get it scoped.
Mr. Luttrell. I do not know if I am necessarily going to
allow you to tuck that into the IT space.
Mr. Friel. I am not pushing it in IT space. For us to do
there as far as like being able to track the workload today, as
far as the first notice of death, the way it is triggered to
the fiduciary hub, we want to create an end product, a work
item, so that they can actually go do that as opposed to a
task. We are working with IT to make that happen in the system.
We would change the system, enhance the system to give us
better oversight and tracking of those through the end product.
Mr. Luttrell. The other two?
Mr. Friel. The other two, I am sorry. The one was the heir,
which we had spoke about earlier, was distributing to the
heirs. You know, we have worked with the Office of General
Counsel (OGC). We have received OGC opinion that it is not
within our purview to make sure that, you know, the estate and
the will and whatever decisions are made in the probate court
are within our purview. They are not part of VA's oversight.
Our oversight is would the funds be issued to the state? If so,
then we need to ensure they come back to VA.
Mr. Luttrell. There is a point of convergence right there
where VA is going to have to pass it off to the state, and the
state's going to look to the VA to solve the problems?
Mr. Friel. It is not so much convergence, it is the laws of
the state, yes, sir, I guess. Yes, you are correct, sir. The
laws of the state, as far as if there is an error or if there
is a will or probate where how that money will be dispersed to
the family members is not within our purview. However, if there
are no will or heir, then we look to make sure that the funds
come back to VA.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. Thank you, sir. Mr. Pappas, do you have
anything?
Mr. Pappas. Sure. Maybe a quick one for Mr. Friel. You were
talking about some prospective legislation that could help the
Department with making determinations out in the field. I just
want to ask you a bit about deceased beneficiaries. You can
have a beneficiary who passes away whose funds must be
distributed to their estate or returned to VA. You can also
have a veteran who passes away while a claim of fraud or misuse
is still being adjudicated.
Just to understand a little bit about how things work now
for that first population, a beneficiary who passes away while
part of the Fiduciary Program, how does VA currently determine
the order of priority for dispersing benefits to the estate of
a deceased beneficiary?
Mr. Friel. As it relates to the disbursement to the estate,
we would go into trust until either the funds--the fiduciary
would put the money, the funds into trust until either the will
is determined or the probate court acts to make determination
on how the funds would be distributed. VA does not have any
role in that other than the fiduciary putting the funds into
some type of trust.
As far as if the funds would go back to the state, right,
so, if there are no heirs, there is no will, then VA assumes
those funds, and we have the fiduciary return them to us.
Mr. Pappas. Just thinking about what steps you can take to
ensure that sufficient guidance for fiduciary hub staff is in
place to determine whether VA derived funds of deceased
beneficiaries need to be returned to VA, any thoughts there?
Mr. Friel. We do have currently within our requirement with
the field exam, we try to identify if there is an heir or a
will during that initial field exam process. We are now working
on actually in a system enhancement to be able to trigger that
within the system too, so that we have that identification and
we can utilize that data to kind of push out, to let them know
that, hey, we have information on an heir or a potential will.
That we can utilize our systems to let the fiduciary know that
there is, in fact, someone out there that exists that the funds
could be disbursed.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. If a beneficiary passes away where there
is suspected fraud or misuse, can you talk about the authority
that VA has to reimburse the estate of the beneficiary as the
fraud claim is being processed. Do you have that authority?
Mr. Friel. Yes.
Mr. Pappas. If not, what do you need?
Mr. Friel. Today, we currently, if there is a misuse
pending at the time of death, we will process that misuse to
fruition, and we will make the estate whole as part of our
process.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Well, I appreciate that. Thank you very
much for those comments.
Mr. Friel. Thank you.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, thank you, Mr. Pappas. Mr. Self, you are
recognized, sir, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not have the figure
in front of me. I am trying to get it, but if I remember right,
there are like 8,000 Government Accountability Office (GAO)
recommendations that the VA, across the VA, has not enacted.
Can you tell me how many GAO recommendations that this program
has outstanding?
Mr. Friel. Sir, I do not have that information available,
and we can take that back and delve into it to see if we can
identify any.
Mr. Self. I would like to see it. I understand your current
yearly you have not had time to close, but I believe that there
are outstanding GAO recommendations from years past, and I
would kind of like to know that number.
Mr. Friel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Self. Mr. Ciscomani, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, my friend. Thank you, Chairman
and friend, for holding this important hearing. Thank you also
to the witnesses for being here today. One of the issues I have
heard about facing veterans relates to the Veterans Benefit
Administration Fiduciary Program. I know we have talked a
little bit about that and the instances in which an appointed
fiduciary misuses a veteran's funds.
While I am sure that many of these VA appointed fiduciaries
are working hard to manage veterans' benefits, some bad actors
exist, like in anything else, in this program that allow for
fraud and misuse. I am proud to have joined Representative
Trone in introducing the Restoring Benefits and Defrauded
Veterans Act, which would ensure the families and beneficiaries
of a deceased veteran in the Fiduciary Program are able to be
reimbursed for the amount of misused funds as well.
Also, I co-led a bill with Representative Connolly titled
the Veteran Fraud Reimbursement Act, which would allow veterans
who fall victim to fraud to receive their reimbursements before
the VA's internal negligence determination is finished. I
believe these commonsense bills can ensure veterans and their
families are financially made whole, and I look forward to
working with my colleagues on the issue and continue to support
the men and women who serve this great country.
Now, my question is for Ms. Van Haeren here. Is it true
that the VA has no timeliness standard for determining whether
a fiduciary misuses, a fiduciary's misuse of funds was actually
the result of VA negligence?
Ms. Van Haeren. Yes, at the time of our report, we found
that there were no timeliness standards.
Mr. Ciscomani. How has this resulted in delays in removing
the fiduciaries and reimbursing misused funds? How does that
impact that?
Ms. Van Haeren. Sure. Based on the time that we conducted
our review of the hotline, there was a significant amount of
time before veterans were made whole from when the misuse
determination, or the allegation was made, through the entire
process and the negligence determination was finally made. It
was over 400 days at the time.
Mr. Ciscomani. What best practices would you say has the
OIG recommended for the VA to ensure that we are effectively
monitoring and tracking the VA's misuses of--determinations of
the reimbursement of the funds?
Ms. Van Haeren. We recommended that VBA put in measures
to--controls again, and also monitoring procedures to follow up
specifically on negligence determinations and reimbursement.
Mr. Ciscomani. Would you mind naming a few examples of
that, of what it can look like and how it can be improved?
Ms. Van Haeren. At the time we conducted the review, VBA
was in the process of moving from one system to another that
was able to actually have reports made that they could actually
track some of the negligence determinations that were once
tracked on, let us say, outside of a system. They did not even
have the information within a system at the time until they
migrated into VBMS-Fiduciary (VBMS-Fid). When they migrated
into that system, they were able to then track it
electronically and then, of course, monitor that work.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. Mr. Friel, on the same light of
timeliness of these services, from the 2021 Inspector General
Report on the Fiduciary Program, it states that, ``staff took
from about 3 to 23 months to complete the 14 negligence
determinations with an average of 468 days.'' To your point as
well. ``Half the cases were pending in excess of 500 days
before being completed. The remaining two were not completed
due to active criminal investigations.''
I have learned that processes have changed, but I believe
that these negligence determinations are still taking way too
long to also the previous point here. What is the average wait
time you would say currently for the negligence determination
to be made? What steps has the pension, specifically in the
Pension and Fiduciary Service taken to reform this process?
Same line of questioning here, but can you speak from your
perspective on this?
Mr. Friel. Yes. As far as the negligence determinations, we
are completing them in an average of like 24 days. I would have
to get you the exact number.
Mr. Ciscomani. Okay.
Mr. Friel. As Ms. Van Haeren's spoke, we moved into VBMS,
which definitely improved our ability and our oversight to be
able to track this work and be able to manage it in a much
better quicker and faster basis. The allegation from misuse to
the determination completion takes about 79 days. That is the
investigative part a, to determine whether or not there was
actually misuse, and then it is working with the fiduciary to
get the final accountings.
I can tell you that we do have a standard for replacement
of a fiduciary once misuse has been determined. If we determine
that misuse did occur, we replace that fiduciary within 60 days
of that happening. That is one of our traction pieces.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you. I am out of time. Would you agree
that moving these determinations to after reimbursements would
ensure veterans are made financially whole while still allowing
the VBA to determine if negligence happened?
Mr. Friel. Yes, I would, because the negligence
determination has no impact on the amount of funds that are
going to be distributed.
Mr. Ciscomani. Excellent. Thank you. I appreciate the
quick, straightforward responses from both of you. We do not
always get that, but I appreciated that. Thank you.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani. Okay. Thank you to
all our witnesses for testifying before us today about this
important issue. The Fiduciary Program is responsible for
ensuring that the veterans who need extra help managing their
VA benefits are taken care of. It is our responsibility as
Congress to ensure that the VA effectively oversees fiduciary
and protects beneficiaries of this program.
One veteran or beneficiary whose benefits are being misused
is one too many. I look forward to further conversations about
improving oversight efforts of this program and about VA's
efforts to implement the recommendations that we discussed
today. With that, I yield to the ranking member for closing
remarks.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward
to working with you to ensure the continued oversight over this
program, which is incredibly important for veterans and their
families. I think it is important that our staff works together
to ensure that OIG's recommendations are fully implemented by
VA and that we see some areas of improvement that were
identified in the hearing today. Our veterans deserve the best,
and I know we can work together to help get it done. I want to
thank our panel for their comments and their work. I yield
back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. Mr. Friel and Ms. Van
Haeren, thank you for your testimonies today. I do not envy the
pressures that you are feeling on your shoulders, sir. I can
only imagine how overwhelming that is. Please understand that
this committee is absolutely here to assist you in any way that
we can to make sure the veterans are the beneficiaries of all
of our acts, everything that we do. Ms. Van Haeren, thank you
for your report. If you do not mind, I would like to speak to
you after the committee closes out.
I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous
material. Without objection, so ordered. This hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:02 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witness

----------

Prepared Statement of Lisa Van Haeren

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Office of
the Inspector General's (OIG) oversight of the Veterans Benefits
Administration's (VBA) Fiduciary Program. The OIG is committed to
conducting independent audits, reviews, and inspections that result in
clear findings and practical recommendations to help VA promptly
provide veterans with the quality care, services, and benefits they are
due. To that end, the OIG works diligently to ensure every report it
releases--even if focused on a single medical facility or benefits
office--serves as a road map for VA leaders nationwide and contributes
to overall program improvements. It also vigorously pursues criminal
investigations involving potential fraud and other crimes affecting
veterans and VA operations, programs, and services.
The purpose of the Fiduciary Program is to protect VA beneficiaries
who are unable to manage their VA benefits as a result of injury,
disease, the infirmities of advanced age, or being younger than 18
years old. VA appoints fiduciaries to receive direct payments on behalf
of beneficiaries and disburse those funds for beneficiaries' care,
support, welfare, and other needs.\1\ During fiscal year 2022, the
Fiduciary Program served more than 108,000 beneficiaries who received
$2.6 billion in VA-derived funds.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ VA beneficiaries rely on their appointed fiduciaries to make
financial decisions in their best interests. When choosing a fiduciary,
VA considers factors including a beneficiary's preference (such as a
spouse or other family member if qualified), the identified
individual's willingness to serve, and the potential fiduciary's
ability to act in the beneficiary's interest.
\2\ VBA, Annual Benefits Report Fiscal Year 2022, p. 142.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the amount of money at issue and VA's commitment to serving
vulnerable veterans, the need for strict accountability and effective
oversight are vitally important to the continuous improvement of the
program.\3\ The OIG's recent reviews have found weaknesses in program
governance that have allowed gaps in workflow management and inadequate
oversight processes to persist. The OIG has identified delays in
determinations of whether a fiduciary is warranted, veterans'
reimbursements when their benefits have been misused, and the
distribution of deceased veterans' fiduciary-controlled funds to their
heirs or back to VA. The delays often created unnecessary risks to
veterans' welfare and exposed beneficiaries and their families to
potential hardships when VA's assistance was critical. In addition to
this oversight work, the OIG's Office of Investigations is deeply
involved in criminal cases that identify bad actors to help deter
fiduciary fraud and reduce its impact on victims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The Pension and Fiduciary Service establishes policy and
procedures, provides training, and generally oversees claims-processing
accuracy. The program is implemented by six VBA fiduciary hubs--each
responsible for administering the program in an assigned geographic
region.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This statement focuses on the OIG's most recent report on the
Fiduciary Program, which reviewed allegations that deceased
beneficiaries' VA-derived funds were not being timely and appropriately
disbursed as required. The report illustrates deficiencies in VBA's
oversight of the program and describes how the identified weaknesses
can deprive veterans' heirs (or others named in their wills) of benefit
funds to which they are entitled. The concerns with lax program
oversight and inadequate processes are not new; prior oversight of the
Fiduciary Program reflects similar findings as described in this
statement.\4\ These weaknesses increase opportunities for bad actors.
OIG investigators routinely work with their law enforcement partners to
bring to justice those individuals who have defrauded or stolen
vulnerable veterans' pensions and VA benefit compensation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ VA OIG, VBA's Fiduciary Program Needs to Improve the Timeliness
of Determinations and Reimbursements of Misused Funds, July 21, 2021;
VA OIG, Fiduciary Program: Some Incompetency Decisions Not Completed,
Putting Those Beneficiaries' Funds at Risk, January 27, 2021.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
RECENT OVERSIGHT OF THE FIDUCIARY PROGRAM

In a report released last month, the OIG assessed an anonymous
allegation to its hotline that two fiduciaries under the jurisdiction
of a VBA hub in Indianapolis, Indiana, had not released the funds of
four deceased beneficiaries who died in 2010, 2013, 2015, and 2020.\5\
During the course of the review, the OIG was made aware of two
additional cases, for a total of six cases, associated with the two
fiduciaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ VA OIG, The Fiduciary Program Needs to Verify the Prompt Return
of Deceased Beneficiaries' Funds to VA, August 17, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG substantiated allegations that VA-derived funds were not
always promptly disbursed to the deceased beneficiaries' heirs or
returned to VA when there was no valid will or heir. Although the OIG's
review focused only on the two fiduciaries related to the initial
allegations, the process deficiencies that the review team identified
could have significant effect across the Fiduciary Program.

Background

When a beneficiary dies, the fiduciary must disburse the remaining
VA ``funds under management.'' \6\ If the beneficiary has a valid will
or heir, the fiduciary must hold the remaining funds under management
in trust for the deceased beneficiary's estate until the will is
probated or heirs are ascertained and then disburse the funds according
to applicable State law. If the beneficiary died without a will and no
heir has been identified, the funds that would typically revert to the
veteran's state of residence are returned to VA.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 38 C.F.R. Sec.  13.250 (2018). For the purposes of this report,
VA-derived ``funds under management'' are beneficiaries' unspent VA
disability compensation or pension benefits payments. VA has no
oversight responsibility for other sources of income beneficiaries may
have, such as social security or retirement income.
\7\ 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5502; 38 C.F.R. Sec.  13.250.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although federal regulations require a fiduciary to submit a final
accounting to VA within 90 days of the beneficiary's death, neither
statute nor regulation includes a timeliness standard for fiduciaries
to distribute VA-derived funds of deceased beneficiaries to heirs or
return them to VA.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5502; 38 C.F.R. Sec.  13.250; 38 C.F.R. Sec.
13.280 (2018). A fiduciary accounting is a written report outlining the
management of a beneficiary's VA benefits payments and expenses for a
specified period.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until March 2021, VBA procedures required fiduciary hub staff to
verify that the fiduciary had indeed disbursed the remaining funds
under management for deceased beneficiaries to both heirs and VA. The
Pension & Fiduciary (P&F) Service terminated this procedure with regard
to a veteran's estate, as no statute requires them to do so, and this
is consistent with a VA Office of General Counsel opinion that states,
``VA's responsibilities with regard to protection of estate assets for
the benefit of others generally cease with the death of the veteran.''
\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ VA Office of General Counsel Precedent Opinion, VAOPGCPREC 5-98
(April 2, 1998). The General Counsel has the power to designate an
opinion as precedential, and opinions involving veterans' benefits are
binding for VA officials and employees in subsequent matters involving
the legal issue.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In contrast, the opinion states that, generally, VA is authorized
to assure the preservation of assets that must be returned to VA when
no valid will or heir exists. Although the procedure to verify
disbursement to an heir was removed, other procedures stated that a
determination must be made as to the existence of a will or heir to
determine whether funds must be distributed through the estate or
returned to VA.\10\ Procedures and any related guidance do not,
however, outline steps the fiduciary hub staff must take to make such a
determination, such as actions and evidence needed to verify whether
the fiduciary identified any valid will or heir.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ VA Manual M21-1MR, ``Actions Required to Determine if Escheat
is in Order,'' part XI, chap. 4, section D.16.d in Adjudication
Procedures Manual, updated February 2, 2005. The Adjudication
Procedures Manual serves as a general guide for processing and
adjudicating claims for compensation, pension, and related benefits for
veterans and their dependents. VBA's Compensation Service is
responsible for updating the Adjudication Procedures Manual.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In March 2021, VBA updated its procedures to include a requirement
to establish electronic controls to track the workload only for cases
in which VA-derived funds of deceased beneficiaries must revert to
VA.\11\ Because the manual does not designate a unique identifier for
electronic controls related to the return of deceased beneficiaries'
VA-derived funds to VA, it is difficult for staff to monitor this
workload.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ VA, Fiduciary Program Manual, ``Actions Required When Escheat
is in Order,'' part 2, chap. 1, sec. C, topic 3.e, updated March 17,
2021. The Fiduciary Program Manual serves as a general guide for
activities and decisions inherent to providing fiduciary assistance to
VA beneficiaries. The Pension and Fiduciary Service is responsible for
updating the Fiduciary Program Manual.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG Found Fiduciaries Were Not Promptly Disbursing VA Funds

The OIG substantiated that, as of June 2022, two fiduciaries, under
the jurisdiction of the Indianapolis hub, had not promptly released the
funds of six deceased beneficiaries. Between August 2022 and November
2022, both fiduciaries returned the funds to either the VA or an heir.
The delay, however, ranged from more than 19 months to 12 years from
the time of death (or the date the final accounting was received by VA,
if required) to the distribution of the funds.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ A delay in probate proceedings could cause a delay in
disbursement. However, the OIG team found no evidence that any of the
six cases were involved in probate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For two of the six cases, VA-derived funds were not promptly
distributed to the deceased beneficiaries' heirs. In total about
$800,000 of VA-derived funds were not released for more than 19 months
in one case and nearly seven years in the other.
For the remaining four cases, no heirs were identified, and VA-
derived funds were not promptly returned to VA. For these four cases,
about $9,300 of VA-derived funds were not promptly returned to VA, with
delays ranging from five to 12 years after the beneficiaries' deaths.
As stated earlier, neither statute nor regulation includes a
timeliness standard for disbursement. As stewards of taxpayer dollars,
however, VA should be promptly reclaiming funds when there is no valid
will or heir to receive them. Heirs also should not have to wait
excessive periods to receive funds to which they are entitled. Even
though it is not a statutory requirement, VBA is not prohibited from
verifying disbursement of funds due to deceased beneficiaries' estates.
Such verification would not only ensure heirs received funds to which
they are entitled, it would also help identify funds that must be
returned to VA if potential heirs thought to have existed at the time
that the case was initially reviewed could not be verified. Moreover, a
fiduciary can dispose of related records after two years from the date
that VA either removes the fiduciary or the fiduciary withdraws. As a
result, there is a potential risk of fraud, theft, and loss, if there
has been no verification within those two years that funds were
properly distributed.

What the OIG Recommended

To address identified weaknesses, the OIG made four recommendations
to the under secretary for benefits to ensure that the P&F Service
conducts the following actions:

1. Clarify procedural requirements to fiduciary hub staff on
how to verify whether VA-derived funds of deceased
beneficiaries must be returned to VA, including whether the
fiduciary identified any valid will or heir to whom the funds
are otherwise due.

2. Consider reimplementing the procedural requirement to verify
the disbursement of VA-derived funds to deceased beneficiaries'
estates when a valid will or heir exists.

3. Identify existing electronic controls or implement new ones
that allow VBA staff to track Fiduciary Program tasks,
timelines, and workload related to the return of deceased
beneficiaries' VA-derived funds to VA that would otherwise
escheat (revert) to a state if not disbursed to heirs.

4. Collaborate with the Office of Field Operations to establish
a methodology and monitor the workload to ensure the prompt
return of deceased beneficiaries' VA-derived funds.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ The Office of Field Operations sets production goals and
manages the employees who process veterans' claims.

The OIG found that VA submitted actions plans generally responsive
to the recommendations. The review team acknowledged VBA's decision not
to reimplement the procedural requirement to verify the disbursement of
VA-derived funds to deceased beneficiaries' estates when a valid will
or heir exists, as proposed in recommendation 2, but reiterates that
VBA is not prohibited from doing so to help ensure fiduciaries promptly
disburse funds to individuals to whom the funds are due.
The OIG will monitor implementation of all planned actions and will
close recommendations 1, 3, and 4 when VBA provides enough evidence to
demonstrate sufficient progress in addressing the intent of the
recommendations and the issues identified.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ The OIG requests updates on the status of all unimplemented
recommendations every 90 days. This is reflected on the recommendations
dashboard found on the OIG website. For this report, the OIG will
request the first update in late November 2023.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVIOUS OIG WORK ON THE VA FIDUCIARY PROGRAM

As stated earlier, the OIG's prior oversight of the Fiduciary
Program also showed insufficient monitoring and workflow management,
leading to significant delays in essential tasks. These delays included
finalizing incompetency determinations and reimbursing misused funds--
increasing risks of poor outcomes for eligible beneficiaries also more
vulnerable to fraud, theft, or financial loss.

Some Incompetency Decisions Were Not Timely Completed, Affecting
Beneficiaries' Receipt of Funds

In January 2021, the OIG published a management advisory memorandum
after assessing the merits of a hotline allegation that a deceased
veteran's VA funds had been misused while he was living at a California
nursing home.\15\ As part of its assessment, the OIG discovered VBA had
not finalized the veteran's incompetency proposal, despite VBA staff
receiving medical evidence that the veteran was incapable of managing
the VA benefit payments. This proposal, which can result in VA
appointing a fiduciary, was not completed for three years prior to his
death. This delay conflicts with VBA guidance that the decision be made
and a fiduciary appointed within 141 days.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ VA OIG, Fiduciary Program: Some Incompetency Decisions Not
Completed, Putting Those Beneficiaries' Funds at Risk, January 27,
2021.
\16\ This includes a 65-day due process period and a 76-day target
for completing the initial appointment process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG expanded its review to identify broader process issues and
found VBA had not finalized incompetency proposals for 221
beneficiaries from January 1, 2016, through December 31, 2019.\17\
Generally, the incomplete decisions occurred because staff did not
update the workload management tool to show an incompetency proposal
was pending a decision. Without that update, the case does not appear
in the inventory of incompetency proposals requiring final action, so
no decision is made or fiduciary appointed, and vulnerable
beneficiaries' funds could be mismanaged. VBA agreed that 52 of the 55
records the OIG reviewed were incomplete (stalled); the others were on
appeal or had been flagged for a decision. The OIG provided VBA with
the remaining 166 of the 221 records found to have incomplete decisions
so that VBA could determine whether further action was needed to ensure
incompetency proposals were finalized.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ VA OIG, Fiduciary Program: Some Incompetency Decisions Not
Completed, Putting Those Beneficiaries' Funds at Risk, January 27,
2021.

VBA Needs to Improve the Timeliness of Determinations and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reimbursements of Misused Funds

In a July 2021 report, an OIG review team examined whether program
staff properly addressed allegations of benefit payments being misused
by fiduciaries and then reimbursed beneficiaries as required.\18\
Program staff initiated inquiries into approximately 12,000 allegations
of fiduciary misuse of funds from January 1, 2018, through September
30, 2019.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ VA OIG, VBA's Fiduciary Program Needs to Improve the
Timeliness of Determinations and Reimbursements of Misused Funds, July
21, 2021.
\19\ Misuse occurs when a fiduciary spends a beneficiary's benefit
payments for something other than the ``use and benefit'' of the
beneficiary. Use and benefit is any expense reasonably intended for the
care, support, or maintenance of the beneficiary or the beneficiary's
dependents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The team assessed staff actions for a sample of misuse
determinations and did not find systemic issues. However, there were
instances of significant wait times for program staff to determine
misuse and negligence and to reimburse misused funds. For example, one
beneficiary waited 19 months after an initial determination of misuse
before staff completed a negligence determination. VA then reimbursed
the beneficiary over $20,000 in misused funds. Another beneficiary
waited 14 months after the misuse determination before VA staff
authorized reimbursement of approximately $5,800. The report concluded
that VBA should consider whether the average number of days taken to
complete each type of misuse action is acceptable to meet oversight
responsibilities and fulfill the stated mission of protecting
vulnerable veterans and other beneficiaries.
The OIG also found VBA did not adequately monitor all follow-up
actions on reported misuse. VBA was unaware of many of the unprocessed
negligence determinations that the team identified. Additionally, the
team examined the workload management plans and the systematic analysis
of operations for the two fiduciary hubs visited but none of the
related documentation discussed or identified pending reimbursements.
The OIG made two recommendations to VBA to ensure prompt completion
of determinations and reimbursements. In response, VBA implemented new
information technology that allowed for electronic monitoring of
negligence determinations and reimbursements. Both recommendations have
been closed as implemented after reviewing VBA's responsive actions.

OIG CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIVE EFFORTS TO COMBAT FIDUCIARY FRAUD

The OIG's Office of Investigations has a robust approach to
identifying and holding accountable individuals who have violated the
law and their duty to protect vulnerable veterans' financial interests.
The OIG criminal investigators' multi-tiered approach to combating
fiduciary fraud includes

1. maintaining a close collaboration with VBA's fiduciary hubs
to proactively share concerns, stay apprised of new schemes,
and solicit referrals for OIG review;

2. promoting publicly a fraud toolkit on the OIG website that
details key indicators of fiduciary and other types of fraud
and additional information on making reports to the OIG
hotline; and

3. investigating potential fiduciary fraud and pursuing the
prosecution and conviction of bad actors.

Together, these efforts have helped increase the awareness of
fiduciary fraud and led to the successful arrest and prosecution of
many fraudsters who were stealing benefits and taking advantage of
veterans.

OIG's Collaborative Efforts with Fiduciary Hubs

OIG criminal investigators have developed strong working
relationships and communicate regularly with VBA personnel on cases of
suspected misuse of benefits committed by VA-appointed fiduciaries.
This highly effective engagement ensures that fiduciary hub personnel
send referrals to the OIG for suspected criminal activity. The OIG also
completes an annual comprehensive summary of all fiduciary-related
actions taken during the previous fiscal year, to include
investigations opened, cases prosecuted, indictments obtained, arrests
made, restitution ordered, and other moneies recovered by VA. This
report is provided to the P&F Service and incorporated into their
Annual Benefits Report.\20\ More information on reported investigations
that flowed from these hubs and other sources is discussed in the
section on fiduciary fraud criminal cases below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ VBA, Annual Benefits Report Fiscal Year 2022, p. 143.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OIG Public Outreach

The Fraud Indicator Toolkit, found on the OIG's website, provides a
list of key characteristics related to 10 types of fraud.\21\ It alerts
VA personnel, contractors, and the veteran community when to report
suspicious activity and alleged wrongdoing to the OIG hotline. The
following examples from the toolkit relate to fiduciary fraud:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ VA OIG, Fraud Program FAQ.

The beneficiary has overdue or unpaid bills or medical
copayments, or needs do not appear to be met (insufficient food,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
medication, clothing, heating, or other expected costs).

The fiduciary is secretive or vague about spending or
lacks documentation for expenses.

The beneficiary's VA benefits are deposited into an
account that is also used for other non-VA deposits (comingled funds).

VA benefits and other government deposits are distributed
among various accounts or checks payable to ``cash'' are made from the
beneficiary's account.

Large or repeated ATM withdrawals and/or in-person
withdrawals are made from the beneficiary's account.

The fiduciary appears to be using or borrowing the
beneficiary's VA benefits for their own personal use, particularly when
there have been purchases of high-priced vehicles, property, or other
goods or services.

Examples of Recent OIG Fiduciary Fraud Investigations

The OIG receives and reviews referrals of potential cases of
fiduciary fraud from the VBA hubs and the OIG hotline. Since October 1,
2019, the Office of Investigations has opened more than 115 criminal
cases, made 55 arrests, and secured 51 convictions. During this period,
there was a $15 million dollar financial impact on VA and a $10 million
dollar impact on veterans.\22\ To appreciate the consequences for
vulnerable veterans, the following are just a few examples of fiduciary
fraud cases recently investigated by the OIG and prosecuted by our
partners at the Department of Justice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Financial impact includes restitution, civil judgments,
penalties, fines, forfeitures, and cost savings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
An OIG investigation revealed that a former VA-appointed fiduciary
misappropriated more than $143,000 in VA funds intended for her
severely disabled veteran husband.\23\ The fiduciary was married to a
US Army Reservist who suffered a severe traumatic brain injury in a
military service-connected accident. Because of this injury, her
husband had many serious physical challenges. As his guardian and VA
fiduciary, she subsequently received $258,613 in VA disability payments
and $36,000 in Social Security payments intended for her husband. She
withdrew $199,649 in cash and accrued about $900 in ATM and overdraft
fees, and then misappropriated most of the funds by spending the money
on methamphetamine for herself and others, living expenses for five
other people, vehicles for numerous individuals, and other nonapproved
items. In October 2022, she was sentenced in the Eastern District of
Arkansas to 20 months' imprisonment, three years' supervised release,
and restitution of $143,000.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ US Department of Justice, ``Jonesboro Woman Sentenced to 20
Months in Prison,'' October 4, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/usao-edar/
pr/jonesboro-woman-sentenced-20-months-prison.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another OIG investigation found that a former VA-appointed
fiduciary embezzled VA funds intended for his veteran brother,
including over $130,000 in unauthorized money transfers, over $25,000
in ATM cash withdrawals, and numerous purchases for his own personal
use.\24\ The purchases included a diamond ring, a pickup truck, and two
motorcycles. In November 2021, the fiduciary was sentenced in the
Western District of Pennsylvania to 1 day of incarceration, three
years' supervised release, restitution of $75,000, and a fine of $4,000
after previously pleading guilty to misappropriation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ US Department of Justice, ``New Kensington Man Sentenced for
Misappropriating VA Benefits,'' November 1, 2021, https://
www.justice.gov/usao-wdpa/pr/new-kensington-man-sentenced-
misappropriating-va-benefits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
From November 2006 to July 2017, four defendants were found to have
engaged in a sophisticated financial scheme to defraud victims of their
VA and Social Security funds.\25\ The investigation was conducted by
the VA OIG, Social Security Administration OIG, Internal Revenue
Service Criminal Investigation, and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The defendants used a nonprofit corporation that
provided guardianship, conservatorship, and financial management to
hundreds of people with special needs. The organization also served as
a VA-appointed fiduciary for dozens of veterans. The defendants used
funds that were unlawfully transferred from their clients' accounts to
purchase homes, vehicles, luxury recreational vehicles, and cruises.
Fifty-two veterans were harmed by this scheme. The loss to VA was
approximately $3.3 million. In July 2021, the nonprofit owner was
sentenced to 47 years' imprisonment, and her husband was sentenced to
15 years. The other two defendants were sentenced to 20 years in prison
and five years and 11 months in prison, respectively. The owner of the
nonprofit was also ordered to pay approximately $6.8 million in
restitution to the victims of the fraud scheme. The other defendants
were ordered to pay the entire amount of the stolen funds as
restitution to the victims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ US Department of Justice, ``Albuquerque Couple Sentenced to
Federal Prison in Ayudando Guardians Case,'' July 15, 2021, https://
www.justice.gov/usao-nm/pr/albuquerque-couple-sentenced-federal-prison-
ayudando-guardians-case.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONCLUSION

An effective process to detect and resolve deficiencies is a
fundamental element of accountability for any VA program. The OIG found
that the P&F Service had deficiencies in both and should strengthen the
fiduciary program's governance, including its oversight of the
fiduciary hubs' operations. VBA leaders should ensure effective
workflow management processes are in place and consistently implemented
to make certain that there is adequate oversight of fiduciaries. This,
in turn, will mitigate the risks that beneficiaries do not receive the
program support to which they are entitled. The OIG is committed to
continuing its oversight work in this area and investigating potential
fiduciary fraud that not only affects program beneficiaries, but also
makes the most effective use of taxpayer dollars.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or members of the Subcommittee may have.

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of Kenneth Smith

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas and distinguished members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) fiduciary
program and the vital role we serve for our Veterans and beneficiaries.
Accompanying me today is Kevin Friel, Deputy Director, Pension and
Fiduciary (P&F) Service. I want to express my appreciation for your
continued support of the Nation's Veterans, their families and
survivors. VA takes the protection of our most vulnerable beneficiaries
very seriously, and we are grateful for the opportunity to share with
the Committee the significant updates VA has made to the fiduciary
program.

Fiduciary Program Purpose and Structure

Since as early as 1924, the mission of VA's fiduciary program is to
protect Veterans and other VA beneficiaries who are unable to manage
their own financial VA benefits because of injury, disease, infirmities
of advanced age or who are dependents under the age of majority. VA
protects these vulnerable beneficiaries by appointing and overseeing
fiduciaries who manage their VA benefits. VA provides oversight over
fiduciaries to ensure that VA monetary benefits are being used to meet
the care and needs of those beneficiaries adjudged incompetent to
manage their VA-derived benefits. VA does not take the action to
appoint a fiduciary lightly and strives to preserve dignity by serving
these beneficiaries with a high degree of sensitivity in the least
intrusive way possible.
The statutory authority for the fiduciary program is 38 U.S.C. Ch.
55 and 61. VA has established Federal regulations for this program
under 38 C.F.R. Part 13, Fiduciary Activities. In 2018, P&F Service
revised its regulations to refine VA policies and procedures, ensuring
consistency with current law. It also clarified the rights of
beneficiaries in the fiduciary program and the roles that VA and
fiduciaries play in ensuring that VA monetary benefits are managed in
the best interest of impacted beneficiaries.
In March 2012, VA consolidated all fiduciary activities to six
regional fiduciary hubs, comprised of over 1,200 Field Examiners, Legal
Instrument Examiners, Fiduciary Service Representatives and other
management and support staff. As of August 2023, these hubs
collectively provide oversight of approximately 104,000 beneficiaries
and 83,000 fiduciaries. The Office of Field Operations monitors the
operations of the six fiduciary hubs while P&F Service provides
policies, procedures, and additional oversight of the fiduciary
program.

VA Modernization Efforts

VA has undergone significant modernization and improvement in its
approach to fiduciary activities. In November 2020, VA implemented a
comprehensive plan aimed at reducing unnecessary intrusiveness in the
lives of VA beneficiaries and their families, while also improving
oversight of fiduciaries. This initiative also allowed VA to re-focus
efforts on expeditiously conducting interviews and investigations that
are paramount to enrolling and monitoring beneficiaries and their
associated fiduciaries in the program. VA focused on the completion of
initial appointments and investigations, as well as follow-up face-to-
face examinations for situations where an issue or concern in the
beneficiary-fiduciary relationship was identified.
These programmatic improvements have also positively impacted the
time it takes VA to appoint a fiduciary to serve Veterans and other
beneficiaries, thereby ensuring faster access to benefits. Since
implementing the procedural modernization efforts which began in
February 2020, VA reduced the average days pending for an initial
appointment field examination from 37 days to 26 days, as of August 31,
2023. Additionally, VA has further enhanced oversight of fiduciaries by
increasing the completion of financial reviews for beneficiary funds by
49 percent from 45,204 in fiscal year (FY) 2020 to 67,223 in FY 2022.
In November 2020, VA also modernized information technology systems
for fiduciary program activities by migrating from a legacy system to
VA's central benefits claims processing system, the Veterans Benefits
Management System. This allowed for the use of VA's modern claims
processing application to deliver fiduciary services efficiently and
effectively.
Accountings are paramount to the oversight of certain fiduciaries.
In August 2020, VA delivered the Fiduciary Accounting Submission Tool
(FAST). Prior to implementing FAST, fiduciaries were required to submit
accountings and financial documents to VA through the mail. The FAST
system provides an alternative to mail by allowing for the electronic
submission of accountings reports which streamlines the current process
for accounting submission and reviews. Fiduciaries may use FAST to
submit new and existing accountings, fund usage reviews and provide
accounting revisions in a centralized repository. VA continues to work
to enhance the FAST system to streamline workload processing of
accountings and fund usage reviews.
VA has also leveraged technology to accommodate the fiduciary
program throughout the global pandemic. The pandemic curtailed in-
person visits with Veterans and other beneficiaries. VA quickly
researched viable options and leveraged the Veterans Health
Administration's (VHA) video teleconferencing tools to conduct field
examinations with beneficiaries. In March 2022, the fiduciary program
released its own video conferencing tool, P&F Service Video
Conferencing. This allowed VA employees to see the beneficiary and
their living situation when circumstances prevented an in-person visit,
enabling VA to continue its oversight responsibilities.

Referrals to the Fiduciary Program

VA beneficiaries may be referred to the fiduciary program in
multiple ways. A referral to the fiduciary program may result from a
proposal of incompetency from a VA regional office based on medical
evidence of record or receipt of a court determination finding that a
beneficiary is unable to manage their financial affairs. VA's
regulation (in 38 C.F.R. Sec.  3.353(a)) defines a mentally incompetent
personas ``one who because of injury or disease lacks the mental
capacity to contract or to manage [their] own affairs, including
disbursement of funds without limitation.'' Additionally, beneficiaries
under the age of majority are required to be referred to the fiduciary
program. VA refers to individuals who have not yet reached the age of
majority as minor children. The age of majority is determined by the
laws of each individual State or U.S. territory.
When the evidence demonstrates that a proposal of incompetency is
appropriate, VA provides written due process notice of the proposed
decision to the beneficiary. This notice explains the evidence used to
make the decision and their rights. The beneficiary is informed of
their right to provide additional evidence, a hearing and the
implications of a finding of incompetency by VA. Beneficiaries have the
right to a minimum due process period of 60 days, unless they waive
their due process rights. If VA does not receive a waiver of due
process, VA will review all evidence of record and make a final
determination on incompetency after the due process period has expired.
VA cannot determine a beneficiary is incompetent unless there is clear,
convincing medical evidence which leaves no doubt as to the person's
incompetency. In the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the
contrary, VA presumes that a person is competent.
It is important to note that judicial findings of a court with
respect to the incompetency of a beneficiary are not binding on VA's
rating activity. If VA accepts the court's finding of incompetency
based on a review of the evidence, no additional notices are provided
to the beneficiary and VA designates the beneficiary as incompetent.
However, if a Veteran is declared incompetent by a court, VA develops
for all necessary evidence to complete a rating determination.

Fiduciary Appointment

In each case where a beneficiary requires a fiduciary, VA strives
to appoint an individual that can assist VA in meeting the care and
needs of the beneficiary. VA appoints various individuals and entities
as a fiduciary, such as a spouse or family member, a court-appointed
fiduciary, another interested party or a professional fiduciary.
During the appointment of a fiduciary, VA will assess the well-
being and needs of the beneficiary and their dependents by way of an
in-person field examination. A VA field examiner will conduct an in-
person visit to assess the beneficiary's living situation and will
review the beneficiary's personal situation. VA will consider the
beneficiary's preference of a fiduciary and attempt to appoint the
preferred individual, provided that the proposed fiduciary is
qualified, willing to serve, and the appointment would serve the
beneficiary's interest. As of August 31, 2023, two out of three
(72,534) fiduciaries appointed are spouses or other family members.
If the beneficiary is unable to identify a preferred individual to
serve as their fiduciary, VA will make every effort to appoint an
individual or entity that is willing to serve without a fee. However,
in certain circumstances, VA must appoint a professional fiduciary who
receives a fee for their services. Fees for a professional fiduciary
are limited by statute to 4 percent of the beneficiary's monthly VA
payment.
When appointing any fiduciary, VA thoroughly examines the
fiduciary's ability to meet their responsibilities as outlined in
regulation and statute. VA investigates a proposed fiduciary's criminal
background and credit history and assesses their suitability. To be
considered suitable, the proposed fiduciary must not possess a bar to
fiduciary service, such as a recent conviction of a felony offense. VA
will not appoint a person to serve as a fiduciary if they have misused
a beneficiary's VA benefits, refuse to comply with VA regulations and/
or are unable to fulfill their fiduciary responsibilities.
During the fiduciary appointment process, VA instructs the
fiduciary on their duties and responsibilities and provides information
about the needs of the beneficiary and any dependents, as applicable.
VA provides fiduciaries with the training resources available on VA's
website. VA ensures the fiduciary understands their responsibility to
know all monthly bills and monetary considerations to meet the care and
needs of the beneficiary.
As part of the appointment process, VA considers whether the
beneficiary has the capacity to manage their own benefits with limited
VA oversight. If the beneficiary demonstrates the capability to manage
their funds, VA will place the beneficiary on Supervised Direct Pay.
When Supervised Direct Pay is utilized and the beneficiary demonstrates
the sustained ability to manage their funds under this appointment, VA
will act to make a determination that finds the beneficiary to be
competent.
In FY 2023 through August 31, VA has completed 1,600 initial
appointment field examinations in an average of 42 days.

Fiduciary Oversight

VA provides robust oversight for all fiduciaries in the fiduciary
program. Through its modernization efforts, VA has refined and
strengthened its oversight responsibilities for the fiduciary and
beneficiary. Fiduciary oversight focuses on a fiduciary's management of
a beneficiary's benefits. VA reviews each case's individual
circumstances to determine the level of oversight needed. All
fiduciaries are subject to regularly scheduled financial oversight
which is achieved by submitting either an accounting or a fund usage
report unless the appointment involves either a chief officer of a non-
VA facility where the cost of care for the beneficiary equals or
exceeds the monthly VA benefit, or a chief officer of a Federal
institution if the officer is receiving VA benefits in a fiduciary
capacity.

Annual Accounting

VA requires an annual accounting when the VA funds under management
exceed $10,000, the fiduciary is authorized to collect a fee for their
service or the beneficiary is paid VA disability compensation benefits
for total disability. VA may also determine that an accounting is
necessary to ensure that beneficiary funds are properly managed by the
fiduciary.
The annual accounting describes, in detail, all activity in the
fiduciary accounts, regardless of the source of funds, such as Social
Security payments and interest earned on deposits. The fiduciary is
required to submit the annual accounting report, along with financial
documents and statements covering the entire accounting period. VA
conducts a thorough audit of the accounting and pertinent financial
documents, examining funds received and expenditures. If the audit
shows any indication of misuse of funds, VA investigates and removes
the fiduciary from their appointment if misuse is confirmed.
In FY 2023 through August 31, VA completed 31,841 accountings,
completing them in an average of 71 days.

Biennial Fund Usage Report

If the beneficiary's individual circumstances do not meet the
criteria for an annual accounting, VA conducts targeted oversight of
the fiduciary's use and management of VA funds through biennial fund
usage reports. A fund usage report consists of a review of 3 months of
all financial statements for the beneficiary. The fund usage report
must include any supporting documents regarding irregular purchases so
that VA can confirm the beneficiary's funds are being spent in their
best interest. As with the accounting audit, if the fund usage review
shows evidence of misuse of the beneficiary funds, VA investigates and
removes the fiduciary from their appointment if misuse is
substantiated.
In FY 2023 through August 31, VA completed 15,805 fund usage
reviews, completing them in an average of 70 days.

Follow-Up Contact

VA completes follow-up field examinations and telephone contact
oversight when the fiduciary fails to fulfill their responsibilities.
For example, VA follows up on delinquent accountings and funds usage
reports and seeks further clarification if the necessary information is
not submitted. Should the fiduciary refuse to submit the accounting,
fund usage report or supporting documents when contacted, VA will
remove the fiduciary.
In FY 2023 through August 31, VA completed 13,567 follow-up
contacts in an average of 29 days.

Onsite Reviews

An onsite review strengthens VA's oversight of fiduciaries. Onsite
reviews are intended to ensure fiduciaries who serve multiple
beneficiaries are performing their duties satisfactorily and to protect
beneficiaries from misuse. VA conducts scheduled periodic onsite
reviews under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5508 on fiduciaries who meet all the
following criteria:

Are located in the United States;

Serve more than 20 beneficiaries; and

Total VA funds under management for beneficiaries is more
than

$78,860.76 as of December 1, 2022.

VA may conduct unscheduled onsite reviews of fiduciaries as
necessary to ensure the well-being of beneficiaries or prevent
exploitation of beneficiary funds.

Beneficiary Oversight

In addition to overseeing the fiduciary's performance, VA conducts
regular oversight of vulnerable beneficiaries to ensure their well-
being through various means, based on the unique circumstances of each
case. VA strives to conduct the least intrusive method of oversight to
maintain a beneficiary's dignity and to minimize any disruption of
family routine.

Annual Written Contact

VA contacts every beneficiary in the fiduciary program annually
through written correspondence to remind them of their rights and
status in the fiduciary program. This letter also advises the
beneficiary and their representative to contact VA if there is an issue
or concern with their fiduciary.
For some beneficiaries, an added layer of oversight is not deemed
necessary because their well-being is actively monitored by a trusted
individual or entity. In these instances, VA leverages annual written
contact as the least intrusive form of regular contact while continuing
oversight of the beneficiary. These situations include where the
fiduciary is:

The beneficiary's spouse;

The beneficiary's parent (in cases of minor
beneficiaries);

VHA; or

Another government agency.

As of August 31, 2023, there are approximately 66,303 beneficiaries
served through this type of oversight.

Telephone Contact

If the beneficiary's situation does not meet the criteria for
annual written contact, the beneficiary may qualify for scheduled
telephonic contact. Beneficiaries who qualify for telephonic oversight
are not socially isolated, able to respond to VA requests and oriented
to person, place, events and time as of the most recent VA contact.
VA will conduct a telephone call with the beneficiary to assess
their well-being, and the beneficiary-fiduciary relationship.
Telephonic oversight allows VA to maintain oversight of beneficiaries
in a way that is minimally intrusive when the beneficiary's evidence of
record indicates that they are able to correspond with VA. As of August
31, 2023, there are approximately 9,722 beneficiaries served through
this type of oversight.

Biennial Face-to-Face Contact

For the most vulnerable beneficiaries, such as those who are
socially isolated, unable to respond to VA requests or are not oriented
to person, place, events and time during the most recent contact, VA
will schedule a face-to-face field examination with the beneficiary.
These examinations occur every 2 years and help ensure the
beneficiary's well-being and assess the current fiduciary situation. As
of August 31, 2023, there are approximately 24,935 beneficiaries
provided this type of oversight.

Fiduciary Removals and Withdrawals

A fiduciary may withdraw from service by providing a written intent
to withdraw that includes the reason for withdrawal. However, a
fiduciary is not relieved of their fiduciary duties until they receive
written notice in response to their request to withdraw, which includes
their requirement to transfer the beneficiary's funds to a successor
fiduciary and receive notice of approval for a final accounting.
VA will also take action to remove a fiduciary when oversight
reveals evidence of misuse, if the fiduciary refuses to respond to VA's
request for accounting or fund usage report documentation or is
otherwise found unfit or unsuitable to continue performing fiduciary
responsibilities. For VA to further ensure proper oversight of the
fiduciary and complete removal actions timely, an annual criminal
background inquiry is completed on all active individual fiduciaries to
determine whether any active fiduciary has been convicted of an offense
which would be a bar to serving as a fiduciary since VA's most recent
criminal background investigation. VA takes action to remove any
fiduciary found to have a bar to service because of the annual criminal
background inquiry.
VA takes misuse of beneficiary funds very seriously and any
credible allegation or finding of such is swiftly and comprehensively
investigated. Misuse of benefits occurs when the fiduciary receives
payment of VA benefits and uses any part of such payment for a purpose
that is not for the use and benefit of the beneficiary or their
dependents. VA fiduciary program personnel investigate and act on
misuse, which is distinct from fraud. For example, fraud could be the
continued acceptance of payments after the entitlement to the payment
ceases to exist, such as when a beneficiary dies, and the fiduciary
conceals the fact to continue receiving VA payments. Allegations of
fraud are immediately referred to VA's Office of Inspector General
(OIG) for criminal investigation.
VA's oversight is designed to detect and address misuse through
accountings, funds usage reports, beneficiary interviews and other
contacts, but it is not foolproof. VA relies on allegations of misuse
of funds from many sources, such as from the beneficiary themselves, a
concerned family member or friend or a beneficiary's social worker.
Every allegation, whether written or verbal, is taken seriously and
investigated thoroughly, objectively and impartially. If misuse of a
beneficiary's funds is confirmed, VA issues a formal misuse
determination which serves as the basis to immediately remove the
fiduciary if removal has not already occurred. VA simultaneously
establishes a debt against the fiduciary and refers the case to VA's
OIG for possible criminal investigation. Any fiduciary found to have
misused a beneficiary's funds is further barred from serving as a VA
fiduciary in the future.
VA's primary obligation is always the beneficiary and their well-
being. If a beneficiary's VA benefits were misused by their VA-
appointed fiduciary, VA will make the beneficiary or the beneficiary's
successor fiduciary whole, while simultaneously seeking recovery from
the person who misused the funds.

VA Negligence

VA does not spare itself from scrutiny and conducts review of its
own oversight. After VA issues a formal finding of misuse, VA reviews
the record to determine if VA was negligent, as required by law. VA is
considered negligent if the misuse would not have occurred but for VA's
failure to exercise proper oversight. VA is also considered negligent
when VA fails to:

Review an accounting within 60 days of receipt;

Decide to investigate an allegation of misuse within 60
days of receipt of the allegation; or

Take action to replace the fiduciary within 60 days of
the allegation of misuse after deciding to investigate an allegation of
misuse and finding misuse.

Thanks to congressional action, P.L. 116-315, the Johnny Isakson
and David P. Roe, M.D. Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement
Act of 2020, VA was able to improve its ability to make beneficiaries
whole after a finding of misuse by decoupling a finding of VA
negligence from reissuance. With the passing of this law, VA is now
able to reissue the equivalent amount of funds misused by a fiduciary
to the beneficiary in every instance of misuse.

Conclusion

The VA fiduciary program has undergone significant modernization in
recent years and VA remains committed to protecting the most vulnerable
of its beneficiaries. VA strives to maintain the balance of oversight
and intrusiveness, while remaining steadfast in our oversight of
appointed fiduciaries and the funds it has entrusted to them. VA shares
Congress' goal of continuous improvements to its program and its
customer service to Veterans and beneficiaries and looks forward to
continued collaboration. VA expresses its appreciation for your
continued support of Veterans and their families, caregivers and
survivors. Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, this concludes my
statement. I am happy to respond to any questions you or the Committee
may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Disabled American Veterans

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting DAV (Disabled American Veterans) to submit
testimony for the record of your oversight hearing titled, ``VA's
Fiduciary Program: Ensuring Veterans' Benefits are Properly Managed.''
DAV is a congressionally chartered and VA-accredited national
veterans' service organization (VSO) of more than one million wartime
service-disabled veterans. To fulfill our service mission, DAV directly
employs a corps of benefits advisors, national service officers (NSOs),
all of whom are themselves wartime service-connected disabled veterans,
at every Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (VARO) as
well as other VA facilities throughout the Nation, including the Board
of Veterans' Appeals (Board).
Mr. Chairman, based on our experience of providing VA-accredited
claims representation and assistance to veterans, their families,
survivors and those deemed to warrant a fiduciary, we are enthused to
provide our concerns about the VA incompetency process, the Fiduciary
Program, oversight of VA appointed fiduciaries and DAV's
recommendations.

VA'S INCOMPETENCY PROCESS

Under VA regulation 38 C.F.R. 3.353(a), a mentally incompetent
person is one who because of injury or disease lacks the mental
capacity to contract or to manage his or her own affairs, including
disbursement of funds without limitation. The Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA) has sole authority to make official determinations
of competency and incompetency for purposes of disbursement of
benefits.
In general, most VA incompetency decisions, stem from the VA
Compensation and Pension (C&P) examinations. On the VA Disability
Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) for mental health, the examiner must
address the question, ``Is the veteran capable of managing his or her
financial affairs? It comes with a note, ``For VA purposes, a mentally
incompetent person is one who because of injury or disease lacks the
mental capacity to contract or to manage his or her own affairs,
including disbursement of funds without limitation.''
The DBQ, however, does not indicate the questions asked by the
examiner or how they specifically conclude the veteran not being
capable of handling financial issues. There is no requirement that this
information be based on an actual review of the veteran's finances. In
addition, the September 13, 2023, VA Office of the Inspector General
(OIG) report found that inconsistent DBQs may lead to inaccurate mental
competency determinations.
Unless the medical evidence is clear, convincing and leaves no
doubt as to the person's incompetency, the rating agency will make no
determination of incompetency without a definite expression regarding
the question by the responsible medical authorities. Determinations
relative to incompetency should be based upon all evidence of record
and there should be a consistent relationship between the percentage of
disability, facts relating to commitment or hospitalization and the
holding of incompetency.
Where reasonable doubt arises regarding a beneficiary's mental
capacity to contract or to manage his or her own affairs, including the
disbursement of funds without limitation, such doubt will be resolved
in favor of competency.
Whenever it is proposed to make an incompetency determination, the
beneficiary will be notified of the proposed action and of the right to
a pre-determination hearing. If the pre-determination hearing is
requested within 30 days of the notice, VBA cannot make a final
determination on the issue of incompetency until the outcome from the
hearing.
Once incompetency is proposed, any retroactive benefits owed to the
beneficiary are withheld until a decision is made regarding competency.
The beneficiary will still receive their monthly VA disability benefits
check. To put this into context, if the beneficiary were granted a 100
percent rating for PTSD, but the issue of incompetency has been raised,
they will receive monthly checks reflecting the 100 percent rating, but
will not receive any of the retroactive benefits until a decision has
been made regarding competency.
If the beneficiary is deemed incompetent, the retroactive benefits
will be paid to the fiduciary, once the fiduciary is appointed. Once a
beneficiary has been determined to be incompetent for VA purposes,
VBA's Fiduciary Program will then start the process to appoint a
fiduciary to manage the beneficiary's financial affairs.

VBA'S FIDUCIARY PROGRAM

VBA's Fiduciary Program provides protection to veterans and other
beneficiaries who are unable to manage their financial affairs. This
program is managed by Fiduciary Hubs, currently there are six Fiduciary
Hubs, meaning that multiple states will be assigned to the same
Fiduciary Hub.
Once incompetency has been determined, the case is provided to the
Fiduciary Hub closest to where the veteran resides. The Fiduciary Hub
will start the process to assign the veteran a fiduciary.
One of the first steps in the fiduciary process is a home visit
with a VA field examiner. The field examiner works for VA and is
responsible for choosing a suitable fiduciary for the veteran, as well
as supervising the fiduciary once chosen and ensuring that the
fiduciary acts in compliance with VA. The field examiner will visit
with the veteran in their home to assess their needs and determine how
to best proceed with filling the fiduciary role, this is often referred
to as the Field Examination.
The Field Examination will give the field examiner insight into the
veteran's lifestyle, finances, and health care needs. As such, it can
be helpful for the veteran to have documentation prepared prior to the
visit, specifically lists of expenditures, bills, and outstanding
debts. During this examination, the field examiner may make evaluations
regarding:

Physical status of the veteran, such as age, appearance,
and physical disabilities or mobility limitations;

Mental health of the veteran, including any mental
conditions, and ability to discern time, place, and events;

Current medications and specific health concerns;

Veteran's current capacity to manage finances;

Inventory of assets;

Standard of living, with specific regard to the monthly
finances and funds used;

Social adjustment, such as social relationships;

Industrial adjustment, such as work capability;

Dependents and needs of dependents;

Information regarding next of kin; and

Any changes to benefit entitlement.

Generally, the most common types of fiduciaries are federal
fiduciaries and court-appointed fiduciaries. Court-appointed
fiduciaries are rarer and only used in instances where a Federal
fiduciary may not be found. A federal fiduciary may include spouses,
family members, or legal custodians.
The goal is finding the fiduciary who best suits the veteran's
needs, and, where feasible, preferences. VA has a set of guidelines to
choose a fiduciary. VA's internal handbook instructs field examiners to
``determine the most effective, practical, and/or economical type of
fiduciary appropriate to the situation.'' As well as ``discuss payee
selection with the beneficiary to the extent possible'' and ``take into
consideration the beneficiary's request where feasible.''
Additionally, field examiners investigate the eligibility of a
potential fiduciary candidate by reviewing:

Identification information, including name, address, date
of birth;

Occupation status;

Relationship to the veteran;

Education level;

Credit report information (this is not necessary if the
proposed fiduciary is a spouse or parent);

Response to criminal background check inquiry; and

Character witness statements

After the field examiner completes the investigation into potential
fiduciary candidates, they will appoint a fiduciary and this requires
the field examiner to notify the veteran through an official
notification, similar to a VBA rating decision.
If the fiduciary is a spouse, the spouse will receive a packet of
paperwork by mail which will need to be filled out. If the fiduciary is
someone other than a spouse, the veteran will be provided with the
fiduciary's identification information and a meeting will be scheduled
for the veteran to meet with the new fiduciary in person. Once this
meeting has occurred, the fiduciary will take over all financial
responsibilities and obtain all the financial information necessary to
do so.
The fiduciary process is designed to protect the veteran and their
assets. Veterans have certain rights to ensure that the system is not
abused and that the fiduciary is best suited for the veteran's needs.
Veterans have the right to:

Be notified when VA appoints a fiduciary;

Appeal the appointment of a fiduciary to the Board;

Request that VA replace a current fiduciary with a new
fiduciary; and

Be assigned a new fiduciary at any time.

According to VBA's Annual Benefits Report for Fiscal Year (FY)
2022, updated in February 2023, the Fiduciary Program is serving more
than 108,000 beneficiaries who receive over $2.6 billion in VA
compensation or pension. Given this large amount of beneficiaries with
third-party individuals who have access to billions of benefits, DAV is
concerned that these veterans and beneficiaries are vulnerable to fraud
and misuse of VA funds. Oversight must be priority one.

FIDUCIARY OVERSIGHT

VBA states the Fiduciary Program closely monitors fiduciaries for
compliance with program responsibilities to ensure that VA benefits are
being used for the sole purpose of meeting the needs, security, and
comfort of beneficiaries and their dependents.
Additionally, two offices within VBA share oversight responsibility
for the Fiduciary Program. The Pension and Fiduciary Service
establishes policy and procedures, provides training, and generally
oversees claims processing accuracy. The Office of Field Operations
sets production goals and manages the employees who process veterans'
claims. Additionally, as noted above, the field examiner is responsible
for compliance as well.
DAV is concerned with the amount and levels of oversight for
incompetent veterans and beneficiaries, as we feel more oversight is
needed to actually protect veterans. There are numerous reports on
fraud and misuse by VA-appointed fiduciaries. For example, the FY 2022
Annual Report noted above, reported fraud and misuse indicating that
fiduciary personnel conducted 2,067 misuse investigations, of which 817
fiduciaries were removed. Of the cases VA referred to the VA OIG, 25
misuse cases were accepted by OIG for further investigation.
The number of OIG prosecutorial outcomes during fiscal year 2022,
so far, resulted in 12 arrests, 16 indictments and 15 convictions. The
total amount of restitution ordered in cases arising from the misuse of
benefits by a fiduciary was $1,773,706. The total amount of money
recovered by the government in misuse cases was $299,865. The total
amount of benefits reissued to beneficiaries was $1,346,660.
Examples of these cases can be found in the VA OIG reports,
specifically, in their March 2023 Highlights report:

The recent VA OIG report of August 17, 2023, found that, ``VBA
Did Not Have Adequate Procedures to Ensure Fiduciaries Promptly
Returned Deceased Beneficiaries' Funds to VA.'' The OIG
substantiated the allegation that as of June 2022, two
fiduciaries under the jurisdiction of the Indianapolis
fiduciary hub had not released the funds of four deceased
beneficiaries who died in 2010, 2013, 2015 and 2020,
respectively. The OIG identified two additional cases in which
the fiduciaries had not released funds promptly. Between August
2022 and November 2022, both fiduciaries returned the funds for
all six cases to either VA or an heir, but the delay ranged
from more than 19 months to 12 years before the funds were
distributed. Probate proceedings could cause a delay in
disbursement; however, the OIG team reviewed VA electronic
records and contacted the fiduciaries involved in these cases
and found no evidence that any of the six cases were involved
in probate. In total, these six cases involved about $810,000
of VA-derived funds.

Additional instances of fiduciary fraud are noted below from the VA
OIG Highlights Report of May 2022:

Former VA-Appointed Fiduciary Pleaded Guilty for Stealing
Benefits from Veterans. VA OIG investigators determined that a
former VA-appointed fiduciary stole over $300,000 that was
intended for use by 10 different veterans that he was appointed
to represent. He pleaded guilty in the District of South
Carolina to theft of government funds.

Another Former VA Fiduciary Indicted for Fraud. In
collaboration with the South Carolina Attorney General's
Office, the VA OIG conducted an investigation that resulted in
charges alleging that a former VA-appointed fiduciary stole
over $65,000 from a veteran she was appointed to represent. The
former fiduciary was indicted in the County of Lexington (South
Carolina) Court of General Sessions on charges of breach of
trust with fraudulent intent and exploitation of a vulnerable
adult.

As a grateful nation honoring service and sacrifice, we provide
compensation to veterans, their families and survivors; however, if we
are failing to protect the most vulnerable of them, we are not truly
honoring them.

DAV RECOMMENDATIONS

Our cumulative experience in providing VA-accredited representation
to veterans and their families, has provided us with insight in
assisting incompetent veterans and dealing with their fiduciaries.
Thus, we make the following recommendations to improve the incompetency
process and the thoroughness of the Fiduciary Program:

Improve the DBQ question about ability to manage
financial affairs. As we noted above, there are no specific questions
asked by the examiner. We recommend the DBQ question be clarified.
Additionally, there is no requirement that a finding of incompetency be
based on a review of the veteran's finances. We recommend that all
determinations of incompetency be based on an actual review of the
veteran's finances coupled with their ability to make decisions
regarding their financial affairs.

Require annual audits with veterans and the VA appointed
fiduciary. VA does require reporting from the fiduciary; however, we
recommend an annual in-person interview with the veteran about the
fiduciary and then a subsequent in-person audit of the fiduciary. This
will assist in identifying potential fraud and misuse. This requirement
would have quickly identified those fiduciaries who were collecting
veterans' benefits 12 years after their death.

All claims of fraud and misuse to be investigated within
72 hours. In our experience, when incompetent veterans make complaints
about their VA-appointed fiduciary, they are not always taken
seriously. In some instances, this has had dire results for veterans.
We recommend that all complaints from incompetent veterans be taken
seriously and investigated within 72 hours.

We acknowledge that most of the VA-appointed fiduciaries provide
protection to veterans and follow all VA-mandated requirements.
However, when there is this much at stake, we must be vigilant and
ensure compliance.
Mr. Chairman, together we must resolve to care for the most
vulnerable veterans and protect them from life's worst hazards,
specifically fiduciary fraud. DAV believes that with changes to the
incompetency process, annual audits with veterans and their
fiduciaries, as well as immediately investigating complaints of
fiduciary fraud, we will protect and honor these men and women who
sacrificed so much for this Nation.
This concludes my testimony and we thank you for the opportunity to
provide our comments, concerns and recommendations.
______

Prepared Statement of Paralyzed Veterans of America

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and members of the
Subcommittee, Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA), would like to thank
you for the opportunity to submit our views on the Department of
Veterans' (VA) Fiduciary Program. Fiduciaries play an important role in
protecting the interests of veterans who because of disability or age
are unable to properly manage their financial affairs. Proper
management of the program is critical, and congressional oversight is
essential in ensuring its mission is successful.

Assignment of a VA Fiduciary

VA fiduciaries help veterans manage their VA benefits when they
lack the mental capacity to do so due to cognitive issues, such as
dementia. A recent VA Office of Inspector General (OIG) report,
however, highlighted some troubling findings in the program.\1\ The OIG
found that two of the four disability benefit questionnaire (DBQ) forms
addressing mental competency are inconsistent and may lead to
inaccurate determinations and the unnecessary assignment of a
fiduciary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ US Department of Veterans Affairs office of Inspector General,
Inconsistent Disability Benefits Questionnaires May Lead to Inaccurate
Mental Competency Determinations, September 13, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
38 C.F.R Sec.  3.353(a) says that ``a mentally incompetent person
is one who, because of injury or disease, lacks the mental capacity to
contract or to manage his or her affairs, including disbursement of
funds without limitation.'' The regulation further states that,
``unless the medical evidence is clear, convincing and leaves no doubt
as to the person's incompetency, the rating agency will make no
determination of incompetency without a definite expression regarding
the question by the responsible medical authorities.'' \2\ The OIG
determined, however, that the ``language discrepancies on the
questionnaires could lead to inaccurate assessments and disparate
outcomes for veterans.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 38 C.F.R Sec.  Annual Benefits Report Archive--Veterans
Benefits Administration Reports (va.gov) 3.353(a)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All DBQs addressing mental competency should use standardized
language to limit the potential for inequitable or inconsistent
decisions. Although not specifically identified by the OIG, a similar
problem exists with the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) DBQ.
Question 12 of the ALS DBQ asks the medical examiner, ``In your
judgment, is the veteran able to manage his or her benefit payments in
his or her own best interest, or able to direct someone else to do
so?'' This is the same language used in the DBQs that the OIG
identified as deficient.
Several years ago, the VA added the caveat to question 12 that a
veteran can ``direct someone else to do so,'' meaning they could
communicate their financial need to their caregiver or spouse. This
clarifying language has reduced the number of improperly assigned
fiduciaries. However, our National Service Officers continue to see
some ALS and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) veterans assigned fiduciaries
despite their being mentally competent to handle their finances.
Veterans with ALS or MS may be physically unable to write a check
or manage their online banking due to weakness, loss of use of
extremities, or other physical limitations; however, a physical barrier
or limitation is not the same as a cognitive impairment. The ambiguity
in the phrasing of question 12 on the ALS DBQ leaves room for errors by
a medical examiner or a rating veterans service representative (RVSR)
processing the claim. The VA must act to ensure that there is no room
for misinterpretation on all DBQs that have the potential to result in
the assignment of a fiduciary.
If a medical examiner answers ``no'' to question 12, the RVSR may
lack sufficient context for the veteran's whole situation, which might
result in the improper assignment of a fiduciary. When the VA proposes
a determination of incompetency, veterans have 60 days to provide
evidence to support their competency. If the VA moves ahead and assigns
the veteran a fiduciary, a higher-level review or supplemental claim
might be necessary, and there is potential for an appeal to address the
issue. However, correcting these mistakes often takes weeks or months
which is time that veterans living with ALS simply do not have.
Recently, VA has placed a tremendous focus on hiring and training
new RVSRs as a result of the hiring and retention tools implemented
with the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to
Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT) Act (P.L. 117-168).
Understanding the complexities of disability benefits is no small
task, and we commend VA on their efforts to ensure a sufficient
workforce. That said, additional training for the Fiduciary Program's
workforce would help RVSRs better understand the nuance of complicated
cases such as those for veterans with complex injuries and illnesses.

Increased Fraud and Misuse Allegations

According to data from the VA's Annual Benefits Report, there has
been an increase in fraud and misuse allegations in recent years.
During fiscal year 2016, there were more than 233,000 fiduciaries
participating in the program with 1,487 misuse investigations. In
fiscal year 2022, there were 2,067 misuse investigations despite there
being 125,000 fewer fiduciaries in the program. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ VBA Annual Benefits Report, FY 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is evident from the data provided by the VA that the number of
misuse cases is increasing, while the number of prosecutions has
remained relatively flat. This raises several questions that must be
addressed. For example, why is the number of misuse allegations
increasing if prosecutions are not? Also, have appropriate resources
been provided to the program to investigate allegations of misuse
properly? In addition, has the VA done its due diligence in ensuring
that fiduciaries have been adequately educated about new guidelines and
expectations?

Caregiver Burden

When an individual is fulfilling dual roles, such as being a
veteran's caregiver and fiduciary, the requirements and expectations of
that individual can be overwhelming. If someone is acting as a
caregiver for a veteran with a spinal cord injury or disorder, they may
be the veteran's family caregiver under the Program of Comprehensive
Assistance for Family Caregivers or they may be the veteran's bowel and
bladder care provider under VA's Bowel and Bladder Program. These and
other similar programs have many requirements that a caregiver must
navigate, which can add to stresses that increase the possibility of
caregiver burnout.
VA must look for ways to reduce the burden on these caregivers.
Unlike the VA's Fiduciary Program, a representative payee for Social
Security benefits who is also the spouse of a beneficiary is exempt
from keeping meticulous records as required by the VA. When acting as
the representative payee, the spouse is expected to use ``good
judgment'' in approving purchases requested by the beneficiary. The VA
should consider implementing this requirement for caregivers who are
also acting as a VA fiduciary for their veteran spouse.
We must recognize the time, effort, administrative duties, and
complexities of caring for another individual. Every effort should be
made to ease the burden caregivers face, and resources must be
available whenever needed to avoid misuse allegations and unintentional
errors.
For example, the VA should consider developing an online portal or
a frequently asked questions (FAQ) page on the main program website.
Within the VA Fiduciary Guide, which is available online, there is a
toll-free number where a fiduciary can connect with one of the hub
locations. However, the line is only available during regular business
hours. In addition to expanding the accessibility of this line, VA
should model its FAQ page after the one on the Social Security website
for representative payees, where the Social Security Administration
lists the helpline in several locations.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Social Security Administration Representative Payee Frequently
Asked Questions
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The VA Fiduciary Program is critical in ensuring our most
vulnerable veterans are safe, healthy, and can recover or heal free
from the burden of managing their VA benefits. A fiduciary is a trusted
and valuable member of the veteran's support system, but with that
trust comes certain expectations of performance and responsibility. It
is incumbent on the VA to provide appropriate resources to ensure
fiduciaries can make sound and proper decisions on behalf of their
beneficiaries to avoid misuse allegations and other mistakes. However,
if a veteran's fiduciary abuses the trust given to them, then they must
be dealt with in a timely and efficient manner to ensure that the
veteran does not suffer further harm.
PVA thanks the Subcommittee for the opportunity to submit our views
on this critical program. We would be happy to answer any questions you
may have.

Information Required by Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives, the
following information is provided regarding federal grants and
contracts.

Fiscal Year 2023

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events----Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$479,000.

Fiscal Year 2022

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events----Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$ 437,745.

Fiscal Year 2021

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events----Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$455,700.

Disclosure of Foreign Payments

Paralyzed Veterans of America is largely supported by donations
from the general public. However, in some very rare cases we receive
direct donations from foreign nationals. In addition, we receive
funding from corporations and foundations which in some cases are U.S.
subsidiaries of non-U.S. companies.

[all]
