- RURAL ACCESS: IS VA MEETING ALL VETERANS WHERE THEY LIVE?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RURAL ACCESS: IS VA MEETING ALL
VETERANS WHERE THEY LIVE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JANUARY 11, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-45

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-756                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, JANUARY 11, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Mike Bost, Chairman................................     1
The Honorable Mark Takano, Ranking Member........................     2

WITNESSES
Panel 1

The Honorable Shereef Elnahal, Under Secretary for Health,
Veterans Health Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     4

The Honorable Joshua Jacobs, Under Secretary for Benefits,
Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Veteran
Affairs........................................................     5

Accompanied by:

Mr. John Boerstler, Chief Veterans Experience Officer,
Veterans Experience Office, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Ms. Alyssa Hundrup, Director, Health Care, U.S. Government
Accountability Office..........................................     7

Panel 2

Ms. Marisa Schultz, Illinois Veteran.............................    38

Dr. Buu Nygren, President, The Navajo Nation.....................    40

Mr. Jon Lovald, Chief Operating Officer, Minnesota Assistance
Council for Veterans...........................................    42

Dr. Mark Holmes, Director, Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health
Services Research and North Carolina Rural Health Research
Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill........    43

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

The Honorable Shereef Elnahal Prepared Statement.................    55
Ms. Alyssa Hundrup Prepared Statement............................    62
Ms. Marisa Schultz Prepared Statement............................    74
Dr. Buu Nygren Prepared Statement................................    77
Mr. Jon Lovald Prepared Statement................................    81
Dr. Mark Holmes Prepared Statement...............................    84

Statements For The Record

American Association of Nurse Anesthesiology.....................    89
American Nurses Association......................................    94
Center for Healthcare Quality and Payment Reform.................    96
NeuroFlow........................................................   100
OTC Health Services, a LEIDOS Company............................   102

APPENDIX--continued

U.S. VETS Prescott...............................................   106
ATA Action.......................................................   108
Western Governors' Association...................................   110
Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Impact Movement..........   115
American Society of Anesthesiologists............................   117
Mr. John Mikelson................................................   121

RURAL ACCESS: IS VA MEETING ALL VETERANS WHERE THEY LIVE?

----------

THURSDAY, JANUARY 11, 2024

Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:05 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mike Bost
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Bost, Radewagen, Bergman,
Rosendale, Miller-Meeks, Murphy, Franklin, Van Orden, Luttrell,
Ciscomani, Crane, Self, Kiggans, Takano, Brownley, Cherfilus-
McCormick, Deluzio, and McGarvey.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE BOST, CHAIRMAN

The Chairman. I appreciate everyone waiting for us to get
through that business meeting but good morning. The committee
will come to order.
I want to welcome the witnesses here today. We are here
today to discuss rural veterans and how VA is ensuring that
they have access to health care and benefits they have earned.
It is easy to forget that many Americans and many veterans
live in flyover country, and that includes me. I am a rural
veteran, as many members on this committee are. We understand
the needs and challenges, and quite frankly, the frustration of
our fellow rural veterans face because they live where they
live.
Now, my home is 30 miles from the nearest VA facility, and
my constituents in the eastern part of Illinois drive some of
them 60 miles or more to get to a VA facility. Veterans in
other parts of the United States travel a whole lot further
than that.
Now, one of the witnesses we will hear from today with the
Navajo Nation spans three states. Now, over 14,000 Native
American veterans live on 27,000 square miles, and the
challenges these men and women in rural America face cannot be
overstated. Which is why others and I have fought so hard in
2018 to get the Mission Act enacted. The Mission Act and the
Community Care Provider Network have transformed VA's delivery
of health care and services, especially in rural and remote
parts of the country.
Now, 5 years after the bill was signed into law by
President Trump, I go home and my veterans are still saying the
same thing. I cannot get health care and I cannot get my
benefits. Whether it is a limited access to high-speed internet
so the veterans cannot make their telehealth appointments, or
driving over an hour for routine physical therapy, or the
inability to find housing near employment opportunities, or
having to travel long distances to attend a disability
compensation and pension examination, rural veterans face
daunting challenges. VA must meet these men and women's needs
where they live.
While VA has an entire office dedicated to serving rural
and remote veterans, I am concerned that this office has not
kept pace with the challenging veteran population. We must
ensure that the 311,000,000 we have spent on this office and
other rural veteran programs are providing real value and not
just lip service.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
how we can pave the way for solutions and bridge the gaps and
ensure the best quality of life for our rural veterans.
I now recognize the ranking member for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairman Bost.
Rural veterans and their families have long had to navigate
the altogether different healthcare experience than their
suburban and urban counterparts. From hours-long drives, to
appointments, to housing shortages, to limited access to
veteran service officers, to file claims, rural veterans
experience a unique series of barriers. These barriers are
likely to harden in the coming years as hospital closures and
healthcare provider shortages in rural areas persist.
When the VA Mission Act was passed in 2018, it sought to
address some of the healthcare challenges facing rural veterans
by creating the Veterans Community Care Program. Now, the goal
was to better enable veterans to access care from community
providers when such care was not readily available from VA.
While necessary, it has not been the bridge to healthcare
access for rural veterans that many had hoped. The healthcare
infrastructure in rural America has proven too compromised, and
in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, too fragile to meet the
needs of civilians and veterans.
The need for a robust VA presence in rural America remains.
Since 2005, more than 100 rural civilian hospitals have closed
according to research conducted by the North Carolina Rural
Health Research Program at University of North Carolina (UNC)
Chapel Hill.
Another 87 rural hospitals have eliminated inpatient
services. According to the Center for Healthcare Quality and
Payment Reform, 600 rural hospitals, or about 30 percent of all
rural hospitals in the country are at risk of closing in the
near future. Over half of those are deemed at immediate risk of
closing. Again, we are referring here to non-VA community
hospitals. One only need look to the newspaper headlines from
across the country to get a sense of how serious the closures
are.
Veterans cannot always rely on the community to be there
but they should be able to rely on VA. We carry out this
country's moral obligation to the men and women who have served
in uniform in part by ensuring they have a healthcare system
able to meet their needs no matter the state or territory they
live in.
There are some things that we simply cannot rely on the
private sector to provide. Our postal service, for example, our
national defense, our police and fire departments, these are
services private industries simply cannot deliver in every
place they are needed, especially as there are no profit
opportunities or low profit opportunities.
This is becoming increasingly true of healthcare. This was
most acutely highlighted during the worst of the pandemic. We
saw hundreds of private healthcare systems effectively buckle
or shrink under the strain of public health emergencies and
natural disasters, workforce shortages, and infrastructure
challenges.
The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) was largely able
to avoid this. They delivered the highest quality care to
veterans, provided world-class infection control, and delivered
humanitarian care to thousands of civilians. They did so with a
majority of elderly and rural patient population, and aged
infrastructure, and an overworked workforce. That in and of
itself was an achievement. They served us further by fulfilling
VA's role as the backstop to the American healthcare system,
aiding nearly every state and territory and dozens of tribal
nations. More than 6,000 VHA employees volunteered to deploy to
assist civilian or tribal health systems from March 2020 to
July 2022.
I am so pleased to have with us here the president of the
Navajo Nation, Dr. Buu Nygren, to share with us the reality
rural Native veterans are facing. Last September I visited
Navajo Nation and discussed with the former president the
myriad of ways VA can partner with tribes and the Indian Health
Service (IHS) to better serve veterans. I am excited to
continue that conversation today.
Navajo Nation had extensive interaction with VHA during the
worst of the pandemic. Dozens of Navajo citizens were
transferred to VA hospitals and dozens of staff, particularly
nurses, were deployed to IHS sites, Indian Health Service sites
throughout Navajo Nation sometimes for months. This
collaboration seems to have largely been successful and has
prompted many of us to wonder how we might continue
collaborations between VA tribes and the Indian Health Service.
As communities continue to lose providers, often VA, tribal
health programs, and the Indian Health Service are the only
providers left. My staff have heard from several tribes over
the years about their eagerness to explore collaboration
between the two Federal health systems and tribes. Ideas such
as dual-use hospitals for VA and IHS where infrastructure and
staff would be shared. In situations where there is a need for
care but a workforce shortage, providing care to both Federal
patient populations could be the solution.
Now, we must continue to provide robust support to VA in
order to ensure that its workforce and infrastructure remain
strong and truly accessible to veterans who need it.
I also urge my colleagues to consider how we could really
pursue creative solutions to rural access gaps. I believe there
are opportunities before us if we are willing to do the hard
work.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the ranking member.
We will now turn to our witnesses' testimony.
Testifying before us today we have The Honorable Shereef
Elnahal, the Under Secretary for Health at the Department of
Veterans Affairs. We also welcome The Honorable Joshua Jacobs,
the Under Secretary for Benefits for Department of Veterans
Affairs, as well as Mr. John Boerstler, Chief Veterans
Experience Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs. From
the U.S. Government Accountability Office, Ms. Alyssa Hundrup,
Director of Health Care.
Dr. Elnahal, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SHEREEF ELNAHAL

Mr. Elnahal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Takano, and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs efforts to provide
health care and benefits to veterans in rural areas.
VA is committed to reaching to reaching veterans where they
are. Lori Karvonen, a proud mother of a Marine corporal, is
helping us do just that through the Veterans Coordination Pilot
Program. Lori is proud to serve in her own way as a nurse in
the Baraga County Memorial Hospital, a critical access hospital
whose patients include many veterans from the local Keweenaw
Bay Tribe.
Through a partnership with VA, her hospital uses a
standardized protocol to screen veterans for medical needs,
including social determinants of health. Lori then helps
eligible veterans enroll in VA care, schedule appointments, and
connect to community services like food assistance, housing,
and vocational training.
Recently, the caregiver of a veteran identified through
screening asked if they could obtain a backup battery for
medical equipment as power outages are common in his rural
community. Lori's team enrolled the veteran in VA care. Then,
through collaboration with the Iron Mountain VA Medical Center
and the local Veterans Service Organization (VSO), they
obtained the medical equipment needed to manage his chronic
lung disease and home blood pressure monitoring for his
hypertension.
When we spoke with this veteran, he was not only thrilled
with his care at VA but asked if we could ``clone Lori'' so
that all veterans may have the same experience.
Almost a quarter of all veterans, or more than 4,400,000,
resident in rural communities like Lori's and face unique
challenges that differ widely from their urban counterparts.
Geographical isolation creates challenges in accessing VA
health care, and through new initiatives in this administration
and a commitment to longstanding efforts, VA continues to
bridge the gap between rural veterans and the world-class care
that they deserve.
Bridging that gap first requires enrolling veterans into VA
care. Since the signing of the The Sergeant First Class Heath
Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics
(PACT) Act, VA has conducted an unprecedented outreach campaign
encompassing direct mail, email, radio advertising, and over
2,000 outreach events, including more than 1,000 in rural
areas.
Through December 2023, VA enrolled more than 500,000 new
veterans, over 100,000 of whom through specific PACT Act
authorities including 25,000 rural veterans, into VA health
care.
As part of implementation, VA also developed the Fiscal
Year 2023 Rural Recruitment and Hiring Plan to ensure VA has
the workforce it needs to meet our obligation. In Fiscal Year
2023, thanks in part to the new authorities in the PACT Act,
our healthcare system saw a 7.7 percent growth rate in the
total employees onboard in rural facilities, which did exceed
our overall growth rate.
In addition to strengthening staffing in rural areas, VA
meets even more needs for rural veterans with telehealth
services, mobile clinics, and transportation services. In
Fiscal Year 2023, VA delivered more telehealth services than in
any previous fiscal year, including 2,900,000 million episodes
of care delivered to more than 770,000 rural veterans.
Further, VA launched 25 new mobile clinics to deliver
medical services to homeless veterans in particular, many of
whom are rural. VA has also made strides specifically in cancer
care. Now, with 75 locations serving across the Nation, VA
National Teleoncology offers state-of-the-art specialized
cancer care across the country. Nearly half of the veterans
seen through National Teleoncology reside in rural areas where
they otherwise may struggle to have access to an oncologist.
VA is also reaching rural veterans through the Close to Me
infusion program which has infusion teams travel to clinics
across rural areas where the live, reducing travel time and
care continuity for veterans in rural areas. Our data has shown
that veterans save 536 minutes of their own time on average due
to this program and getting their cancer care.
Many of the needs of rural veterans also means ensuring
American Indian and Alaska Native veterans who are most likely
to live in rural areas receive the care and benefits they
deserve. In April 2023, VA implemented the Isakson-Rowe
Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act, exempting
eligible Native American veterans from copayments for their VA
health care. That exemption honors our treaties with sovereign
nations and addresses healthcare access and disparities for
American Indian and Alaska Native veterans. As of December 8,
2023, VA has canceled over $2,100,000 in copayments for over
3,400 eligible American Indian and Alaska Native veterans. VA
is also focused in suicide prevention for these veterans with
an emphasis on culturally informed interventions.
Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss our efforts to best serve veterans of
rural communities. We appreciate your continued partnership as
we embrace our collective responsibility to serve those who
have served. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Shereef Elnahal Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Elnahal.
Mr. Jacobs, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA JACOBS

Mr. Jacobs. Thank you, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member
Takano, and members of the committee for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss how VA is working to
increase access and improve outcomes for veterans living in
rural or highly rural areas.
VA believes all veterans deserve timely access to world-
class health care and earned benefits no matter what they look
like, who they love, or where they live. Far too many veterans,
and particularly those in rural areas, are unaware of the
benefits that they have earned or lack trust in VA to deliver
them.
To better meet the needs of rural veterans where they are,
VA has been engaged in the most aggressive, forward-leaning
outreach campaign in the department's history over the past
year. In Fiscal Year 2023, the department held over 13,000
outreach events in communities across the country, relying
heavily on our VSO state, county, and community partners to
encourage every eligible veteran, family member, and survivor
to apply for care and benefits that they earned.
The results of that outreach can be seen in the historic
number of disability claims that were submitted and approved,
and in the individual stories of the veterans who have been
positively impacted by this outreach, veterans like Rene
Kendall, a retired police officer living on a fixed income in
the small town of Otto, North Carolina, which is 3-1/2 hours
away from VA's regional office in Winston-Salem.
In an effort to meet veterans closer to where they live,
the Winston-Salem regional office hosted an event in Franklin,
North Carolina this June which enabled Rene to speak in person
with a VA employee without spending 7 hours in the car. At this
VA hosted event, Rene sat down with Misty Allen, a claims
examiner from the Winston-Salem Regional Office (RO) to talk
about his pending claim. While reviewing his file, Misty
discovered there was an incomplete exam form provided by the
medical examiner for review at the time of Rene's exam and that
he had a recognized presumptive condition related to his
service at Camp LeJeune.
As a result of this rural outreach event and Misty's
attentiveness, VA was able to award Rene retroactive benefits
giving him and his wife a little more financial freedom each
month on their fixed income. In his own words he said, ``Misty
Allen is truly an advocate, and this extra money every month is
a godsend. It has made an impact on our lives and helped us get
by a little easier every month.''
Though rural communities offer veterans like Rene multiple
benefits, the approximately 4,500,000 veterans living in rural
communities face unique challenges, like unreliable internet
access and long travel distances that limit their awareness of
and access to the benefits they have earned through service to
this country.
Addressing these challenges and others requires a
collaborate approach involving Federal, state, and local
government agencies, along with VSOs, nonprofit organizations,
and local community partners to ensure veterans in rural areas
receive the support they need to thrive.
In collaboration with our partners, VA is also taking the
following actions to better meet the needs of our rural
veterans.
First, we are keeping our foot on the gas, continuing our
data driven, proactive outreach campaign.
Second, we have changed the Transition Assistance Program
(TAP) curriculum to add VSOs and State Departments of Veterans
Affairs to brief transitioning service members at the end of
every 1-day VA TAP class, increasing connections to the
benefits and services available to them in the communities in
which they will reside.
Three, we are leveraging technology for more virtual
Compensation and Pension (C&P) examinations, increasing
utilization of mobile medical units to conduct C&P exams closer
to where veterans live, expanding provider networks and the use
of other modalities like the Acceptable Clinical Evidence
Process, and utilizing automated decision support tools to
minimize overdevelopment.
Fourth, we have accredited our first two Native American
VSOs, the Navajo Nation and the Gila River Indian communities
to provide critical outreach and representation to an
underserved population.
VA is committed to addressing the unique challenges faced
by rural veterans but we cannot do it alone. Through a
collaborative approach we are working to bridge the
geographical gaps that hinder access to health care and other
earned benefits for our rural veterans. By utilizing proactive
outreach, leveraging technology, expanding resources, and
fostering partnerships, we are making significant strides in
alleviating burdens faced by rural veterans ensuring every
veteran is included in the VA process with a commitment to do
more.
Thank you for your continued support of veterans, their
families, caregivers, and survivors. I look forward to
answering any questions any members of the committee may have.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Jacobs.
Ms. Hundrup, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALYSSA HUNDRUP

Ms. Hundrup. Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss our work on the Veterans Health Administration's Office
of Rural Health.
My testimony today covers findings and recommendations we
made in our May 2023 report on the Office of Rural Health. Its
mission is to improve the health and well-being of veterans
living in rural areas through research, innovation, and the
dissemination of best practices.
Rural veterans represent a significant portion of our
Nation's veterans with about 2,700,000 veterans enrolled to
receive VA health care.
As has already been noted, rural communities often have
fewer resources compared to their urban counterparts which can
result in rural residents experiencing challenges in accessing
health care. In particular, rural communities often have fewer
hospitals, face healthcare staffing shortages, and have limited
transportation options as well as inadequate broadband access
compared to their urban communities.
VA's Office of Rural Health is one of the main offices
responsible for taking actions to increase rural veterans'
access to care. The office does this by two primary activities.
First, it funds initiatives implemented by VA's various
program offices. Initiatives expand existing services to
medical facilities that serve rural veterans. For example, the
office has provided funding to help provide transportation for
veterans to VA facilities for medical appointments or ambulance
services.
Second, the office funds research projects that develop
interventions to improve access to healthcare services for
rural veterans and then disseminate those interventions more
broadly. Research activities are managed by five resource
centers which are field-based satellite offices that serve as
hubs of rural health research. For example, several projects
are looking into new uses for telehealth, such as programs for
cardiac or knee rehabilitation.
In our May report, we recommended that the resource centers
communicate available research funding opportunities across VA.
We found that each of the centers only communicated funding
informally such as by word of mouth. For example, we heard that
some researchers learn about funding opportunities through
existing relationships with resource center staff. With only
informal communication methods, many researchers may be unaware
of funding resulting in missed opportunities for relevant
research. By communicating more broadly, the office could reach
a larger pool of applicants which in turn would help ensure the
research projects the office funds best align with its mission.
VA agreed with our recommendation and said that by May 2024, it
plans to develop a standard procedure for communicating funding
opportunities to researchers across VA.
Also in our May 2023 report, we found the Office of Rural
Health has taken steps to assess progress in meeting its
mission. In particular, we found the office has identified
broad outcomes it wants to achieve through strategic goals but
it has not defined the specific level of performance that it
aims to achieve to accomplish these goals. We recommended that
the office develop performance goals that reflect leading
practices identified in our prior work such as being objective,
measurable, and quantifiable.
For example, one of its strategic goals is to reduce rural
healthcare workforce disparities. The office collects data on
the number of clinicians trained on rural healthcare issues
through its initiatives and research projects. In Fiscal Year
2021, for example, it reported that 31,000 clinicians received
training through its efforts. However, the office does not have
a performance goal identifying how many clinicians it should
train each year to help achieve its strategic goal of reducing
workforce disparities.
By developing performance goals, the Office of Rural Health
would be better positioned to measure its performance and
ultimately its progress in improving the health and well-being
of rural veterans. Setting performance goals would also help
inform the office's decision-making about funding for
initiatives and research projects and help it determine if
there are areas that may need additional focus.
VA also agreed with this recommendation and stated that the
office is developing a new strategic plan for 2025 through 2029
that will include performance goals with annual growth targets.
The office has estimated that it will finalize its strategic
plan by this June.
In closing, we are encouraged with VA's initial steps to
implement our recommendations and will continue to monitor its
efforts going forward.
This concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you may have. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Alyssa Hundrup Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Hundrup.
We will now turn to questions. I will recognize myself for
5 minutes.
Dr. Elnahal, last year we discovered that about 9,700,000
of PACT Act money for critical skills incentives was paid to VA
senior executives as bonus. Now, that money could make a big
difference in attracting providers to rural areas. Has the
money been fully recouped?
Mr. Elnahal. Mr. Chairman, the money is in the process of
being recouped from the executives who received it.
The Chairman. Are there safeguards in place to make sure we
do not do that again?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, one of the first things the secretary
did was ask the Office of the Inspector General to do a full
lookback on how those decisions were made in error. That is
ongoing and we will work closely with the Inspector General on
that.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Elnahal. That will then, of course, inform our policies
to make sure that all of these things are transparent to senior
leadership and that we make decisions according to policy and
the law.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Also I need to ask, between 2016 and 2022, the budget for
the Office of Rural Health (ORH) grew about 68 percent, and
that is about $311,000,000 today mentioned in the opening
statement. What meaningful impacts have been made with that
$311,000,000 in 2022?
Mr. Elnahal. Mr. Chairman, the Office of Rural Health
really plays an important role in two main ways--making sure
rural veterans benefit from appropriated funds. The first is
actually funding research initiatives but also operational
initiatives that extend our care to veterans across the
country. In multiple ways the Rural Health Office has done
that. For example, they have coordinated with our health
informatics team and our field leaders to distribute almost
200,000 tablets to veterans across the country to be able to
make sure they can have access to telehealth in the convenience
of their own home. That also speaks to a partnership we have in
the interagency with the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC).
We also have commissioned many studies to figure out what
disparities exist as Ms. Hundrup mentioned among rural veterans
so that we can bring more resources and more care available.
The second main function rural health does is coordinate
the actual execution of those funding, of those funds, and make
sure that program is benefiting veterans. Everything between
our minority veteran coordinators who reach out to American
Indian and Alaska Native veterans to our Rural Access Network
Growth Enhancement (RANGE) and Enhanced Rural Access Network
for Growth enhancement (E-RANGE) programs for mental health are
assisted by the Office of Rural Health.
The Chairman. I think you have probably in your statement
there answered this part of my questions as well but maybe you
want to expand on it. What ORH initiatives have the VA adopted
across the enterprise as a program model of care or best
practices?
Mr. Elnahal. Another example, Mr. Chairman, that I have not
mentioned yet is the Women's Health Mini Residency Program
which has done now over 200 events and trained more than 500
providers refreshing the unique aspects of women healthcare
needs and making sure our clinicians are read up on those. In
fact, women's health is an increasingly important focus and
that is a close collaboration between the Office of Women's
Health and the Office of Rural Health. That on top of multiple
initiatives to get care as conveniently close to veterans in
rural areas as possible really underlies their focus.
The Chairman. None of the Offices of Rural Health 35
initiatives placed more providers in the rural areas; is that
right?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, we have enterprise-wide initiatives that
are trying to bring care closer to veterans in rural areas. The
Office of Rural Health assists in multiple ways in extending
access but we have hired a record number in just one year of
providers in rural areas just last year. In fact, the growth
rate of rural health--of rural employees rather within our
healthcare system exceeded our overall growth rate at 7.7
percent.
That is an operational priority that I sent as my first
priority last fiscal year, and thankfully, we have seen better
staffing in rural areas.
The Chairman. I know that a lot of the problems with
telehealth is no connectivity. Okay? Would we be better off
budgeting and be better spent on facilities and providing like
more mobile facilities as well?
Mr. Elnahal. Mobile medical units are a very important part
of what we do as well. In fact, we just announced in August
that we are deploying 25 mobile medical units to assist with
homeless veterans including in rural areas. That is just one of
many examples.
I also mentioned in my opening testimony our Close to Me
infusion service and National Teleoncology where we bring
providers, you know, over a certain period of frequency to
veterans who need chemotherapy in clinics that are closer to
them. Normally, chemotherapy infusion services are offered at
our larger tertiary centers, our larger medical centers. We
know that increasing the convenience and reducing the travel
time is just a more reliable way to deliver care for rural
veterans.
The Chairman. Thank you.
My time is expired. Ranking Member, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Elnahal, can you talk about some concrete efforts at VA
to hire healthcare workers in rural areas, particularly in the
area of mental health? What have you been able to achieve?
Mr. Elnahal. Yes. Mental health is a major focus of our
hiring efforts. We hired thousands of mental health providers
and mental health staff last Fiscal Year alone as part of my
broader priority of hiring faster and more competitively. We
also have programs that are specifically related to veteran
outreach and care delivery in rural areas. One of them is
RANGE. RANGE is a program that allows for more intensive care
coordination for veterans in rural areas who need intensive
outpatient mental health services and helps connect them to
inpatient services like residential rehabilitation treatment
programs when they need it. We recognize that more intensive
care coordination could benefit rural veterans and those two
programs are just a couple of examples.
Mr. Takano. Well, great. Would you agree that Congress has
given the department a range of tools, a lot of tools, a lot of
authorities to be able to recruit and retain employees? I mean,
do we need to give you any more?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, I will tell you, the PACT Act
authorities, Title IX of the PACT Act helped us significantly
in increasing our total employees onboard to the tune of us now
having more employees onboard in the healthcare system than at
any point in history. More than 410,000 employees in the
healthcare system. Everything from recruitment and retention
incentives to better loan repayment, to the ability to pay
retention incentives up front when people come in has made us
that much more competitive.
We do have a legislative proposal called the VA Careers Act
that would help us be much more competitive with physicians. We
were only able to increase physicians onboard by about 2.3
percent last year. That did exceed our previous years because
of these enhanced authorities but relieving us of the $400,000
cap, especially for specialty physicians who far exceed on
average that amount for many specialties would be extremely
helpful.
Mr. Takano. We do have a need to increase the specialty
physicians. We need to really get serious about that. This
hearing is about rural areas. It is especially challenging to
get specialty care into rural areas, is it not?
Mr. Elnahal. It is, Congressman. In fact, the salaries that
folks command in specialty care areas, in rural areas are much,
much higher than often we are able to pay. It is why we have
had this as our first legislative priority proposal coming out
of the administration for veterans for a couple of years now.
We know that this will just better enhance access to care for
veterans, reduce wait times, and make care better.
Mr. Takano. I mentioned in my opening statement, Dr.
Elnahal, that rural hospital closures have been accelerating in
recent years. How is VA factoring the shrinking footprint of
community providers in rural areas into its long-term
infrastructure and workforce planning?
Mr. Elnahal. Mr. Ranking Member, I completely agree that
the degree of closures of critical access hospitals and other
healthcare infrastructure in rural areas is highly concerning,
especially because of the disproportionate number of rural
veterans who need care in our system. In fact, for inpatient
care we often rely on these institutions as it stands to be
able to meet that care. In response, we have to invest in our
direct care system. We are often the only healthcare providers
for particular specialties for veterans in rural communities
and we absolutely have to hire but also create more
infrastructure and be able to get appropriated funds to create
that infrastructure especially with this concerning trend of
closures.
Mr. Takano. Especially with specialty care, being absent
even in the private sector, I mean, it is clear to me that care
in the community, it does not solve the problem of access to
care in these rural communities. I mean, might we have to
consider solutions like somehow getting VA's specialty
physicians into these areas and possibly sharing them with
others in the community that need them? Might we be thinking
the other way around instead of thinking, open it up to
community. Maybe the communities in these rural areas need VA
specialists that can be shared with Medicare and Medicaid and
whoever at the Indian Health Service?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, the first thing I will say is veterans
do disproportionately in rural areas rely on community care, so
I do not want to undercut in any way the importance of our
Community Care program. These are critical partners for us to
deliver timely care for rural veterans. You are right in that
there often are not good options in the community for veterans
to receive the care that they need. Again, doubling down on our
need to build infrastructure.
We have a partnership similar to what you are talking about
here with the Public Health Service Corps, Admiral Levine
recently communicated to us that she intends to have now 200
Public Health Service Corps officers deployed within VA for
their healthcare experiences. We will disproportionately deploy
them to rural areas. Thinking about other Federal healthcare
systems like the Indian Health Service with whom we just
renewed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for reimbursement
for their services for American Indian and Alaska Native
veterans, looking at our partners at Department of Defense
(DOD) for enhanced staffing, all of that is on the table for
consideration.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
I yield back. I am sorry for going over.
The Chairman. Representative Van Orden.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Elnahal, I want to start by thanking you personally. We
spoke quite a while ago and I gave you a copy of a letter
written by one of my constituents about their brother
committing suicide because they could not get an appointment at
the VA. I know you have done personal follow up with that widow
and that is a standup thing to do. That really speaks to your
level of commitment as a public servant. I appreciate that
greatly.
I live in a very rural district. I mean, this committee
hearing is perfect for us. The big complaints that I get from
my constituents and it sounds so simple is the removal of a
kiosk so that folks could get their travel claims. I guess, Mr.
Jacobs, is a travel claim, that payment, is that considered a
benefit?
Mr. Jacobs. We provide travel reimbursements in instances
of C&P exams. If you are talking about reimbursement for
medical care that would be handled in the health system.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Like when I go to the optometrist at
the La Crosse VA which is awesome, you are supposed to be able
to file for reimbursement for travel. Well, here is the
problem. Before you used to be able to just push a couple
buttons and it would be your birthday, your Social Security
number, and your name, and then it would say, here it is. You
would sign it with your finger, direct deposit, done. Now
because these kiosks are gone, and it is my understanding that
someone forgot to renew the contract during COVID, you have got
to do this first. This is a 40-page document about how to do
ID.me. You have got to follow all these steps on a computer in
order to get an ID.me identification number and then when you
are done with that there is this 16-page step-by-step document
for people to fill out a travel claim.
My concern is this. We have Korean War veterans that have a
flip phone that do not understand the technologies involved. We
have folks that it has been addressed already that do not have
broadband internet. Are you guys taking concrete steps to
either get these kiosks back or to radically streamline this
process?
Mr. Elnahal. Yes, Congressman. I will tell you, I will not
mince words on this. We did not do well with this transition
with the beneficiary travel online system. We should have
codesigned that better with veterans and we should have rolled
it out much more carefully. Certainly before decommissioning a
process like the kiosks that veterans were used to. It should
have been deployed better. I take ownership of that. That has
happened over the last several years as you mentioned
throughout the pandemic. We will do better.
One way that I am ensuring that any veteran has the option
if they are not able to use the online system for various
reasons they do have the option to file a paper claim to be
able to get reimbursed.
Mr. Van Orden. I did not bring a copy of that but it is an
extensive thing also. My point being this, sir, is that we had
something that was incredibly efficient for the veteran. It was
perfect. It even could tell you your appointments for the day.
We spent so much time deriding a bureaucracy as we should
because you were here for the business meeting. You saw that we
have an oversight responsibility assigned to us by the
Constitution. We had like one thing that really worked and then
we got rid of it. That is part of our frustration.
Maybe as opposed to redoing this. It is like 70 pages worth
of stuff for people that, I mean, I am old, too. He was right.
Scott was right. I did not appreciate it but, you know, the
truth hurts sometimes. Maybe we could think about
reimplementing the system that we absolutely know works.
Mr. Jacobs. Well, I commit to you, Congressman, that we
will make this better. For the kiosks that do exist, we are not
going to be decommissioning them so that at least the veterans
who are used to using that process will have that. There are a
total of four ways now for veterans to get reimbursed. We just
have to do better in redesigning them to making them easier and
to be able to do a personal touch with veterans, especially
veterans like Korean War vets who are on average less able to
use this type of technology. We have to bring a better process
to them. That is VA's responsibility and you have my
commitment.
Mr. Van Orden. Excellent. I would like to continue to
follow up with your office because, again, that is like the
number one complaint I get from my constituents.
I would like to thank you guys for letting me jump ahead. I
appreciate it greatly.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. It is nice to see you.
It is my understanding that VA estimated that only 8
percent of enrolled rural veterans are women. Why? I mean, that
seemed low to me. I am curious to know if there are rationales
or reasons for why that is.
Mr. Elnahal. I will always start, Congresswoman, by saying
that it is VA's responsibility to increase enrollment and
increase access to care for veterans no matter where they live
or what their gender is. I think the first and most important
reason is that we need to do more outreach and we need to reach
more veterans in rural communities who are women. We take that
very seriously. We have a collaboration between the Office of
Rural Health and our Office of Women's Health to be able to do
much more outreach. I will pass the baton quickly to Mr.
Boerstler to help talk about ways that we are going to reach
more rural women veterans.
Mr. Boerstler. Thank you, Dr. Elnahal, and thank you,
Congresswoman.
I absolutely agree. We do have a lot of really great
programs to reach more women veterans. As you know, as this
committee knows, women veterans are our fastest growing
customer population at VA, and we are, especially in the last
year and a half, since we have implemented the PACT Act, we
have been able to reach more women veterans and increasing
their access to benefits and care.
In particular, reaching women veterans, and all veterans in
rural areas, has become a big focus for us especially as we
roll out our VA radio outreach program which has been able to
record 60 different public service announcements for different
personas like women veterans and Native American veterans and
other minority veterans that are in rural areas to be able to
reach them if they do not have access to broadband internet or
they are not able to go to their nearest facility. We have been
able to partner with 150 different syndicates in these rural
areas. There is a lot of work being done.
We are also proactively text messaging lots of veterans
including more women veterans in these areas so that they can
have better access to care and benefits.
Ms. Brownley. Very good.
Mr. Jacobs, you talked about historic outreach. I am just
curious to know of the outreach that you did was historic. How
many more veterans who are now qualified to receive benefits?
Did you capture that number?
Mr. Jacobs. In Fiscal Year 2023, we had a 40 percent
increase in the total number of claims we received relative to
last year which was an all-time high. We also delivered more
benefits to more veterans than we ever had in our history.
Ms. Brownley. How many more veterans just, you know, who
are new to the VA who qualified to receive benefits?
Mr. Jacobs. I do not have that number but I will get back
to you for the record.
Ms. Brownley. Did you have a breakdown at all in terms of
men versus women?
Mr. Jacobs. I would have to get back to you on that. We do
proactively try to conduct outreach targeted to encourage more
women veterans to file claims. I do not have those numbers in
front of me.
Ms. Brownley. If you would provide them I would appreciate
it.
Mr. Jacobs. Absolutely. Yep.
Ms. Brownley. That would be great.
Mr. Secretary, you mentioned IHS and the MOU. When was that
finalized?
Mr. Elnahal. Congresswoman, we announced it at the White
House Tribal Nation Summit just last month.
Ms. Brownley. Just last month. I am curious because as
chair of the Health Committee, a couple years ago we had a
couple of hearings on this and I am curious to know, because I
know one of the issues was that veterans would use IHS for
general health care and then they would use the VA for
specialty health care. Then when they went to the VA for
specialty health care, the VA repeated a lot of the different
tests and assessments that were done with IHS. I am just
wondering if the MOU addressed that so that the VA is not doing
more tests than they need to do in order to prescribe what a
veteran may need in terms of their health care.
Mr. Elnahal. Yes. You are describing a frustrating
experience, Congresswoman, that I hear all the time for
veterans who have to often repeat their histories and where
clinicians do not have the information available to them. The
MOU was mostly focused on how we will reimburse the Indian
Health Service and better coordinate with them to be able to
deliver a comprehensive care plan for American Indian and
Alaska Native veterans. We have a lot of collaborative work
going on to make that process as seamless as possible.
Especially in rural areas and for tribal veterans in
particular, they often have to go to different systems because
of the general lack of healthcare infrastructure. That is why
the relationship with IHS is so important. It is why, for
example, we opened a couple of more contract-based clinics in
the Navajo Nation alone to be able to bring, you know, care
closer to the veterans. All of that happened just over the last
several months but us working better and more seamlessly with
IHS on the ground is extremely important to prevent what you
are talking about.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, sir.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Radewagen.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Chairman Bost, and Ranking Member
Takano, for holding this hearing. Talofa lava. Thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony.
This issue is very important to my home district as our
veterans must fly thousands of miles to receive anything more
than the most basic care. Our veterans in the rural and remote
areas deserve the same level of treatment as the rest of the
country. Telehealth and other initiatives have come a long way
in improving access but there are still gaps to be filled.
Dr. Elnahal, Government Accountability Office (GAO)
recommended that VHA update its guidelines for establishing
outpatient intensive mental health care programs. How is VHA
planning to revise these guidelines to improve access to mental
health services for our rural veterans, particularly those with
serious mental illness?
Mr. Elnahal. One of the main ways we do that,
Congresswoman, is through our RANGE program, which is
essentially an intensive case management program that makes
sure that rural veterans in particular, including veterans in
our territories, are getting the care that they need. You know,
an extra hand to be able to coordinate that care, canvass all
options including not only VA care but also community care, and
making sure the dots are connected for veterans so that the
care is both timely and effective is the focus of that program.
It is, in fact, focused exactly on what you mentioned, the
veterans who need intensive outpatient and in some cases
inpatient services for mental health and we are very focused on
it.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
You know, a GAO report from last year indicated that VHA
does not analyze mental healthcare data by virality. How does
VHA plan to incorporate virality in its data analysis to better
understand and address the disparities in mental healthcare
utilization between rural and urban veterans?
Mr. Elnahal. That effort is more than possible,
Congresswoman. The way that we are approaching that is
essentially by using this very specific geolocation information
for both veterans and our infrastructure to better understand
who needs what no matter where they live, including, of course,
rural veterans. That report was very helpful to us. It helps us
really be able to try to slice the data in the way that is
helpful. By the way, helpful not just to folks at headquarters
but more importantly, folks who are at the clinics and in the
infrastructure in rural areas to better target the veterans
they can serve.
Ms. Radewagen. Dr. Elnahal, we noticed many of the
initiative's Office of Rural Health funds are related to
telehealth. How is ORH coordinating with relevant VA offices,
such as the Offices of Connected Care, Primary Care, and
Specialty Care?
Mr. Elnahal. One of the main ways that you see that
collaboration is through our clinical resource hubs. Every
network in the system, including Veterans Intergrated Service
Network (VISN) 21, which serves the Pacific, has a clinical
resource hub. Across our system we have about 800 tele-mental
health providers in particular that are able to--and in fact,
spend all of their time coordinating and providing care to
rural veterans via telehealth. That is a collaborative effort
between rural health, Connected Care, and the Integrated
Veteran Care program. Of course, our operators in the field who
execute on that.
Ms. Radewagen. What are you doing for veterans that lack
broadband internet access or prefer to see providers in person?
Mr. Elnahal. We have a collaboration with the Federal
Communications Commission that helps us essentially cover the
costs vis-a-vis FCC's authority. For much of the broadband and
wi-fi services, you know, total bill that veterans need. That
number continues to grow for veterans served. Of course,
veterans also have to have the devices to be able to use
broadband. That really underlies our effort to hand tablets to
a vast majority of them are rural veterans, almost 200,000 we
have distributed.
We calculate that almost 100 percent. About 97 percent of
the encounters that we are seeing with telehealth for rural
communities is delivered in the convenience of the veteran's
home. We will keep trying to expand those programs. We know
that rural veterans will continue to meet them.
Ms. Radewagen. VA talks about expanding access through
telehealth, but 27 percent of veterans do not access the
internet at home as you have mentioned and lack of broadband
connectivity is still a major issue in much of rural America.
Yet, one-third of Office of Rural Health's initiatives are
focused on telehealth. What is VA doing to address
infrastructure issues?
Mr. Elnahal. We have that program with the Federal
Communications Commission, Congresswoman, that helps us offer,
you know, the ability for veterans to cover the costs of
broadband and wi-fi services. Our task is to just make sure
every veteran who needs this and who qualifies for it knows
about it and that our local teams are letting veterans know
about it. We will not know unless we ask the question to
veterans when they come in for care, and we just have to do
that with every opportunity we have, especially for our
facilities in rural areas.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Cherfilus-McCormick.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say thank you to Dr. Elnahal for visiting my
office, Under Secretary. Visiting our district, actually, and
speaking to the mental health services that are available to
our veterans.
I wanted to pick up on the question of the tablets that you
handed out. One of my first community projects was to actually
hand out tablets to connected people to telehealth. One of the
things we got back was some people did not know how to use the
tablets because they were not digitally savvy. Have you come
across that with our veterans who are receiving them?
Mr. Elnahal. Yes. I have heard that personally, and we have
also had oversight reports, including from the Office of the
Inspector General that talked about that and a number of other
issues. We are working to change that. We really need to be
helping veterans not only, you know, get these tablets but know
how to use them and know how to use our applications, like My
Healthy Vet and the VA.gov global application. That really
needs to be a close, you know, veteran centered education that
happens.
We are working on that. We are trying to improve the way
that we educate veterans on this and provide a helping hand. I
view that as VA's responsibility.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. How big of a problem is it? Is it
a huge problem or a very small problem that you are running
into?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, the problem varies depending, of course,
on the service area and the age of the veteran. We know that
rural veterans on average are older. Again, it is really the
responsibility of VA in my view to take a full comprehensive
approach in helping veterans through that process to learn how
to do it.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Now, I have a question about best
practices as was mentioned by Ms. Hendrup. What steps are you
taking to make sure that best practices are being established
especially for our rural veterans. When I go throughout my
district I see there is a huge difference with the VA in West
Palm Beach, in Miami, and even outside my district. What steps
are you guys taking to ensure that they are getting the best
services available to them?
Mr. Elnahal. Yes. We are addressing the issue of best
practices through our Office of Rural Health Promising Practice
program.
I will just give you one example that was unique to rural
veterans. I served in VA. This is my second time serving in VA.
My first time I focused on the very topic of spreading best
practices. Collaborated with the Office of Rural Health
extensively. One of the best practices to get more advanced
care directives for rural veterans filed, better to be able to
define what they would like to receive in terms of end-of-life
care. That should be the veteran's decision and should be a
plan well in advance of them needing end-of-life care. They
were a really innovative practice where it was essentially
group classes and group visits. Rural veterans obviously have
more difficulty getting to our brick and mortal infrastructure
and so to hold classes like this when we know rural veterans
are coming in for care, to educate about advanced directives
and on the spot offer the opportunity for rural veterans when
they are ready to file their advanced directive. It is one of
many best practices that just gets a very needed piece of their
care delivered.
The Office of Rural Health works with our Innovation team
and other members of our team at headquarters to make every
corner of our system know what is working for veterans.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Rosendale.
Oh, I am sorry.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
It has been great to hear about some of the improvements
for expanding access to rural health care since I think that is
what we are here to discuss. Rural access and VA. Are we
meeting veterans where they live? I think there is some room
for improvement. We have done good things that you all have
mentioned--telehealth, mobile clinics, improving transportation
service. That is great but I, as a nurse practitioner, I want
to talk about an issue near and dear to my heart, and that is
expanding the scope of practice for advanced practice
Registered Nurses (APRNs), nurse practitioners, nurse
anesthetists. A lot of midwives. There are so many of us that
feel such a void for health care, especially for rural health.
I know that the VA provided guidance for APRNs in 2016 and you
published that report. Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist
(CRNAs), specifically, were left out of that. Nurse
anesthetists were not allowed to practice to the full scope of
their potential. I wanted to just note some things from the
guidance talked about expanding full practice authority for
CRNAs would not harm Team Base Care. That anesthesia care
provided by CRNA would not harm team-based care and the
anesthesia care provided by CRNAs is equally safe with other
physician supervision.
This was from that 2016 report. Also in that report the VA
believes that a significant shortage of anesthesiologists exist
and that this leads to cancellation, delays of surgery in rural
settings. I know that after that time the VA partnered with
Temple University Beasley School of Law in 2022 for a VA
commission duty which concluded, the policy, about the CRNA's,
decisions on their standards should be guided by current
available data. The data provided in the study shows that
removing restrictions on CRNA's had no negative impact on
patients. Maybe a cost effective solution to physician
shortages and may increase access to care. In the wake of
reports on canceled surgeries and acknowledgement that 25
percent of VA facility chiefs of staff reported problems
recruiting or hiring anesthesiologists, it is of the utmost
importance that the VA reconsider their exclusion of CRNA's
from their 2016 rule on the APRNs. Additionally, APRNs,
including CRNAs, are typically more accessible to historically
underserved populations in geographic areas. For instance,
rural facilities which are more heavily reliant on CRNAs for
anesthesiology and surgical practices.
I guess my question is to Mr. Elnahal. Can you just tell me
why? Why are we leaving CRNAs out of the picture? This is a
time when we need advanced practice nurses more than ever to
fill those voids. They are capable. All of this data, I know I
could go on and on about providing that their outcomes are just
as good, if sometimes not better than some of the physicians we
employ. Why are they left out of the equation?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, the first thing I will do,
Congresswoman, is identify yourself with your support for
advanced practice nurses. More generally, they have been some
of my best colleagues in healthcare delivery personally as a
physician.
I also want to clarify that our current policy is one where
advanced practice nurses, and CRNAs in particular, where our
medical centers are in states that allow full practice
authority for CRNAs. Medical centers do have the authority to
extend privileges for full practice authorities in those
states. We have many medical centers already doing this
consistent with that policy and consistent with state licensing
guidelines.
The question at hand with the National Standards of
Practice is whether or not through our Federal supremacy
authority potentially override state licensing restrictions on
those professions. That is the question at hand as we look at
the national standard for CRNAs.
My team tells me that just over the next year or two we are
going to see more data that would help in our final decision-
making on what that national standard should look like. We want
to make sure we have the most up-to-date and important
information for us to be able to take that extra step and say
VA through its Federal supremacy will grant that authority
regardless of what its state licensing regime says. That right
now is still deliberative. I have not made a decision on that.
My team has not recommended a decision on that yet.
Ms. Kiggans. Yes. I do not know how much more information
you need to have the outcomes be very obvious that we need
these guys. We need them now because we are not providing the
care to our veterans especially in those rural health settings
again.
You know, I come from Virginia, and we recently, only in
the past few years allowed for nurse practitioners statewide to
have full practice authority. VA led the way. You guys did it
first. You were brave. You went out there. You filled that
void. I think you can do it in this instance, too.
I will be watching as a member of this committee, as a
nurse practitioner, and watching and waiting for you all to
approve full practice authority for our CRNAs.
I know I am running out of time. Actually, I only have 5
seconds. I will yield. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Representative McGarvey.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for being here today. I appreciate you all's testimony.
Dr. Elnahal, thank you for your testimony and for sharing
the great work the VA is doing to address the needs of rural
veterans and their families. I am thinking particularly of
Appalachia and Eastern Kentucky, the state where I am from,
where my grandfather is from in that area, and all of the other
rural areas that really struggle with access to care and how we
better reach them.
I am excited to see the telehealth visits are expanding.
Two point four veterans have made 11,600,000 million telehealth
visits but only 770,000 of the 2,700,000 enrolled, rural
veterans, or 29 percent are using telehealth.
My colleague, Ms. Radewagen asked a little bit about this,
and obviously, we have got to see some more access to
broadband, what we can be doing now. Appreciative of the
American Rescue Plan and the infrastructure laws that are going
into place. I know you guys addressed that a little bit.
I am going to talk a little bit about the programs
themselves because obviously, we all share the commitment and
passion to get health care to our veterans because they have
earned it. They have earned it and they deserve it.
You have got the at-home screening for colorectal cancer.
You have got the remote monitoring for prevention of diabetic
amputation. These types of programs.
Dr. Elnahal, how does the VA determine how to design these
programs, whether a program is working, and how to quickly
scale it up?
Mr. Elnahal. The best programs, Congressman, in this area
have really come organically from our field leaders and field
clinicians who understand what veterans need close to the
ground as they serve them. You know, a lot of our home
monitoring programs for things like congestive heart failure,
the diabetes amputation program that you mentioned, started in
one or two or more of our medical centers. We are discovering
it and lift it up as a best practice and then it becomes
supported better and better through our infrastructure. I think
that is the best way that we service these really effective
programs.
Mr. McGarvey. I know you are setting up a new Office of
Digital Health as well. Can you tell me about how the VA plans
to untether veterans, especially our rural veterans, from just
solely relying on the brick and mortar model of care?
Mr. Elnahal. The impetus for this office, Congressman, I am
glad you mentioned it, is a recognition that digital health
will just become more and more of a part of the expectation of
patients, not just veterans, but across the country. We have to
be leading on this as we have historically with telehealth. The
best way to do it in my view is through human center design.
That is an office that will have the infrastructure in
collaboration with the Veterans Experience Office to be able to
work with veterans to understand how technologies can be
accessible, how much education are we offering, but how are we
designing the programs up front to be able to make it as easy
and effective as possible to receive that care. I am happy to
pass to Mr. Boerstler for more insights on that.
Mr. Boerstler. Well, thank you, Dr. Elnahal. As he pointed
out, the human center design or veteran center design in this
case is really understanding the pain points, the bright spots,
the moments that matter along each customer journey, whether it
is a specialty care journey or an outpatient care journey for
rural veterans and non-rural veterans alike. We continue to do
that in almost every business line.
We also consistently monitor on the quantitative side.
Through our Veteran Signal or V Signal survey platform we are
able to see and monitor the increase in trust in ease,
effectiveness, and emotion. I am happy to report there are
great scores for veteran access to care for outpatient services
in particular which are higher among rural veterans. More rural
veterans trust VHA outpatient services than non-rural veterans,
as well as emergency medicine, vet centers, and community care.
There is a lot of great quantitative data there as well.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you. Just in closing in the time we
have left, in you all's opinion, what is the best action we
could take now to help veterans get this type of care?
Mr. Elnahal. I think, Congressman, ensuring that we have
the resources to be able to not only extend the best and most
modern technology but also that we have the right workforce in
place to be able to lead what is really the digital revolution,
especially with the advent of generative Artificial
Intelligence (AI) would be extremely helpful. We are going to
out of our Digital Health Office lift up our AI program to make
sure that we are following the trustworthy AI principles that
the president outlined in a recent executive order but then put
as much potential forward in a safe and secure way to be able
to meet veteran needs. Of course that means telehealth. It
means as much home monitoring as possible to make things more
convenient for rural veterans. Really, everything that we can
do to make the daily job, the daily work easier for our
clinicians to be able to deliver that care.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Representative Rosendale.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for holding this hearing.
I want to start off this afternoon by thanking publicly Dr.
Elnahal. I am known to hold people accountable and raise hell
on occasion when things are not being done the way that I would
like to see, and I do that publicly. I want to make sure that
everyone is aware of the great job that we are seeing right
now.
Before too long, ineffective leadership oversaw poor hiring
procedures and tolerated serious medical malpractice. Veterans
suffered as a result, and while there is still work to be done,
I am very encouraged with the new leadership at the Montana VA
at Fort Harrison. It started to implement changes leading to
improve care for our Nation's heroes. I appreciate you and
Secretary McDonough for being responsive to my initial letter
conducting the preliminary investigation, requiring a
comprehensive review, and keeping my office thoroughly
informed. Hiring an interim executive director and bringing in
the outside help. I made it my mission to fix the Montana VA to
ensure veterans receive the best health care possible. I am
thankful for your role in this department and these efforts.
Again, I want to say that publicly because we have had many
conversations over the last several months and the work is
bearing fruit. It has really been turning out good.
Mr. Elnahal. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Rosendale. I am passionate about ensuring veterans have
easy access to effective healthcare services and believe
telehealth is an essential component. In Montana specifically,
patients who otherwise would have to spend hours driving to an
appointment often having to take time off of work have come to
rely on these telehealth services. We saw them expand it
dramatically during COVID, obviously, but in Montana it is just
a way of life without COVID.
Dr. Elnahal, in your testimony you mentioned that for the
Fiscal Year 2023, the VA delivered 11,600,000 telehealth
episodes to over 2,400,000 veterans. This number was the
highest for the VA in any fiscal year. What do you anticipate
the demand for telehealth to be for the Fiscal Year 2024? What
steps is the VA taking to meet that demand?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, Congressman, I appreciate your
recognition that we are providing more telehealth than we ever
have in history. I can tell you we plan on offering more and
more of it because the expectations of veterans in all
generations frankly are to receive more and more convenient
care. Not only are post-911, Iraq, Afghanistan veterans who are
pursuing modern and convenient care, but we have data that also
shows that more than 50 percent of rural veterans prefer
telehealth as the primary modality. I am going to see if we
have modeled what the expected volume should be this fiscal
year. I do not have that in front of me right now but we will
be sure to get that back to you. I can almost guarantee it will
be more telehealth than we have ever done before.
Mr. Rosendale. Great. If you could get those numbers to me
and then just some kind of summary of how you plan to address
that increase, that would be greatly appreciated.
As you can imagine, we are challenged with both the
broadband and technology issues. In Montana because the state
is so rural, some of these areas just are not able to get it,
with the travel.
That being said, I want to dive into the travel issues.
Veterans across Montana have told me about the difficulties
with the Beneficiary Travel Self-Service System, especially for
some veterans who are not as proficient in technology. This has
led some veterans to give up in frustration and not to obtain
the reimbursement they have earned. When you are traveling
literally hundreds of miles that is a large financial impact.
The veterans liked the old kiosk system. I know that you
spoke to that a little bit earlier but I was not here. Why is
it that we cannot bring back the kiosk system that worked
better for veterans? I know that there was fraud and waste
involved in it. With the investments that we could make there,
we could make improvements for the security of that if that is
the problem, and make sure that we still eliminate the waste
and fraud while keeping those consumers and veterans happy.
Mr. Elnahal. I will just say, Congressman, we have to do a
lot better with that system. I will say that up front and admit
it to you as I have admitted it to my team. I will tell you
that our process for instituting this new system was not done
correctly. We did not design it with veterans. That is why we
are collaborating more than ever with Mr. Boerstler and his
team with the Veterans Experience Office. We are going to keep
the kiosks we have but we have to maximize and make the options
easier to use for veterans.
There are four options now. The VA.gov patient check-in is
a new one that we just introduced. We are going to try to
educate veterans on that and see if they respond well to it.
Similar to my comments before about the Office of Digital
Health, we will make sure that we focus on this and make the
design much easier to use and better. It is a major focus of
ours.
Mr. Rosendale. Very good. Thank you so much.
I see my time has expired. I would yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Representative Deluzio.
Mr. Deluzio. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
everyone. Thanks for being here.
I want to pick back up on some of the telehealth discussion
Mr. Rosendale and you were having, Dr. Elnahal. I recently was
at the Beaver County Clinic in my district and saw some
technology there for veterans who come in who may not be able,
because of internet access or technology, do it from home or do
it from where else. I encourage more of that so that veterans
can do those appointments perhaps with a specialist. In my case
it might be University Drive or Heinz in Pittsburgh, PA.
My question though, if VA is unable to offer an appointment
that makes someone eligible for fee-for-service care out in the
community, they might receive virtual care out in the
community. Why should we not consider virtual care as an access
standard if VA can provide a virtual appointment?
Mr. Elnahal. That is exactly our intention, Congressman.
The secretary announced that last year that if we are able to
deliver an appointment via telehealth and the veteran agrees
and our clinicians think that that is an acceptable modality of
care for what they need that that should count toward our
ability to fulfill an appointment according to our wait time
standards.
We are working on that through rulemaking. There will be a
number of other elements that help us factor in the importance
of telehealth. We strongly believe that again, if the veteran
agrees and our clinicians think it is acceptable, we can offer
that as satisfactory in meeting the standards.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you. Please proceed as best you can
there. I mean, one of my overarching concerns, I mentioned this
to Secretary McDonough when he was here last year. It was the
ballooning cost for fee for service care side of the ledger
relative to what we are seeing at VHA. I am not going to cite
you every study but, of course, VA's own systemic review study
which I think now is looked at 57 studies itself continually
shows the bulk of the findings of the VA is doing as well, if
not better than care, a free for service. They are out in the
community. I mean, even on wait times in particular that was
stark to me how much better VA is doing, what that stark to me
how much better VA is doing, what that trend looks like
relative to providers out in the community. My great fear is we
are not investing in VA's ability to give and relying on a
community care fee-for-service network that there are provider
shortages that many of us see in our district and communities
that we should be strengthening VA. Would love to hear your
perspective of, you know, can VA scale up? Should we be? What
are your thoughts here?
Mr. Elnahal. I agree with your perspective, Congressman.
You mentioned the studies. We also participated in Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid's (CMS's) overall hospital quality start
rating system for the first time just this past fall. When we
released our results, 67 percent of our medical centers score
either four or five stars on that rating compared to fewer than
50 percent of hospitals in the private sector. Overall, our
direct care system provides exception care. These are people
who focus squarely and only on veteran care by definition. We
have some of the best researchers expanding the pie of
knowledge and the services that we can offer, new treatments,
effective treatment. We do rely on the community though when we
cannot offer timely care to veterans. That is a backstop. That
is still important specially for rural veterans. Investing in a
direct care system has been among my top priorities to include
more than 61,000 people we hired just in Fiscal Year 2023 alone
to make sure we have the team in as many areas of the country
as possible and growing our healthcare workforce in rural areas
by 7.7 percent in just one year.
Mr. Deluzio. Well, and I will point to a couple of these
findings. I know I do not have a ton of time but one about a
study of veterans who live within 20 miles of VHA facility and
comparing those sent to private hospitals for emergency
treatment. The mortality rate was much worse than the private
hospitals. That gives me cause for alarm. I think we should get
veterans we should be investing in VA so the veterans are
getting that better care.
I also point to the Office of Inspector General (OIG)
report last year on prescription of opioids.
Then the lack of oversight we were seeing in the feel for
service community care providers. The ranking member and some
of my colleagues and I sent a letter to VA, which we await a
response. One, any update on when we will hear that response,
and two, I will urge that we have at least scrutiny you are
seeing in VA on those prescriptions when it is happening out in
the community as well.
Mr. Elnahal. It is an extremely important issue,
Congressman, and I regret that we have not gotten that response
back to you yet. I will ensure that is our top priority and
correspondence to get that back to you. What I will say is, you
know, we have an oversight responsibility over this. We know
that there are some levels of redundancy on this. You know,
there are a lot of states and there are to some extent Federal
oversight requirements on opioid prescribing. We require folks
to look at essentially what is a public data base, patient by
patient, on what opioids they have been prescribed
historically. The prescription drug monitoring programs that we
engage in. Our responsibility is to veterans no matter where
they get their care. If they are being too many opioids, VA has
to be on first in identifying that and holding our community
provider partners accountable.
Mr. Deluzio. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Miller-Meeks.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you very much, Chair Bost, and
thank you for holding this hearing.
Quite honestly, it has been apparent to me so I am both a
physician and a veteran, married to a veteran who is also a
nurse, and I was a nurse prior to becoming a physician. It is
very apparent to me when I talk to veterans in my community and
as a physician providing care that the Mission Act is not being
fully implemented by the VA. That became readily apparent when
we had our Health Statement of Benefits (SOB) on residential
mental health and substance use disorder where the VA did not
even think that residential mental health and substance use
disorder fell into the parameters of the Mission Act.
Therefore, getting a patient in within 30 days was not part of
that type of care.
I am just going to be blunt here. Color me unimpressed. You
can take accountability for the fact that you got rid of a
kiosk system to me is bureaucrats deciding this would be a
great idea. We are going to do this. Guess what? Just like
Electronic Health Records (EHRs), we are not going to talk to
the people that use these systems. We are not going to talk to
veterans to find out what they want, what makes it easier. You
have had multiple complaints. You know about the complaints.
Veterans complain about it but we have not done anything.
Whatever money we thought we were going to save by getting rid
of the kiosk, that money is now invested into increasing VA
employees to train people how to do stuff instead of, and this
is the same for the Office of Rural Health Care, and believe
me, I have done this as a physician, we need people who deliver
care. Not people who study care. It is great that you are
talking about advanced directives. All patients should have
advanced directives. Do we have to set up a training program,
go out into rural areas to make sure veterans have access to
knowledge about advanced directives rather than when they are
at the facility it is done?
I do not care to increase the bureaucracy of the VA with
people who are not delivering care. What I want is for people
to receive care. We should not have to do a bill that says if
you need residential mental health care and you need substance
use disorder treatment that that has to be within 10 days
because the VA does not see it within their parameters to
deliver that care. Or that you go to another VISN that is 200
to 300 miles away from your home. Or that we are going to call
you the day before your appointment to make an appointment
which we get under the 30-day timeline because we do not want
people going out to the community. Absolutely there should be
oversight of care wherever that care is delivered. Fully
supportive of that. I am not supportive of people who know what
their problems are, know that there are access of care issues
because people can get into the VA, but yet do not want them to
receive community care in a timely fashion.
I think this is both for Dr. Elnahal and for Mr. Jacobs.
Has there been a decrease in veterans filing for travel claims?
Mr. Elnahal. To my knowledge, Congresswoman, that is not
the case. I think we are seeing more travel claims but I have
to get that back to you for the record.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Yes. I know veterans who are not filing
for travel claims because of the difficulty of doing that.
Dr. Elnahal, how is the VA ensuring optimal diabetes
management for rural at-risk veterans to prevent foot ulcers
and amputations?
Mr. Elnahal. Yes. It is a really important program that we
have, not only care that we provide in-person for wound care
and ultimately diabetes management to prevent the need for
amputations. We also have a remote monitoring program and a
telehealth program specific to that, again, supported by the
Office of Rural Health. We have seen some really promising
results that I am happy to send to you and your team,
Congresswoman. We want to expand that offering as much as we
can.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. I certainly think technology can truly
help to get access, especially with cameras, our digital
ability to do things that we have not had in medicine. I am
just going to say, it is one thing to take ownership of
problems that you know about but one of the things that very
frustrates our veterans and our constituents is that there is
never accountability. You still have your job despite
developing a program, rolling out a program that has been
extraordinarily cumbersome for veterans. Our Rural Health Care
Office, it is great to study whether or not veterans can have
access to studies, especially if their study is cutting edge on
medications to treat disease. What I want to know is are
outcomes improved? Do we have less veterans committing suicide?
How are we treating Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)? What
is our cancer cure rate? What is our amputation rate for our
diabetes?
I have volunteer organizations in my district, volunteer,
receive no money from the VA, are not VA employees, who
actually do a job, a better job of reaching out to veterans and
taking them down from a suicide risk and treating their PTSD
only because they are just there to serve veterans. That should
be our goal and our mission.
Thank you very much. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Representative Budzinski, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Budzinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member, for this opportunity. Good morning everyone. Thank you
to all my colleagues and the witnesses for your time today to
discuss the urgent issues around rural healthcare access in
particular.
I represent a very rural district in central and southern
Illinois, and I have heard concerns from veterans back home
about the need to expand health care. I have especially heard
this concern from our women veterans.
In September, I hosted my first Women Veterans Roundtable
in the district, and among the issues mentioned was a lack of
awareness of women specific services provided by the VA in
rural areas. I would like to use my time to focus on our women
veterans in particular which leads me to my first question for
Dr. Elnahal.
What are some examples of initiatives and research projects
funded by the Office of Rural Health that focus on women
veterans living in rural areas and their access to health care?
How is that office helping to disseminate information about
services and resources to our women veterans in rural areas?
Thank you.
Mr. Elnahal. Yes. It is a mandate that we take very
seriously, Congresswoman, to make sure that we are the ones
getting women veterans connected to care, enrolling more women
veterans. The fastest growing demographic by far is women
veterans. Of course, for women veterans in rural areas to make
sure they get the care they need.
The first program is the Women's Health Rural Mini-
Residency program which really primes our providers in rural
areas to understand the unique needs of women veterans. Our
Office of Women's Health leads that. We have already trained
more than 500 providers using this over 200 events. We continue
to grow that offering.
We also have the Women's Health Care Rural Coordination
Program for essential screening that is gender specific, so
breast cancer and cervical cancer screening. We have seen an
uptick in screening as a result of that program thankfully and
we continue to want to expand that.
We also have specific offerings for women veterans in
tribal areas. American Indian and Alaska Native veterans
through just offering better cultural care. I will ask Mr.
Boerstler to help supplement the outreach we are doing for
women veterans as well.
Mr. Boerstler. Thank you, Dr. Elnahal. Thank you,
Congresswoman. I actually wanted to mention this earlier but we
did not have enough time. We hosted our first Women Veterans
Experience Action Center last fall. It was a national program
really focused on increasing access to VA Benefits Care,
Appeals, Cemetery Memorial Affairs services is really
successful in partnership with all the offices and many of the
women veteran service organizations in the country.
Another great example is in South Dakota, which is a highly
rural state, we have about eight Community Veteran Engagement
Boards. It is all run by a one woman veteran, an Army veteran
named Jill Baker. She has been hosting listening sessions
throughout the state focused on women veterans and outreach and
access to VA care and benefits in partnership with
representatives from our VA facilities in the state and
surrounding areas.
There are a lot of best practices out there that we are
really anxious to share and continue to increase access for
benefits and care for women veterans across the country.
Ms. Budzinski. That is really great. I would love to find
an opportunity to build something out like that within my own
district to help specifically women veterans and maybe we could
lean on you and follow up with your office specifically about
how we can get tapped into kind of those best practices that
you mentioned. I would really appreciate that.
My next question is for Ms. Hundrup. I know the GAO has
looked into VA health care for rural vets. Do you have any
input based on what you have found on how health care for women
veterans in rural areas can be improved as well?
Ms. Hundrup. I would just underscore what has already been
stated. I mean, I think just the first is the recognition and
the acknowledgement and having the awareness and really looking
at the data first and foremost. We have got to understand and
analyze it by rurality, by gender to know, and then recognize
the unique needs.
For instance, we have talked a lot about hospital closures.
I think the VA pays for maternity care. It does not offer those
services and we are seeing obstetric units closing as with
other hospital closures around the country. Just having that
awareness and then being proactive and taking action in terms
of outreach and getting those services.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay. That is great.
Can I just go back to Mr. Elnahal, maybe just giving an
opportunity to further elaborate on some of this work? If at
all, are women veterans represented as an area of focus within
the Office of Rural Health Strategic Plan or its research
agenda in particular? I have heard from women veterans and
their organizations specifically the research side is sometimes
kind of lacking as it relates to specific outcomes related to
women veterans. I am just curious if you could speak to that,
too.
Mr. Elnahal. I would say, Congresswoman, that our Office of
Women's Health, which by the way reports directly to the Under
Secretary for Health, is taking the lead on research for
women's health services. In fact, we have an incredible leader
over that area. She has done incredible work over the last many
years, Dr. Becky Yano, who really commissions health service
researchers across the country, helps fund those studies, and
supports them.
I had a chance to address our women's health researchers
just a few months ago and they continue to develop insights on
where we are seeing inequity, where we need to place more
services. What I am trying to do is make sure that our
operation responds to those findings swiftly and that informs
our infrastructure planning, our hiring planning. Women
veterans, especially in rural areas deserve that.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay. Yes, I would love to follow up with
your office and those offices and folks just to hear more about
how I can integrate some of those ideas into the work we are
doing.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all
our witnesses also for coming before the committee to lend
their perspective on the issues facing rural veterans.
With over 70,000 veterans in my district, in District 6 of
Arizona which encompasses large sections of rural areas, I am
constantly looking for ways to identify gaps of discrepancies
in access to housing, medical examinations, and care. I have
worked hard to address barriers to access to care for our
veterans, specifically disability exams for our rural veterans.
Through two different pieces of legislation I have aimed to
increase the number of exams conducted and ease in which our
veterans can access exam providers. My bills tackle these
challenges by not only expanding the pool of providers who can
conduct exams but also expanding the ability for providers who
provide care across state lines.
Further, I worked with Chairman Tom Cole to introduce H.R.
4155, the Tribal Department of Housing and Urban Development-
Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) Act of 2023,
which would make permanent the HUD-VASH program, a critical
effort that ensures our tribal veterans have access to quality
housing as well. Veterans of all walks of life deserve a safe
place to call home.
Now, ensuring those who sacrifice have the opportunity to
receive the care and respect they were promised is one of my
top priorities here in Congress. The Federal Government has a
solemn duty to ensure our duties have the care and respect they
were promised. This is a responsibility I do not take lightly.
Now, as my first question here to Dr. Elnahal, to your
knowledge are there any steps being taken to specifically reach
and inform female veterans in rural communities about relevant
VA healthcare services, especially in regard to maternal
health?
Mr. Elnahal. Yes, Congressman. We take very seriously the
need to focus very closely on the care coordination for women
veterans. Every medical center in the country to include our
rural facilities has a women's health coordinator to be able to
guide the care and make sure that we are not seeing lapses in
care or unanswered phone calls or missed appointments. These
coordinators have a very busy plate. They are some of the best
professionals we have. That is just part of our standard work
every day.
For example, if a woman needs maternity care if she becomes
pregnant we have a very intensive care coordination program
that helps guide that care in the community because we do not
provide direct obstetrical services in our direct care system.
Those are just a couple of examples. Mr. Boerstler also
mentioned our Community Veteran Engagement Boards. I am not
sure if you have further comments on outreach.
Mr. Boerstler. Especially in the Veteran Experience Action
Centers we have hosted successful engagement in American Samoa,
other Pacific Islands, Michigan, Indiana, Montana, other highly
rural states, and we would love to do the same in Arizona in
the coming months and years, Congressman. These Veteran
Experience Action Centers are essentially 3-day enrollment
sprints where veterans will have access to the Veterans
Benefits Administration, Health Administration, Cemetery
Administration, and the Board of Veterans Appeals to solve
their issues. In many cases they are talking to multiple
administrations about multiple issues they have. The experience
scores that we are seeing from these events are in the 90th
percentile. We do a specific outreach to women veterans and
minority veterans and Native American veterans so that we can
increase the enrollment in those events from those populations.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I definitely want to know more about
that. That actually leads into my next question. That is
directed to you, Doctor, but either one of you could answer.
How does the office of Rural Health measure, you guys
measure the impact and the effectiveness of the mobile medical
units, as well as mobile vet centers in improving healthcare
access and outcomes for rural veterans? Also, if you could
mention what steps are taken to adapt these services based on
the feedback and needs of our rural veteran communities?
Mr. Elnahal. Our mobile medical units, Congressman, just
have an incredible infrastructure that can travel around very
flexibly. They have areas for being able to draw labs within
the vehicle. They often have the ability to beam in, to have
any provider through telehealth who might be a specialist to
come in and serve veterans, and so just really important
assets.
We have seen from the GAO, but also other oversight bodies
the need for us to better track where these mobile medical
units are going, how they are being used, and what the outcomes
are. Candidly, that is something we need to work on and better
develop in order to meet those recommendations. We have
concurred with all of them. We just want to make sure that we
are making maximum use of these assets to reach as many,
especially rural veterans as possible who could most benefit.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, it is definitely the goal. Also back
to your point also, Mr. Boerstler, regarding expanding this to
Arizona and those services, I think that is critical. I look
forward to working with you on all this.
Thank you so much. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
coming. I appreciate what you all are doing on the work on
behalf of veterans.
I am very blessed to be in a district in eastern North
Carolina where about 10 percent of my constituents are
veterans. Camp LeJeune is there, Cherry Point, New River Air
Station. Multiple other military communities that are there. It
is a huge, huge aspect for us.
On the other hand, we are also an extremely rural area.
When practicing full time, I still practice some, we had a 29
catchment rural area, one major hospital. It is a huge burden,
difficult.
One of my colleagues mentioned earlier that he thought, he
read one study where veterans got worse care at a private
institution. I want to read that study and pick it apart
because as you guys well know, most of our literature is
nonsense. I would love to see what that means because that is
just the opposite of the experience I have had.
One thing before I want to get into some of my questions.
Dr. Elnahal, can you tell me what these executive bonus things
we started out the committee meeting was about? I am going to
just preface it by saying I am appalled by the hospital
administrator bonuses that go on across this Nation when the
people who are actually taking care of the patients, doctors
and nurses do not get them and all these other things. The
administrators getting the money frankly pisses me off. If you
will go ahead with that.
Mr. Elnahal. Well in short, Congressman, we discovered that
bonuses occurred that were outside what we thought was
legislative intent and outside of our policy. Upon discovery of
that we made the decision to retract those bonuses for
headquarters executives.
Mr. Murphy. I get the whole thing about competition in this
country but it is also, it is something that is played
explicitly, well, we are going to lose somebody who is
competitive. That is nonsense. Anyway, let me get back to
actually the meat of what I would like to ask.
I think it is becoming more and more and more apparent to
the country that we are experiencing an overall shortage of
physicians and it is going to be apocalyptical in the next 3 to
5 years with a shortage of surgeons, especially those who, we
are getting Medicare cuts day in and day out.
I know that the VA has sometimes a hard job in competing
with hospitals who get extra money now because of some of the
subsidies they get and everything. I understand the pressures
that you guys have in recruiting. I really do, because it is a
real world situation and some of the previous administrations,
some of the laws put into place make it so much more difficult.
If you look at tertiary consequences down the road and what has
happened to our physician community, it has turned into, and I
will just say it this way, just with so much employment of
physicians it has turned into so much of a transitory physician
market rather than ones who come down and put their roots in
communities. That is even worse I think affected with the VA.
I would really love to know, you know, the VA cannot do it
all. As you and I talked on the phone the other night, the fact
that you thought that the VA efficiency was 60 percent compared
to medical centers which compare to private practice is
normally about 60 percent. We are really looking at a depletion
in efficiency how you are, one, going to fix that, and two, how
are you going to use the private community and the private
world to assist our veterans? I do not believe that nonsense
about getting worse care at a private institution than at the
VA. I really want to know your strategy for fixing it.
Mr. Elnahal. Well, Congressman, I appreciate you asking
that because we are here to provide the best quality but also
the most timely access possible to veterans. Access really just
means how many veterans we are able to bring through the door
in a timely way through our clinics across the country. That is
why the first thing I announced as a major priority was to hire
enough clinicians to be able to do the job. The more clinicians
we have on board, the more timely we will be able to see
veterans.
The second thing we did was double down on a strategy that
we call bookability, which is to really make sure that every
provider uses the time that they are booked as clinical, to
fill that time by at least 80 percent with veterans scheduled
into their clinic. The rest of the time should be for walk-ins,
for same day care when needed on an urgent basis, and to take
care of some of the important documentation work and other
tasks that physicians have to do. That 80 percent standard now
we are enforcing across the country. We did see an improvement
in clinician productivity overall in Fiscal Year 2023. We are
going to continue to double down on that and make sure that we
make most use of the direct care system as possible.
Your second question on community care, when we are not
able to meet timeliness standards or when we have
infrastructure that is too far for veterans, we do offer
community care as required by us under the Mission Act. That
will continue to be a critical piece of what we do. In fact, we
are now as of last Fiscal Year nearly a $30,000,000,000 payer
for care. Especially in rural communities we will need to be
relying on community care for at least a portion of a lot of
veterans' care.
Mr. Murphy. I appreciate that. I would ask that you look at
actually Community Care actually paying people because I took
care of veterans for so long and we never got paid in Community
Care. It is a difficult job with turnover and I am not asking
you guys to be slave drivers because there is competition that
goes out there. Asking somebody to do 80 percent of 100 percent
of a job with allowing for work-ins is not asking too much.
One quick question and I will just maybe follow up with
somebody else because I know my time is overdone, is the VA
part of the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) system, the
drug reporting system?
Mr. Elnahal. I am not aware of that, Congressman.
Mr. Murphy. The reason why I ask this is because different
states, North Carolina, we have a system which some idiot in
the State House wrote, that was me, that just looking at drug
usage and everything before you prescribe an opioid or
anxiolytic you have to query. The thing is it has to be
nationwide because some people can jump right across borders.
If you are not interfacing with the private community system
also there are people that are going to be gaming that system.
Mr. Elnahal. Now I am tracking, Congressman. We do have
what we call the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program and we
participate, the last I checked with at least 49 states'
programs to be able to query that.
Mr. Murphy. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Crane, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jacobs, your testimony stated that VA held 436 claims
clinics across the country. What is VA's plan for ensuring that
rural veterans, rural community, and Native American tribes are
aware of the options to request a claims clinic?
Mr. Jacobs. Yes, Congressman, thanks very much for that
question.
What we have identified at a national level is that we are
serving rural veterans at a slightly higher percentage than
urban veterans in terms of benefits utilization but that highly
rural veterans are being served at a slightly lower percentage.
Now, that varies in community by community. As an example, I
was talking with our regional office director in Oakland
earlier this week, and he shared with me that the rural
communities that he serves are having a lower benefits
utilization rate--or actually, they have a higher benefits
utilization rate than their urban counterparts. If you go to
other parts of the country the inverse is true. The way that we
are getting at that is we are utilizing a population mapping
tool so we can look state by state and county by county to
determine where we have penetrated the communities where we are
appropriately serving veterans and we can target those areas
that are underserved. We are using that tool to drive the
decisions about where we go to conduct claims clinics and we
are doing that in partnership with the State Department of
Veterans Affairs, with county veteran service organizations and
officers, with our VSO partners, and increasingly with the
tribes.
Mr. Crane. On that, Mr. Jacobs, why do you think that is?
Why do you think in rural communities our veterans are
accessing these facilities more?
Mr. Jacobs. I think they are accessing benefits in some
cases because they have got incredible local resources. We have
incredible partners in the county VSOs who do wonderful work in
educating veterans about their earned benefits and helping
connect them to those earned benefits through the filing of
their disability claims. I think in some cases it is network
and word of mouth, and so understanding where there are
opportunities and community members and friends helping one
another. I also realize that is not true in every part of this
country.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. I have got to follow up on that real
quick, sir. Which program office should Native American tribes
contact or request a claims clinic? Can you assure me that
their request will be fully considered?
Mr. Jacobs. They can contact my office and certainly I
would be happy to work with you.
One of the things that we have done is we are now for the
first time ever accrediting tribal veteran representatives.
Mr. Crane. How do they contact your office, Mr. Jacobs?
Mr. Jacobs. My email is
[emailprotected]
. Send me an
email. We also have a veteran service organization liaison that
will help, and every single regional office director would be
happy to help as well. Through partnership with the local
regional offices, through the contact at the national level,
through our VSO liaison, we can help identify where there are
opportunities to pursue in collaboration with local tribes
additional claims clinics.
Mr. Crane. How does the VA prioritize these claims clinics
from rural and some of the tribal nations?
Mr. Jacobs. We are looking at the more broadly. As an
example, the three of us were in Nashville late last week for
the Student Veterans of America conference. While we were there
we had staff who were there to help veterans file and process
claims. We had folks from our Medical Disability Examination
Office, from our Education Service Office, and we had mobile
medical units from our four vendors who conduct the C&P exams
on the ground to help with veterans. We were able to help
hundreds of veterans on the ground. We identify events like
that, large VSO conferences, but we are also identifying using
that tool that I mentioned where there is great unmet need. We
do it both from a data driven perspective, but also based on
the input that we are getting from our partners where they are
hearing anecdotally where there may be unmet need.
Mr. Crane. Is it geographical distance to a facility? Is
that how you guys prioritize? Let us say you have got 10
requests but you only have five resources, who gets priority?
That is what I am asking.
Mr. Jacobs. It really is case by case. I cannot provide a
uniform answer but what we are doing is looking where can we
get the most bang for the buck. In some cases we have very low
percentage utilization in a small population. We are still
going to have to make that decision. I think there is value in
going there even if we are not able to serve as many veterans
because we have identified an area where there is not enough
benefits being utilized. In other cases, we are going to make a
different decision and it really just depends on the
circumstances.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Jacobs.
Mr. Jacobs. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Self.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is for pretty much the entire panel. I continue to be
frustrated with the VA solution to everything is more inputs.
We never see health outcomes. You all believe that you solve a
problem by throwing more money at it, a new organization, a new
position. I never hear that we have had a decrease in diabetes.
We have had a decrease in heart conditions. We have had
certainly suicides. I just ask you, Ms. Hundrup, I would ask
you to start measuring that because in your testimony the
300,000,000 that was totally uncontrolled or accounted for
formally, I would ask you to start measuring health outcomes
because all of this process, all of this infrastructure that we
are discussing today, what is the benefit? Not that they use a
benefit the way you term it but what is the health outcome
benefit to our veterans? I do not see it in any of these
testimonies written. I continue to be frustrated with how much
better off are our veterans because of VA, as opposed to just
throwing another process, another organization and some more
money at it.
While I am on money, I have already told the VSOs that we
need to get a better handle on offsets. The only offset that
this committee has is charging veterans additional home
financing fees for a new program. We are charging veterans for
every new program that we put into the VA. That is not an
offset to me. An offset to me is when we say this is a very
noble program. We must have this program. It is vital that we
have this program. What less noble program are we going to find
an offset in? Every program is noble but a less noble program,
what are we going to find an offset in? That is the rules of
the road here. We find an offset. I do not think the housing
finance fee that we charge veterans is an offset because it
adds to it. I have got the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is
a problem. I understand the scoring issue. Those are two issues
that I wanted to highlight.
I am not sure which of you is going to answer this but what
percentage of claims is actually filed by an outside
organization? My rural VSOs tell me that they believe that it
is like 90 percent of all claims are not started within VA.
They are started by some VSO. Is that true or not?
Mr. Jacobs. Yes. I do not have the exact numbers. I will
follow up and get them so I am not misstating. We rely very
heavily on accredited representatives like VSOs and county VSOs
to help veterans. They do that for free. We are increasingly
concerned about other actors coming in and trying to charge
veterans for something that they have earned through their
military service, but we do rely on outside entities to help
veterans pull together, explain information. We are available
at all of our 56 regional offices. We have got a national
contact center. We have got a website, other public outreach
events where we go and try to explain it but we rely on and we
value very much----
Mr. Self. Okay. I would like that figure if you can get it
to me.
My rural VSOs also say that when they go onto your
website--this may have been covered by one of my colleagues in
a different format--they bring up their current claim. One of
them showed me his current claim that shows the documents that
supposedly have been put in to justify that claim. They are not
live linked anymore. They are dead documents. When you copy the
PDF and you put it in it goes nowhere. That is concerning to my
rural veterans because they cannot get a true picture of the
status of their claim. I would just ask you to look at that and
I would like a response on that as well.
Mr. Jacobs. Yes, Congressman, I would ask if they are rural
VSOs that you have been talking to, I would like to meet with
them to talk about the issue and I will bring in my team and we
will make sure we go through that directly.
Mr. Self. Absolutely. We will set it up. Hunt County,
Texas. Hunt County, Texas is where you are going.
Mr. Jacobs. Love it.
Mr. Self. I want to just ask you a general question. I have
got 30 seconds so my question is, how do our rural veterans'
health care compare to the rural citizens who are not veterans?
Do we have a feeling for how they compare?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, Congressman, you know, we could do
analyses on healthcare outcomes per your previous comment. I
can tell you that our medical centers do score very highly
whether rural or not on CMS's overall hospital quality star
rating. That is actually a pound for pound comparison between
VA Medical Centers and private sector medical centers. More
than two-thirds of our medical centers score at the top two
ratings compared to only about 42 percent of the private
sector. Many of our four and five star medical centers are in
rural areas.
Mr. Self. Okay. Very good.
Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. General Bergman, you are recognized.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Elnahal, I saw that you called a few days ago. I am
sorry I was not able to take your call. I was driving so I was
not doing anything illegal or would get me a ticket.
Mr. Elnahal. No problem, Congressman.
Mr. Bergman. The point is I understand you were talking
about one of my constituents when Secretary McDonough and I
were up in Baraga.
Mr. Elnahal. Thank you for correcting me.
Mr. Bergman. Just think of, we have a lot of black bear in
the area. It is a wonderful part of our environment. Just think
of coming into that little town and seeing a bear looking you
in the eye. It is Baraga.
Mr. Elnahal. I will not get that wrong again.
Mr. Bergman. I had the same conversation with Secretary
McDonough when he had the same challenge and we laughed about
it. They are good folks up there.
Let me ask you a quick question here. You know, in your
testimony you describe how it is consistently more difficult to
recruit physicians in rural areas, probably other healthcare
providers as well. It is my understanding that the VA allows
for independent certified registered nurse anesthetists--that
is a tough one for me. Maybe Baraga for you but anesthetist for
me--practice in about 40 VA facilities typically in more rural
areas. Does the VA see a difference in either outcomes or
patient satisfaction at those facilities compared to others
where you are, you know, not so rural or not so remote?
Mr. Elnahal. That is exactly the question, General Bergman,
that our team is deeply analyzing now with our own data, to
understand whether there are differences in outcomes. I have
not seen data that has shown worse outcomes, whether it is
rural or urban areas. The question we are trying to answer with
the National Standards of Practice is whether we override state
licensing restrictions on CRNAs. As you mentioned, we do
authorize CRNAs independent practice in states that allow that
under their licensing system.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. To discuss one specific program, last
month GAO found that VA was not reliably collecting or
reporting performance data on its MMUs, Mobile Medical Units,
which provide a wide variety of care to veterans that literally
cannot--they do not have internet. They cannot get out of their
house to get to a provider. How does the Office of Rural Health
measure the impact and effectiveness of mobile medical units
for rural veterans? What steps are being taken to adapt these
services based on the feedback, so the loop? Service provided,
feedback loop, modifications. Any comments on that?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, the first thing I will say, General, is
that we concurred strongly I would say with GAO's insights on
our need to better track what mobile medical units are doing.
The outcome that we track should be quite simple. It should be
access to care. It should be wait times for care. If we are not
making access more convenient for veterans with mobile medical
units, then we are not sending them to the right places.
We have what we call our North Star metrics for access,
which is simply the wait time for direct care, the time it
takes to schedule community care, and what veterans are telling
us through surveys on access. Mobile medical units have to be
improving all three of those for us to know that it is working.
Mr. Bergman. The reason I ask is not necessarily to be
answered now but again, in our neck of the woods, literally,
not all of our folks who live there are going to be veterans
and be eligible for the mobile units. If there is something
going on outside of veterans health care with other entities, I
would very much like to hear where there is a sharing of
information because care is care in the rural and remote areas.
I have 45 seconds left. Ms. Hundrup, you have been sitting
there very quiet for a very, very, very long time. Any thoughts
that you would like to share with the committee here on GAO's
perspective?
Ms. Hundrup. Thank you.
I will try to make this quick. I could say a lot but let me
be brief with regard to mobile medical units. I think we found
in our work that they absolutely do have the potential to fill
a lot of gaps but the information that is out there now, it
suggests they are underperforming. I think just to underscore
Dr. Elnahal, we really need better information so that we have
a complete picture which will give us a better sense of where
they can be more strategically used and fill a critical gap in
care. I think just to very briefly say, I think really focusing
on the information by rurality to understand what is happening
and then take action to develop guidance to really just look
at, we have talked a lot about women-specific issues, the needs
of rural areas, tailoring that to the guidance to get that out
to the field so that they can then take action.
I could go on but I am going to stop there. Thank you.
Mr. Bergman. No, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me an extra 30 seconds.
The Chairman. All right. Before I dismiss the panel I have
two really quick questions for Dr. Elnahal.
Doctor, it is the committee's priority to ensure that VA
provides the care our veterans deserve. Do you think the work
environment at Loma Linda Veterans Affairs Medical Center
(VAMC) is conducive to our veterans receiving the care that
they deserve?
Mr. Elnahal. Well, I heard concerns, Chairman, about the
work environment at Loma Linda, which is why I visited myself.
It was eye opening to hear directly from employees, labor
leaders and, you know, the difficult experience that many of
the employees had there and the behavior that we have seen from
certain leaders in the past was not excusable. I will say that
I think things, the culture there is beginning to improve. I
intend to get an update soon from the director at Loma Linda
but what I want to make sure that the whistleblowers know at
Loma Linda and at every corner of our system is that we are
here to listen to you and we take those concerns very
seriously. I going to be personally tracking progress at Loma
Linda. I was there with Representative Takano as well.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Also, in November 2023, the Secretary committed to
providing the committee with a list of possible health
conditions that could quality for VA's health exceptions for
abortions. It has been 69 days since this commitment was given
to me to get this communication. Will you give me the
commitment? Will you provide that information as promised by
January 19?
Mr. Elnahal. Mr. Chairman, my commitment is to make sure
you get that as soon as we possibly can. We took the questions
very seriously in your latest letter and we want to make sure
we provide the most precise and accurate response as possible
for the record.
The Chairman. All right. Well, thank you for being here,
Doctor, and also Mr. Jacobs, Mr. Boerstler, and Ms. Handrup for
testifying today. You are now excused. Thank you for being
here.
We want to try to get the second panel up and seated as
quickly as possible. The second panel is seated. Welcome.
I would like to welcome Ms. Marisa Schultz and Dr. Buu
Nygren and Mr. John Lovald. Finally, Mark Holmes. Thank you for
being here. We had another witnessed scheduled, Mr. Mikelson,
John Mikelson, but in a vivid reminder of the challenges rural
veterans face, his appearance here was stopped by a snowstorm.
I would like to recognize myself if I may to introduce our
first witness who I am proud to say is from my home district,
Illinois 12. Ms. Marisa Schultz is a veteran who understands
the issues on how to navigate the VA and is a tireless advocate
for veterans. Marisa served in the Illinois National Guard and
deployed to Iraq in 2005. When she got home she enrolled in
classes at Eastern Illinois University and eventually took a
job with the Salvation Army Supportive Services Veterans
Families program where she is a healthcare navigator. It is my
pleasure to have Marisa here today to bring her vitally
important perspective to the table.
Ms. Schultz, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARISA SCHULTZ

Ms. Schultz. Thank you, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member
Takano, and members of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs
for this opportunity.
My name is Marisa Schultz. I am a disabled combat veteran
and a healthcare advocate. I commend your dedication to our
veterans and I am honored to represent the rural veteran
community.
I served in the Illinois National Guard, being deployed in
2004 through 2005. I have personal and professional experience
utilizing health care in rural areas through the VA.
Professionally, I serve veterans in rural communities
identifying their needs and helping them access healthcare
systems, community care, and other outside providers.
As we convene today, I implore you to consider a group of
heroes who often face an unnoticed battle, the veterans
residing in rural America. As stewards of their well-being, it
is imperative that we acknowledge the stark disparities between
urban and rural healthcare access for our veterans. We owe it
to them to level the playing field.
Imagine being a veteran eagerly awaiting a VA arranged ride
to a medical appointment, excited to get help dealing with
chronic pain from a helicopter crash during employment. For one
such veteran I served, lengthy wait times and repeated failures
in VA transportation options led to desperation ending in a
call to 988. This veteran suffered from emotional and physical
distress and feeling like the system had failed him.
This is not an isolated scenario. It is the reality for
many of our rural veterans. Transportation, or rather lack
thereof, emerges as a top barrier for our healthcare access.
Financial constraints and employment vulnerabilities further
compound this dilemma, forcing veterans to make agonizing
choices between their health and their livelihoods.
Moving on, to provide model health care to our veterans, we
must acknowledge and address another critical issue, a need for
gender-specific health care within the VA. Rural female
veterans who served our country with equal valor encounter
unique challenges in accessing specialized health care tailored
to their needs. In my case, securing a female provider for a
compensation and benefits examination necessitated a 2-hour
commute. This challenge of meeting this basic, yet serious
request reflects limited availability of practitioners in rural
locations.
A third critical issue is the advancement of telehealth
which has a potential to break geographical barriers and
provide unparalleled health care for our veterans. Telehealth
offers a lifeline to veterans residing in remote areas often
struggling with limited access to traditional healthcare
facilities. It presents the opportunity to help ensure timely
care reaches these underserved communities.
While the flexibility of telehealth has significantly
expanded accessibility, it has also brought some notable
challenges. Elderly and aging populations encounter challenges
with digital literacy hindering the seamless use of telehealth
system. Limited phone minutes and need for internet access also
present hurdles. Overall, significant progress has occurred in
the past few years and we hope to see further improvements to
telehealth options.
We have explored some challenges our rural veterans face in
accessing health care such as transportation options, access to
gender-specific providers, and digital literacy for telehealth.
One way to help rural veterans access care and meet them where
they are can be done through the strategic deployment of mobile
medical units which can be designed to provide primary care and
other essential services. These could be deployed to areas
lacking traditional healthcare access, effectively addressing
the insufficient healthcare access for rural veterans.
Additionally, emphasizing the pivotal role of technology,
specifically telehealth, by expanding or creating digital
education can help bridge this gap.
To conclude, I urge this committee to consider critical
issues faced by rural veterans, specifically transportation
options, access to gender-specific providers, and digital
literacy for telehealth. Let us work together to ensure that
health care for our veterans it not determined by their
geographical location.
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to
positive outcomes that benefit our rural veterans.

[The Prepared Statement Of Marisa Schultz Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony.
For our next witness I yield to Mr. Crane to introduce the
witness.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
hearing on an important topic and for your concern for rural
and tribal veterans. I am glad your staff was able to
experience firsthand the incredible Navajo veteran community in
Tuba City this past August.
I want to take a minute to welcome President Buu Nygren to
the committee today. I visited President Nygren in Window Rock
following his inauguration last year shortly after I kicked off
my time here in Congress and appreciated learning more from him
about the unique challenges Navajo veterans face in obtaining
health care and other critical services.
We met with former Navajo Nation chairman and code talker
Peter MacDonald and I was grateful to hear his experience. I
also joined President Nygren in welcoming VA Secretary
McDonough to Tuba City last July. We appreciate the Secretary
coming out to my district and meeting with our veterans.
For those of you who do not know, I am proud to represent
over half the tribes in Arizona including the Navajo Nation. My
district spans 20,200 square miles of Arizona land. That is
larger than nine U.S. states, and the rural and tribal areas I
represent do not have reliable access to VA services.
Native Americans historically have the highest record of
military service per capital and Navajo veterans specifically
have a rich history of service to our Nation. Navajo patriots
serving as code talkers during World War II used traditional
tribal languages to send secret messages in battle, a
contribution that along with their warrior mentality was
essential to our victory.
Unfortunately, despite their remarkable impact on our
military history and culture, Navajo veterans face many
barriers to VA service and care. The VA hospitals in Phoenix
and Albuquerque are the only full-service medical centers
within driving distance to the Navajo Nation and veterans still
face a 3-to 5-hour drive to get to those locations.
I, myself, have made the drive from Tuba City to Phoenix,
almost 4 hours of driving and that is just not feasible for a
veteran needing frequent and reliable access to medical care.
While several VA outpatient clinics have been established
within Navajo Nation lands, these clinics often focus on
primary care or less severe mental health issues. This means
that many do not have the resources to address severe PTSD and
they may also lack the ability to provide specialty care for
chronic pain or diabetes. Two of the most common diagnoses
among Navajo veterans. If they cannot reach a VA facility that
is capable of providing the type of care they need, Navajo
veterans suffer. This is unacceptable, and I hope that in this
hearing today we can discuss ways to address this to ensure our
tribal veterans can receive the care they need and deserve.
I am looking forward to hearing President Nygren's
perspective as he represents the voice of our Navajo veterans
who have played an integral role in our military victories and
continue to serve honorably today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Crane.
Dr. Nygren, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BUU NYGREN

Mr. Nygren. Yaateeh, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano,
and members of the committee, and our representative Eli Crane,
thank you so much.
My name is Dr. Buu Nygren. I serve as the president of the
Navajo Nation. I come before you today to discuss critical and
ongoing issues of access to care and benefits for our veterans
all across the Navajo Nation, who have a proud history of
military service. As many of you know, Native Americans have a
profound and honored legacy with the United States military.
Our warriors have served with distinction in every major
conflict since World War I. During World War II, the Navajo
Code Talkers created an unbreakable code from our Dine language
that was instrumental in securing the victory for the Allies in
the Pacific theater. Their valor and courage exemplify a
patriotism and sacrifices that is a hallmark of our Navajo
people.
Despite this rich history, Navajo veterans face significant
barriers in accessing the care and benefits they have earned.
The closest VA Medical Center as mentioned earlier is in
Phoenix, Arizona; Albuquerque, New Mexico; and Salt Lake City,
Utah. The distances present a formidable obstacle often
requiring veterans to travel many, many hours at great personal
expense across remote areas just to receive basic services.
This burden is compounded by social determinants of health that
disproportionately affects our community such as high rates of
poverty, unemployment, and limited access to transportation.
Telehealth services, which is beneficial, are not a cure all
for our veterans. The digital divide is a stark reality on the
Navajo Nation where many of our veterans lack adequate internet
access or the technology needed to utilize telehealth
effectively. The limitation is not just a matter of convenience
but a barrier to essential health care, mental health services,
and benefit assistance.
The VA's Beneficiary Travel program is critical, yet it
does not fully offset the high costs of the logistical
challenges associated with traveling many, many hours to the VA
facilities. Furthermore, grant and per diem rates for
homelessness of veterans do not reflect the higher cost of
living in remote areas which further disadvantage our veterans
in need.
Access to healthcare providers is another significant
challenge. There is a scarcity of medical professionals in our
region and their shortage means that even basic care can be
very hard to come by. Compensation and pension exams which are
crucial for veterans seeking disabilities and benefits are
often delayed or inaccessible due to this lack.
The issues I have outlined today represent a larger
problem. The lack of adequate VA care on the Navajo Nation is
not reflective of the continuous contributions the Navajo
people have provided this country. Our veterans have earned the
right to accessible, quality care, and benefits through their
service and sacrifice. It is for these reasons I ask Congress
to work with my administration to bring a full-service VA
Medical Center into the Navajo Nation. This center would
provide quality care not only for our Navajo veterans but most
of the rural southwestern part of the United States.
I am also asking Congress to appropriate funds to build a
VA benefit center on the in New Mexico side of the Nation to
help educate our veterans on the benefits that they have earned
together through their service.
In closing, I urge the committee and Congress to take a
decisive action to address these critical issues facing our
Navajo veterans. We need increased funding aimed specifically
at improving infrastructure and services in rural areas
tailored to the unique challenges of our Nation and the region.
We must bridge the digital divide to ensure telehealth is a
viable option for our veterans. It is essential to address
grant and per diem rates that reflect the true cost of living
in remote areas and to expand the beneficial travel program to
alleviate the significant financial burdens our veterans
undertake. Our Navajo veterans have honored their commitments
to our Nation. We must continue to honor them by bringing
services closer to them.
Thank you for your time and consideration. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Buu Nygren Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Doctor.
Next we have Mr. Jon Lovald, Chief Operations Officer for
the Minnesota Assistant Council for Veterans.
Mr. Lovald, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JON LOVALD

Mr. Lovald. Thank you, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member
Takano, committee members.
My name is Jon Lovald and I am the Chief Operating Officer
for the Minnesota Assistance Council for Veterans. I grew up in
rural Minnesota, and before joining MACV I served for 25 years
in the Army retiring as a lieutenant colonel.
MACV is a 501(c)(3) statewide nonprofit with the mission to
end veteran homelessness in Minnesota. MACV served more than
2,000 veterans and their families last year with roughly half
of those veterans residing in rural and other nonurban areas
across Minnesota.
I thank you for this opportunity to share the observations
and experiences our organization has gleaned from decades spent
serving thousands of veterans in greater Minnesota.
The challenges and opportunities facing rural veterans can
vary considerably depending on where they reside. Combined with
their individual backgrounds and needs, the most effective way
to serve these veterans might look different than what is
available to the urban veteran.
Some of rural veterans' most consistent barriers include
lack of affordable housing, few jobs which pay a living wage,
transportation limitations, scarcity of support of services,
and many rural communities simply have no emergency shelter.
MACV's team regularly encounters these challenges while serving
rural veterans as finding housing, employment, transportation,
and short-term shelter are all interconnected and determine
their stability.
For example, we have Ryan, a 66-year-old Coast Guard
veteran from Winona, Minnesota, with an honorable discharge.
Served 4 years on the Coast Guard cutter Steadfast. Last year's
housing stability was challenged after he lost his wife and he
was struggling to care for himself while he was grieving. He
was hospitalized with a life-threatening infection that needed
a partial amputation of his foot. During those months he was in
the hospital he fell several months behind on rent, and
additionally during that time a family member who was staying
in his house was arrested triggering the landlord to evict Ryan
leaving him homeless upon his discharge from the hospital.
Luckily, the small town of Winona has a shelter and staff
there realized Ryan was a veteran and they connected him with
MACV services. Due to his medical situation, it was untenable
for him to stay in the shelter, but MACV was able to place him
into a hotel room using a state-funded emergency shelter
program.
MACV was able to then help him search for his sustainable
housing solution to fit his needs. Through our landlord
partnerships, we were able to find Ryan accessible housing
designed for veterans. Thankfully, this location has an
accessible transportation program as well since he does not
drive. This all sounds like a great assist.
However, all these resources required him to move miles
away from his hometown of Winona to Rochester. While he is
currently housed, he would prefer to live where he still has
family and a support system but there are no options for a
veteran with his limitations in a smaller town.
Jerome, a 27-year-old Army veteran living in Olivia,
Minnesota, was staying with family after his discharge from the
military. He had a fallout with family forcing him to leave.
Due to the fact that there is not emergency shelter in his
community, he started living out of his car in a campground. He
could afford to pay for the camp fees because he was employed
and he stayed there to be able to take showers and maintain his
outward appearance to ensure he could keep his job. However,
with winter looming, the campground would be closed for the
season. Thankfully, in Minnesota, every county in the state is
required to have either a county veteran service officer (CVSO)
or a tribal veteran service officer. His CVSO connected Jerome
to MACV and we were able to supply him a cell phone through the
VA's Homeless Smartphone Initiative. That helped us stay in
contact with him even though he was homeless and miles from our
closest office. Through that connection we were able to work
with him to find housing near his job in Redwood Falls, then
using Supportive Services for Veterans Families (SSVF) funds to
help him with his deposit and first month's rent.
I mentioned that the VA's Smartphone Initiative ended in
2023. This was a program that greatly helped rural veterans
with limited access to the internet. In every case where we end
a veteran's homelessness is done through a network of
collaborative efforts involving Federal VA, state, local, and
nonprofit agencies working together to find the best outcome
possible. There are many resources for veterans but most of
them tend to be in larger towns or metropolitan areas with
limited affordable housing options due to their desired
locations. Rural housing, while it can be affordable, rarely
has access to homeless resources, jobs with livable wages, and
no access to public transportation for rural veterans to reach
critical resources.
I am pleased to report to you today that Minnesota has
achieved a functional end to veteran homelessness in 8 of our
10 continuums of care, including all of our COCs in rural
Minnesota through our partnerships.
Thank you for the chance today to speak on serving rural
veterans.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jon Lovald Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony.
Next we have Dr. Mark Holmes. He is a director of the Cecil
G. Sheps Center for Health Science Research and North Carolina
Rural Health Research Center at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Dr. Holmes, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK HOLMES

Mr. Holmes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon. My name is Mark Holmes. I am the director
of the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research and
the North Carolina Rural Health Research Center at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. I am an economist
whose expertise is in rural health policy. For today's hearing,
I will provide context on challenges facing the non-VHA rural
healthcare system.
Rural veterans may receive some or much of their health
care from community providers, so it is important to recognize
the fragility of the overall rural healthcare system as part of
their healthcare portfolio. I am unable to cover all the
salient topics in rural health today so I will focus my
comments on three main points relevant to today's topic.
The first is that rural healthcare infrastructures continue
to erode and this threatens the health and well-being of the
60,000,000 Americans, including the 5,000,000 veterans who live
in rural areas.
Two, Congress should consider some effective rural health
workforce policies.
Third is that many rural communities have also shown
remarkable ability to innovate and use their strength and local
assets to overcome challenge.
Since 2005, nearly 200 rural communities have seen their
hospital close or close its inpatient service. Those hospitals
that do survive have steadily gotten smaller. Rural hospitals
have cut services like maternity care and home health services
and inpatient care in rural hospitals has fallen by 13 to 20
percent in the last decade alone with most of the decreases
driven by rural residents being increasingly likely to receive
inpatient care at urban hospitals.
Access to specialty care is also affected. Approximately 20
percent of Americans live more than 60 minutes from oncology
services and rural residents who have to drive an hour each way
for 5 weeks in a row to get their radiation treatment are
facing fatigue of long car travel while fighting cancer.
Meanwhile, many specialty services including maternity,
surgical, and other key specialties are eroding in rural areas.
Given evidence that female veterans may be more dependent on
non-VHA providers to receive certain gender specific services
like obstetric and gynecologic care, the erosion of these
services in rural communities is especially worrisome for this
population.
Rural places have long faced workforce shortages. Many
proposed policy solutions to address these workforce challenges
focus on one profession at one stage in their career and it is
critical that we look at solutions that are not siloed in this
fashion and support healthcare workers across their entire
career trajectory. Decades of research have taught us that one
of the most effective ways to boost health workforce in rural
and underserved areas is to train them in rural and underserved
areas. By growing the number of rural training opportunities
and ensuring that resources are available to retain that
workforce across their careers, we can ensure that the
workforce needed to support rural areas is there for decades to
come.
Efforts to expand physician training have paid great
dividends. For example, Rural Residency Planning and
Development program has helped lead to more rural residency
slots in the last 5 years than were established during the
previous decade. By supporting residency program development,
Congress can increase the number of slots in underserved
communities which improves access to health care.
As you all know, the Choice Act directed and funded the VHA
to increase the number of residency slots by 1,500 with many
rural VHA facilities receiving priority for additional slots.
Additionally, the VA's GME pilot program on Graduate
Medical Education residency will allow the VA to fund startup
costs for new programs that train VA residents at non-VHA
facilities. This is a new approach for the VHA and will help
bolster their ability to train residents at facilities where
many veterans seek care. Congress could consider whether to
expand this model to train additional types of health
professions beyond physicians. Veterans would benefit from
health professionals who are trained and practice on
interprofessional teams both in VHA and non-VHA facilities.
Behavioral health is a particularly salient healthcare
service for veterans. Veterans experience certain conditions
like Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and substance use disorders
more often than their civilian counterparts. Although access to
behavioral health care remains a crisis throughout the country,
compared to urban residents rural residents receive less care
from providers with less specialized training, and the care
they receive is less likely to be innovative. This creates a
particularly acute challenge for rural veterans. There are
fewer healthcare providers to treat and manage their more
prevalent behavioral health needs.
Perhaps because of the more limited resources in rural
communities there are many examples where rural healthcare
innovations led the way. It is important to continue to
recognize that rural healthcare systems are different and not
simply small versions of urban and can yield similar outcomes
when given the opportunity.
One word of caution as we talked a lot about telehealth
today and we have heard about one-quarter of rural veterans not
having internet in their home, and we cannot have systems that
are built on veterans connecting with their providers in the
parking lot of a library.
Although rural residents and those who visit rural
communities face real barriers to achieving their full health
potential, history has shown that thoughtful legislation
designed to address rural-specific challenges and leverage the
assets of rural American has been successful in improving the
lives of those who live in our rural communities. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Mark Holmes Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Now we are going to go to questions. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schultz, how is it different for a homeless veteran in
rural Illinois than it is in Chicago or other major cities?
Ms. Schultz. Thank you for your question.
In rural communities for homelessness veterans you lack no
public transportation. I mean, there is no public
transportation. The access to everything is impossible, really.
If you do not live in a community where you have access to more
jobs, apartments, all the things, even healthcare access, VA
care, it is just very different. It is night and day really.
The Chairman. As far as the actual homeless veterans, there
are a lot more urban programs than for rural homeless veterans
to try to find anything?
Ms. Schultz. I believe for urban homeless veterans you have
more resources. You have clothing banks. You have food
pantries. We have those things in rural areas. They are just
more widespread and harder to get to.
The Chairman. In your opinion, what can VA do to help make
sure rural homeless veterans are treated equally to those ones
in the urban areas?
Ms. Schultz. Just expanding healthcare access programs to
support them. I mean, things need to be more readily available.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Lovald, H.R. 3848 and the Housing
Oversight and Mitigating Exploration (HOME) Act that passed the
House late last year would include authority for VA to provide
similar assistance with rides of appointments for homeless
veterans. Would this additional authority alleviate some of the
strain on the MACV and the other providers seeking to help the
homeless veterans?
Mr. Lovald. Chairman Bost, thank you for that question.
That absolutely could assist in the process of us
connecting with those veterans. I think that one thing I would
highlight, in the state of Minnesota, the Disabled American
Veterans (DAV), in partnership with the VA, provides numerous
rides. Currently those rides very specifically have to be
related to VA health care. If there was an expansion on where
those vehicles could be used for or another way to access
transportation that did not require the veterans to have a
vehicle, many of them cannot, many of them are not driving
anymore, anything that addresses exactly what was just
discussed about getting said veteran to that resource is going
to be helpful.
The Chairman. Well, first off, I want to say thank you to
each one of the panelists because I am going to turn it over to
Mr. Takano for his questions. Let me say this. When you come
from areas that are rural like I do--I know many of the people
on this committee do--any unique ways that you can see to help
us help VA to make sure that they can provide those services.
You know, when we started talking about telehealth everybody
thought how great it is. It is true for the rural area. It
handles great for the rural area if you have a connection.
Quite often we have watched in the rural areas getting a
connection might even be easier than getting potable water,
too, but that is a whole different story for the rural areas.
It is unique, and I appreciate you being here. I will now turn
it over to Ranking Member Takano for questions.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Nygren, thank you. Dr. Nygren, thank you so much for
being here. I had the pleasure of visiting Window Rock in 2022.
In your testimony you advocate for Congress to appropriate
funds to build a full-service VA Medical Center in the Navajo
Nation. Who do you envision this facility serving? Just
veterans or all Navajo Nation citizens?
Mr. Nygren. Thank you, Honorable Takano, for coming out
last year. I just missed you just by a few months. Hopefully
you come back out.
Mr. Takano. I would love to. It is a beautiful country. I
would love to be the guest of Representative Crane.
Mr. Nygren. All right. Well, thank you to both of you.
The first thing I think about is I think it is going to
serve all veterans in the area. I think that not only it would
benefit Navajo veterans. It would benefit Hopi veterans, Ute
veterans and non-Native American veterans just because it would
be a lot closer to the Four Corners area because we are in such
a unique, beautiful area that if that facility was actually
built in Chinle, Arizona it would actually bring a lot more
people closer to where their travel distances are not as far. I
do know that most of our Navajo citizens do use Indian Health
Services to the best of their abilities but I do know if this
facility is built it would really benefit the 10,000 plus
Navajo veterans and probably a lot more that have not really
realized some of their benefits that are available.
Mr. Takano. Well, have we given thought to a possible joint
facility with VA and the IHS so that your people could benefit
from the economy of scale to bring out specialists, to make it
a real, a much fuller array of services. We could justify that
by opening it up to both the IHS beneficiaries as well as VA
beneficiaries. Is that an idea you are open to?
Mr. Nygren. I think, Mr. Takano, I think that would be a
great idea. I know that one of the things that currently we are
going to reopen a small contract agreement with the Chinle IHS,
but most of the concerns of the veterans is they want to be
treated more tailored as if they showed up at a VA center
instead of being just treated like a normal Native American
going to that facility. That was one of the things that I have
been told is let us make sure they treat us like veterans
instead of them not even asking us if we are a veteran or not.
Mr. Takano. I think that is a very valid concern. I think
just knowing that it is primarily a VA facility but there has
historically been this connection between the IHS and VA. I
hope to talk to Representative Crane more about this idea
because I believe as far as directing resources to a major
facility, this is one way to maybe get it done.
I was impressed by the fact that you have your own college
and that you have a nursing program is what I recall. Of
course, as Dr. Holmes has mentioned, one of the best ways to
get health practitioners into rural areas is to get medical
residencies and training opportunities into these areas. I have
Sherman Indian Institute, which many of your young people come
to in Riverside, California.
Do you think there might be ways for us to work together to
create pipelines of training opportunities for students to come
to Sherman, students that go to your own schools and to your
own college to train for these medical professions?
Mr. Nygren. Honorable Takano, I think that is a great idea.
I think that one of the things that we really need within that
area is trying to develop that pipeline of nurses that are
local so that people are not crisscrossing across the country
to take on contracts for a few weeks at a time because what
will happen is you will have people that come out for short
stints of time but they do not truly understand the culture.
They do not understand the people. If we can train up our own
people, whether they go to the program at Sherman Indian
School--just so you know, my grandma went to Sherman a long
time ago. One time I was there and she showed me a picture of
where they would pick up dates and stuff and things like that.
I know it is a long way from Navajo but it is one of those site
topics to where I think that I cannot believe people traveled
that far back in the 1940's and the 1950's so far away from
home. I am definitely open to what we can do with the Sherman
Institute and our own school. I know that Northern Arizona
University is working on developing a medical school, and I
think that is something that Representative Crane and myself
and you, we can talk with Northern Arizona University to figure
out is there a program that can be geared toward Navajo nurses
and doctors and be a lot closer to Navajo.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, if you might permit me to ask just ask one
question of Dr. Holmes. Thank you for being here, Dr. Holmes.
You know, you talk about other ways that VA and healthcare
systems could attract and retain mid-and later-career
professionals in rural areas. Can you point to any success
stories about how that has already happened or could happen?
Mr. Holmes. Thank you for the question.
I think one of the themes that I have heard all day and at
this panel as well is the notion that rural communities need to
design programs that are tailored to the assets that are there.
If some communities have really strong broadband then that
might be a solution there. Others may have a scope of practice
that enables. I am getting to your answer, I promise.
All that is to say that healthcare systems are often really
innovative at this and they recognize what it is that they need
in order to keep their mid-and late-career professionals. Part
of that is a career ladder. Particularly in rural areas, you
need to be able to see I have progress in my career and I can
move forward. Investments in those kinds of models have proven
highly effective where a medical assistant can become a nurse
and expand their career over time.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. We have a tremendous brain trust
here and I hope that we can make some movement on rural
healthcare.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Radewagen.
Ms. Radewagen. Ms. Schultz, can you describe the specific
challenges you face in accessing healthcare services in your
rural area such as transportation or distance to the nearest VA
facilities? How have these challenges affected your ability to
receive timely and adequate health care, especially for any
ongoing or specialized medical needs?
Ms. Schultz. Okay. Thank you for the question.
My closest VA hospital is 2 hours from me but I do have the
privilege of having a Community Based Outpatient Clinic (CBOC)
in my town. If I cannot go to the 2 hours then I can get care
locally. When we dive into Community Care, because not
everything is available at a CBOC, I still have to travel. I
have one Community Care. I still have to travel an hour and 15
minutes to get to a Community Care provider because it is so
hard to get into the Community Care system and it is a rural
area so not as many providers are available for Community Care.
I have had personal difficulty getting referrals to
specialists so I use my private insurance to do those things
which, again, I am blessed to be able to do. I work with
veterans who do not have those same privileges and they miss
appointments because of VA options for transportation or there
is no options for transportation or they are working. A lot of
veterans who I work with have to choose between going to work,
and they do not have the kinds of jobs that allow them time off
for medical appointments. They do not have Paid Time Off (PTO)
so they do not have that access to care readily available. As
far as female providers, again, for specialized female care I
would have to travel 2 hours to get to the facility for that
care.
Ms. Radewagen. In your testimony you mentioned mobile
medical units. What has your experience been like in regards to
receiving health care at mobile medical units? Have they
provided you with adequate care and met all your needs?
Ms. Schultz. I do not have any personal experience with
mobile medical units. I just do not want to bring problems
without solutions and I feel like mobile medical units coming
into rural areas would be beneficial for our veterans who do
not have transportation, or if they have transportation it is
only getting them locally, right, to their basic needs, to
their job. I did a little research with the mobile medical
units that were deployed starting in August 2023 and it
appeared to me that they were really in urban areas. Refocusing
some of those units or getting additional units into rural
areas could really be a gamechanger.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Schultz. Thank you.
The Chairman. General Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
Mr. Lovald, I am sure you are familiar with Scott County.
My dad, a World War II vet's last community service was driving
veterans from around Scott County into the VA Medical Center
over by the airport. It was one of the proudest moments of his
life, especially it was not about so much getting them to the
appointment, which was essential but the interaction that he
had with them as some old guys who have been around a long time
sharing stories toward the end of life, if you will. I thank
you for all you do across the state of Minnesota.
Dr. Nygren, I greatly appreciate you being here and
providing the testimony. Michigan's 1st District which I
represent is home to seven federally recognized tribes. All are
in rural and remote areas and all with a long history of
service to our country in uniform. Some of my most
heartwarming, fulfilling interactions over these last 7 years
in Congress is to attend the different tribal ceremonies at
different times of the year to dance and participate in the
ceremonies because we are all thankful for everybody's service
over time.
One of the recommendations in your testimony is to foster
collaboration between Congress, the VA, tribal leaders, and
tribal health authorities. I am going to ask one question and
just say any steps that you think you would like to take, next
steps you would like to take to accomplish this. Is part of
this the potential for utilization of excess space in tribal
health clinics that are rural and remote that here you have the
existing tribal health clinic and you have space, is there an
opportunity for us to deliver some of that rural and remote
care? Veterans are not driving by the tribal health clinic
because they are not a member of the tribe. I would just like
to hear your thoughts on that.
Mr. Nygren. Thank you, Congressman Bergman. I thank you for
the tribes that you represent, the seven tribes, and I am very
happy that you are open to being a part of their traditions and
cultures as my representative is, too, as well. Thank you so
much. I think this question also kind of comes back to Mr.
Takano's question as well, too, is what can we do to better
utilize? All of us know that any healthcare facility in rural
America, if we can find a way to collaborate and bring them
together to work with the VA is good for all of us because it
is already tough enough to get water, electricity, and sewer.
If there is a tribal health facility that is there, my
recommendation would be to continue that collaboration so that
veterans feel like when they walk in--not only when they walk
into that tribal facility, but if a part of it is dedicated to
them so that they understand that a veteran is going to be
talking to me. They know the challenges that they have gone
through and things like that. I believe that if we can continue
to foster that spirit of collaboration to figure out how can we
combine the VA and the tribal facilities to work together so
the veteran does show up, I think that will definitely work a
lot easier. It actually would make it a lot more feasible
because I know there are times when it is a tremendous task to
bring a facility out to any remote rural areas but if you can
already tap into the existing infrastructures that are there to
kind of build off of I think that will be a great way to start
those discussions as well.
Mr. Bergman. Well, when you think about it certain things
that are done, procedures performed, pharmacies potentially,
whatever it happens to be, the idea of shared services, you
already have a physical facility. How do we get maximum
utilization out of that for all concerned?
I just want to thank you all for being here and I will
yield back 30 seconds here for the good of the order. Thank you
all.
The Chairman. Representative Crane, you are recognized.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
President Nygren, thank you again for being here today,
sir. Thank you for everything you do for the Navajo Nation. It
is definitely critical for us to hear your perspective on these
issues.
As we previously discussed, Navajo veterans face extremely
lengthy trips to VA health centers, often driving multiple
hours just for one health visit. At some clinical locations
they may not even be able to get that type of specialty care.
In your opinion, what is the greatest barrier to care for
Navajo veterans?
Mr. Nygren. Thank you, Representative Crane.
The greatest one that I think about is the distances that
they travel. If you have ever been to Navajo country it is
very--as we are speaking now, there is big weather that is
coming through and elders are stuck in communities to where
even it is hard to get a grader or a backhoe in some of those
communities. It is one of those things where I think about
where if we can bring the services a lot closer to them and
more accessible that would actually make it a lot easier on
them because for them to travel down to Phoenix, they have told
us that the mileage reimbursement is enough to just cover the
gas but it does not account for the vehicles that they drive
because a lot of the vehicles that they drive are 4-by-4
vehicles because of the rural areas that 9 miles a gallon is
only going to get you so far when you go down to Phoenix.
Those are some of the challenges. The other challenge is
that a lot of these veterans are elderly. They are either
Vietnam veterans or they are in that age where it is very
difficult for them to travel. They are going to have to have
people to actually take them down there. To me one of the
greatest challenges would be to bring it a lot closer to them.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely.
Now, we talked about a possible VA hospital, improving
telehealth reliability, adjusting per diem rates to relieve
costly financial burdens. Is there anything else on that list
that we can do to help veterans on the Navajo Nation?
Mr. Nygren. Honorable Representative Crane, when it comes
to telehealth, as everyone mentioned here, when we talk
telehealth for rural communities it all depends on the services
that we can actually get to actually get videoconferencing. Our
veterans on Navajo, they actually really prefer people to deal
with because a lot of them only speak Navajo. They do not quite
understand a lot of the challenges that a lot of people can use
a telephone. A lot of them do not prefer that. They really
prefer in-person discussions, one-on-one discussions and to be
able to relate to someone. I think that might be another
obstacle really to think about when it comes to telehealth is
just there is that generation that would really prefer in-
person meetings instead of telehealth.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely. If you had to rank those three
priorities--the hospital, telehealth, and then adjusting per
diem rates, would it go in that order, one, two, and three,
just like that?
Mr. Nygren. Yep. They would be very close to one another.
Mr. Crane. Okay. Thank you, President Nygren, for being
here today.
One question for Mr. Lavold real quick. Sir, I know your
big issue is veteran homelessness. I know there are several
reasons that our veterans end up homeless. What is the biggest
reason that you tend to see our veterans becoming homeless?
Mr. Lovald. Representative Crane, thank you for that
question.
As it relates to rural veterans specifically or just
veterans in general, veterans who are finding their selves
homeless have essentially run out of resources. They have maybe
burned bridges. They have run out of family. They have run out
of places that they can actually go before they are actually
homeless. There rarely is somebody waking up and the next day
they are homeless.
We have seen and witnessed that a lot of mental health
issues are what are contributing to decision-making that then
lends into difficult situations with their family or friends.
Maybe creating incarceration situations as well. The mental
health component I think is a very big piece of why an
individual becomes homeless and honestly, why some veterans
choose to be homeless is because they are not connected to the
mental health services that they might need to help them see a
solution in front of them that is viable.
Mr. Crane. Yes. That is something a lot of people do not
understand that some veterans actually do choose that lifestyle
at least for a period of time; is that correct?
Mr. Lovald. That absolutely is correct. We continue to
reach out to these individuals with different solutions hoping
that the next opportunity, maybe we built that relationship to
offer something new.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Lavold.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ranking member, do you have any--first of all, I want to
say thank you to the panel here, but do you have any closing
remarks?
Mr. Takano. No. We have got to go vote. I appreciate the
courtesy in letting me ask Dr. Holmes more questions.
The Chairman. I want to say thank you to the ranking
member. I want to thank all the witnesses for joining us here
today, especially the second panel who traveled from all over
from rural America to try to get here today and provided access
to the best healthcare benefits and veterans. As I asked
earlier, if you come up with ideas, please bring them to us,
any suggestions you may have. We want to make sure that we do
this and we want to make sure that our veterans are provided
for no matter where they live and where they choose to live.
I appreciate Ranking Member Takano and the members of the
Committee for standing shoulder to shoulder with me in a
bipartisan manner to do that.
I ask unanimous consent that all members shall have 5
legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks
and include extraneous material.
Hearing no objection, so ordered. This hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:54 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Shereef Elnahal

Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
ways VA provides health care and benefits to Veterans in rural or
highly rural areas.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Veterans Health Administration uses the Rural-Urban Commuting
Areas system to define rurality. The Rural-Urban Commuting Areas system
considers population density as well as how closely a community is
linked socio-economically to larger urban centers. We use the term
rural to include rural, highly rural, and insular island areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Almost a quarter of all Veterans, more than 4.4 million reside in
rural communities. Many of these Veterans face unique challenges and
obstacles that differ widely from their urban counterparts. Veterans
often reside in rural communities to be close to family, friends, and
community; to have open spaces for recreation; more privacy; lower cost
of living; and less crowded towns and schools. However, the
geographical isolation of rural areas can create challenges for rural
Veterans in accessing VA resources, including medical care, educational
benefits, and employment assistance.
Rural Veterans often face unreliable internet access, long travel
distances, and less awareness about the benefits and care available to
them through VA. Unreliable internet access restricts their ability to
connect with online platforms and information, limiting access to
essential resources like telehealth services and online application
processes. Long travel distances can also pose financial and logistical
challenges for rural Veterans, who must travel considerable distances
to receive medical care, appointments, or other essential services.
Furthermore, historically limited outreach efforts in rural communities
may prevent many Veterans from fully utilizing the resources to which
they are entitled.
VA is committed to working across Government, including with
Congress, the White House, and Executive branch, and with Veterans, and
external stakeholders to overcome these challenges and provide rural
Veterans with the care and benefits they have earned and deserve. The
Department is doing so through new efforts under the Biden-Harris
Administration and through ongoing efforts across the agency.

President Biden's Policies Benefit Rural Veterans

The Biden-Harris Administration's general policy framework has
provided more care and benefits to Veterans, including rural Veterans.
The Administration emphasizes expanding access to quality health care
services, including mental health and substance use disorder resources,
through initiatives like telehealth and mobile clinics. The framework
aims to address long travel distances and limited access to medical
facilities experienced by rural Veterans and to increase awareness of
benefits and care available to these Veterans through outreach efforts
and improved communication channels. By prioritizing rural Veterans'
needs and improving their access to care, the President, and VA, aim to
improve their quality of life and overall well-being.

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address
Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).

The PACT Act marked the largest expansion of Veteran benefits in a
generation. From August 2022 to mid-December 2023, VA enrolled more
than 500,000 new Veterans, over 100,000 of which were eligible to
enroll based on specific new authorities in of the Act itself, and
included 25,000 rural Veterans. To date, VA has also screened over
five million Veterans enrolled in VA health care for toxic
exposures, of which 1.7 million live in rural areas. This marks
significant progress toward our goal of screening all Veterans
enrolled in VA health care for toxic exposures at least once every
five years.
Rural Recruitment and Hiring Efforts. Department recruitment
efforts for physicians and health care providers in rural regions have
been a longstanding challenge. In fiscal year (FY) 2022, turnover rates
within the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) hit their highest
levels in over 20 years, reaching 11 percent for VHA overall and 12.1
percent in rural facilities. In FY 2023, the PACT Act provided VA with
unprecedented authority and flexibility to better recruit and retain
staff. Leveraging these and other authorities, VHA saw a 7.4 percent
overall growth rate and 7.7 percent in rural facilities for health care
providers, the highest rate in over 15 years. Despite the fact that
rural hiring outpaced the enterprise's overall growth, physicians
remain more difficult to recruit in rural areas in particular. In FY
2023, rural areas saw a 2.1 percent growth rate in physicians, compared
to 3.6 percent for VHA overall. VA continues to work with Congress to
strengthen VA's ability to recruit and retain providers in high-need
areas and specialties.
As part of PACT Act implementation, VA has also developed the FY
2023 Rural Recruitment and Hiring Plan \3\ to ensure VA has the
workforce it needs to meet our obligation to rural Veterans. The plan
outlined goals to improve staffing levels at all rural facilities,
engage stakeholders to improve recruitment and onboarding, empower
leadership across rural facilities to implement comprehensive
strategies, increase satisfaction with the recruitment, hiring, and
onboarding process, and provide the soonest and best care to Veterans
living in rural communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Veterans Health Administration. (2023). Rural Recruitment and
Hiring Plan. Workforce Management & Consulting, in partnership with the
Office of Rural Health.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beyond efforts under the PACT Act, the Integrated Clinical Staffing
Project contract, announced last year, is designed to address staffing
shortages and improve care for Veterans.\4\ It covers various clinical
and non-clinical positions, including physicians, nurses, pharmacists,
therapists, technicians, social workers, and administrative staff. The
contract will support VA's transformation initiatives, including the
expansion of telehealth services and the enhancement of community care
partnerships.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Note: The tentative award date for acquisition is January 9,
2024. No awardees have been named to date.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Largest Outreach Campaign in VA's History. With the passage of the
PACT Act, VA launched its largest outreach campaign to ensure every
Veteran impacted by toxic exposures receives the benefits and care they
deserve. This required collaboration with community and national
partners to reach Veterans across the country, especially rural
Veterans, like never before. To this end, VA pushed an agency-wide
enterprise initiative called ``Summer Vet Fest,'' intended to inform
Veterans, their families, caregivers, and survivors about the PACT Act
and encourage them to apply for due benefits and care. Additionally, in
the last calendar year, VA led at least two community-level events in
every state and Puerto Rico and participated in 14,036 PACT Act-focused
events, reaching 1,129,916 people. Of these PACT Act briefings, 5,883
included Congressional representation, and 32,248 included the media.
VA also held 436 claims clinics across the country, reaching more than
18,000 attendees and resulting in 13,172 claims filed.
Veterans Exposure Team-Health Outcomes Military Exposures (VET-
HOME). The VET-HOME program \5\ is a vital initiative aimed at
addressing the health concerns of Veterans, with an emphasis on
military exposures, such as hazardous chemicals or environmental
toxins, to identify and mitigate potential health risks. Launching over
the past year, the program offers clinical evaluations on a national
scale through a geographically distributed team of providers trained in
military environmental exposures. This initiative is particularly
important for rural Veterans who may have limited access to health care
resources and face challenges in receiving timely and specialized care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  For more information, see https://www.publichealth.va.gov/VET-
HOME/index.asp.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Caregiver Support

Caregivers can play a crucial role in the well-being and quality of
life of rural Veterans, especially those with physical or mental health
challenges. In rural areas with limited health care and support
resources, caregivers play a vital role in filling gaps and providing
necessary support. They assist with medication management,
transportation to appointments, and ensuring treatment plan adherence,
leading to better health outcomes. Caregivers also positively impact
the mental and emotional well-being of rural Veterans,\6\ providing
emotional support, a listening ear, and a safe space for them to
express their feelings. They also help alleviate social isolation,
providing companionship, engagement in social activities, and
connecting Veterans with support networks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ L'Heureux T, Parmar J, Dobbs B, Charles L, Tian PGJ, Sacrey LA,
Anderson S. Rural Family Caregiving: A Closer Look at the Impacts of
Health, Care Work, Financial Distress, and Social Loneliness on
Anxiety. Healthcare (Basel). 2022 Jun 21;10(7):1155. doi: 10.3390/
healthcare10071155. PMID: 35885682; PMCID: PMC9318565. See also Talley
R., Crews J., Caring for the Most Vulnerable: Framing the Public Health
of Caregiving. Am J Public Health. 2007;97:224-228.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In April 2023, President Biden signed an executive order to
increase access to high-quality care and supporting caregivers,\7\
enabling families, including Veteran families, to have access to
affordable, high-quality care and to have support and resources as
caregivers themselves. As of December 19, 2023, 19,200 active
caregivers in rural areas are enrolled in the Program of Comprehensive
Assistance for Family Caregivers, offering services and benefits. This
Executive Order called for the expansion of the Veteran Directed Care
program to all VA Medical Centers by the end of 2024. VA's Veteran
Directed Care Program (VDC) provided personal care services to over
7,200 Veterans in FY 2023, with over 50 percent living in rural areas.
VDC is crucial due to limited home health aide agencies and labor
market shortages.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  See generally https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
Presidential-actions/2023/04/18/executive-order-on-increasing-access-
to-high-quality-care-and-supporting-caregivers/.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Security

Another significant health concern for rural Veterans, especially
those who are younger, unmarried, unemployed, and have children is food
security.\8\ Veterans who are food insecure are more likely to
experience physical and mental health problems and have a fourfold
higher risk of suicidal ideation. In 2022, VA established the VHA Food
Security Office to address food insecurity among Veterans through
partnerships, data management, and research. The office provides
clinical nutrition care to many rural Veterans through tele-nutrition
visits and VA Video Connect.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See Widome R, Jensen A, Bangerter A, Fu SS. Food insecurity
among Veterans of the US wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Public Health
Nutrition. 2015;18(5):844-849. doi:10.1017/S136898001400072X. See also
Cohen AJ, Dosa DM, Rudolph JL, Halladay CW, Heisler M, Thomas KS. Risk
factors for Veteran food insecurity: findings from a National US
Department of Veterans Affairs Food Insecurity Screener. Public Health
Nutrition. 2022;25(4):819-828. doi:10.1017/S1368980021004584, and Wang
EA, McGinnis KA, Goulet J, et al. Food Insecurity and Health: Data from
the Veterans Aging Cohort Study. Public Health Reports.
2015;130(3):261- 268. doi:10.1177/003335491513000313.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Indian and Alaska Native Veteran Initiatives

Meeting the needs of rural Veterans also means ensuring American
Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) Veterans receive the care and benefits
they deserve. These Veterans serve in the military at one of the
highest rates of all racial and ethnic groups and are the most likely
to live in rural communities. These veterans' already significant
health care disparities are aggravated by barriers related to access to
care, coordination, and care navigation. Thus, VA has worked with its
partners to develop programming to address these challenges.
Copayment Exemption for American Indian/Alaska Native Veterans. In
April 2023, VA implemented the Johnny Isakson and David P. Roe, M.D.
Veterans Health Care and Benefits Improvement Act of 2020 \9\,
exempting eligible Native Veterans from copayments for VA health care.
The copayment exemption honors our treaties with sovereign Nations,
addresses health care access and disparities, provides more health care
options, and continues to build trust in VA. As of December 8, 2023, VA
has canceled over 118,000 copayments for over 3,400 eligible AI/AN
Veterans, amounting to $2.1 million in canceled and reimbursed
copayments. VA continues to receive, review, and process applications
for exemption and conduct outreach to ensure qualified Veterans get
this exemption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Pub. L. No. 116-315, 134 Stat. 4932
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tribal-VHA Collaboration on Suicide Prevention. In 2021, the
highest suicide rate within minority populations was found amongst AI/
AN Veterans. VA is focusing on increasing access to care, delivering
culturally meaningful treatments, and growing support networks to
reduce suicide risk among these Veteran groups through a suicide
prevention strategy that is guided by the National Strategy for
Preventing Veteran Suicide 2018-2028 and aligns with the President's
2021 National Strategy for Reducing Military and Veteran Suicide. To
this end, VA continues to collaborate with Federal, tribal, state, and
local governments to advance a public health approach to suicide
prevention. These efforts include:

Advancing suicide prevention for Rural Native Veterans
through Tribal-VHA partnerships;

Implementing Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
Outreach to Minority Veterans and American Indian and Alaska Native
Veterans (P.L. 117-328 Sec.  101);

Awarding $52.5 million to 80 community-based
organizations through the Staff Sergeant Parker Gordon Fox Suicide
Prevention Grant Program; and

Expanding collaborative suicide prevention efforts with
AI/AN tribal communities in FY 2024 as part of VA and the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration's (SAMHSA) Governor's
Challenge to Prevent Suicide Among Service Members, Veterans, and their
Families.

COMPACT Act

The Biden-Harris Administration recognizes that reducing suicide
cannot be accomplished singularly through reactive policy change;
rather, it requires a long-term strategic vision and commitment to
implement systemic changes in how we support Service members, Veterans,
and their families across the full continuum of risk and wellness. In
addition to continuing to build on VA's public health approach to
suicide prevention, this year, VA implemented section 201 of the
Veterans Comprehensive, Access to Care and Treatment Act of 2020
(COMPACT) \10\ Act. This law enables VA to provide, pay for, or
reimburse emergent suicide care for eligible Veterans, determine
eligibility for other VA programs and benefits, and make appropriate
referrals for care. The ability to be seen at any medical facility for
this care without prior authorization can be critical for rural
Veterans who may have to travel long distances to their nearest
facility. In addition, rural Veterans in crisis now have simpler access
to the Veterans Crisis Line. The National Suicide & Crisis Lifeline's
new number--988 (then Press 1 for Veterans)--helps make it easier to
remember and share the number to access help in times of need,
regardless of location.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Pub. L. No. 116-214, 134 Stat. 1026.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ongoing Efforts to Serve Rural Veterans

VA's longstanding efforts continue to help bridge the gap between
rural Veterans and the resources available to them. Through outreach
efforts, telehealth services, mobile clinics, and partnerships with
local community organizations, VA is working diligently to address the
specific needs of rural Veterans and improve their overall well-being.

Outreach Initiatives

VA is committed to reaching rural Veterans where they are, ensuring
they can access healthcare services and information about benefits,
mental health support, and other available resources. This outreach
involves partnering with various agencies, including Veteran Service
Organizations (VSO), State Departments of Veterans Affairs, Federal
agencies, and non-governmental organizations. VA.gov offers an online
platform for Veterans to learn about, apply for, and manage their VA
benefits and health care. In rural communities, VA collaborates with
Rural Outreach Coordinators, VHA's Office of Rural Health (ORH), Mobile
Vet Centers, County Veterans Service Officers, Transition Assistance
Advisors, disability and aging network organizations, and community
faith-based organizations to coordinate outreach support for events.
VA's success in providing updated benefits and service information
to rural Veterans is largely due to its collaboration with local VSO
Officers. The Rural Veteran Special Emphasis outreach program
identifies gaps in benefits delivery to remote locations, ensuring
equal access to and knowledge of all benefits. In FY 2023, VA completed
over 1,100 Rural Veteran outreach events, connecting with over 300,000
Veterans, Service members, and beneficiaries. Additionally, Regional
Offices across the U.S. have outreach plans based on their state's
Veteran demographic and population data. For instance, the Winston-
Salem Regional Office uses this data to determine the best methods for
rural and untethered Veterans. They also collaborate with VA, VSOs, and
other Veteran stakeholders to ensure effective outreach. Further, the
Homeless Veterans Outreach Program focuses on assisting homeless or at-
risk Veterans through outreach events and partnerships with
stakeholders.
Rural Partners Network to Empower Rural Communities to Access
Federal Resources. The Office of Rural Engagement (ORE) is a key
partner in the Rural Partners Network (RPN), a whole-of-government
initiative led by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. ORE collaborates
with various stakeholders, including the RPN, government agencies, and
community organizations, to understand and address the unique needs of
rural Veterans. The ORE's mission is to leverage the strengths of the
Federal Government, the Department of Veteran Affairs, and Veterans
themselves to build resilient rural communities and improve the health
and well-being of rural Veterans. ORE connects VA programs and policies
to the unique needs of rural Veterans, employing a whole-of-government
approach to support and engage both Veterans and their communities. It
serves as the front door for rural Veterans, improving accessibility to
resources specific to their needs. ORE also assesses VA policy
implications for rural Veterans, providing relevant information to
Congress, the White House, the Interagency, and VA senior leadership.
VA conducts outreach to engage rural Veterans and their advocates,
aiming to increase participation in earned benefits and develop
effective strategies for reaching rural communities.

Compensation and Pension (C&P) Examinations and VA's Over-Development
Reduction Task Force

VA strives to improve service delivery to the rural Veteran
population. VA's Medical Disability Examination (MDE) vendors
understand the need to expedite C&P examinations in remote geographical
locations with limited medical resources. VA uses several methods to
ensure rural Veterans are receiving C&P examinations in a timely
manner.
VA began using the Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) process to
streamline and enhance the disability claims evaluation. The ACE
process provides C&P examination services for Veterans that reside in
rural areas, and those who are elderly and may have difficulty
traveling distances, utilizing C&P examiners who assess Veterans using
Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs) and existing medical
evidence, supplemented by interviews conducted telephonically or via
video when deemed appropriate. From FY 2021 to FY 2023, MDE vendors
have increased their ACE modality usage by 123.8 percent. Tele-C&P
(that is, telehealth) examinations expanded in 2020. The use of
telehealth in the C&P disability examination program provides services
for Veterans who reside in rural areas, those who are elderly and may
have difficulty traveling distances, and those requiring specialty
examinations. This allows for flexible exam scheduling and reduces the
likelihood a Veteran will miss their examination. Tele-C&P examinations
use video technologies for accurate face-to-face assessments, ensuring
safety and efficiency. From FY 2021 to FY 2023, MDE vendors have
increased their Tele-C&P modality usage by 74.6 percent.
VA has also utilized vendors to deploy mobile units throughout the
country to augment existing provider networks and provide a full range
of exam services which allow Veterans to undergo exams where they live.
These units allow providers to conduct examinations in rural areas of
every state within the lower 48 states. Mobile units are equipped to
complete general medical and most specialty exams, as well as
diagnostic testing. The units are handicap accessible, with wheelchair
lifts and ramps, and are fully self-contained with power supply and
internet connectivity, allowing for secure evidence transmission to VA
systems. VA Medical Disability Examinations (MDE) Contract Vendors
continue to expand their mobile unit fleets and collectively have 31
operational individual units.
VA collaborates internally with other VA benefits and services
offices committed to reaching our rural Veterans, such as VA's Office
of Outreach, Transition, and Economic Development, Office of Field
Operations, Office of Tribal Government Relations, local VHA Outreach
Coordinators, as well as VSOs, to support claims clinic events by
providing onsite C&P examinations utilizing MDE vendor Mobile Units.
MDE vendors have supported events for C&P examinations with the Crow
Agency, Cheyenne, Arapahoe, Saginaw-Chippewa, and Apsaalooke Tribes.
MDE vendors are beginning to use newly approved innovative measures
to complete C&P examinations such as boothless technology for audio
exams, newly approved portable visual field-testing units for optometry
exams, and wearable home sleep monitoring devices for in-home sleep
studies. These technologies reduce the need for Veterans to travel in
some geographical areas.
In addition to increased examination modalities, MDE vendors use
traveling providers and per-diem or rented locations, such as a
temporary medical office space in Fulton, Illinois, to assist rural
Veteran populations. License portability is utilized by MDE vendors,
allowing covered examiners to travel across state lines to supplement
the provider network in areas with limited medical provider options.

Supporting Rural Veterans' Health

ORH also works to improve the health and well-being of rural
Veterans by increasing access to care and services. Nine specific
programs include:

(1) Telemedicine: ORH supports various telemedicine programs,
including Clinical Resource Hubs for primary care, mental
health and substance use disorder treatment, and specialty care
in 18 VISNs, Tele-Critical Care for remote critical care
expertise in rural intensive care units, and over a dozen
specific telemedicine programs in various specialties.

(2) Transportation: ORH collaborates with the Veterans
Transportation Program to support two programs that provide
transportation options to rural Veterans. The Highly Rural
Transportation Grant Program grants to local and tribal
programs, while the Veteran Transportation Service offers
services like VetRide and ambulances, partnering with VSOs.

(3) Broadband: ORH, in collaboration with the Office of
Connected Care, is providing VA Video Connect Patient Tablet
program equipment, training, and broadband to Veterans without
access.

(4) Workforce: Rural health care can be disproportionately
impacted by both chronic and sudden shortages. ORH is working
to leverage the full VA workforce through telemedicine,
clinical education and training to rural sites, and
disseminating best practices for recruiting and retaining
providers in rural areas.
(5) Other Specific Rural Clinical Initiatives: ORH has
developed a pipeline of innovation and research to enhance care
models for rural Veterans, including 36 enterprise-wide
initiatives, 9 Rural Promising Practices, and hundreds of
small-scale pilots in various fields like primary care,
emergency medicine, geriatrics, and more.

Caring for Veterans Where They Are

Telehealth, mobile clinics, and innovative technologies are also
helping bridge health care barriers. Telehealth reduces wait times and
travel costs, mobile clinics bring health care directly to rural
communities, and wearable devices enable effective home health
management. These approaches promote preventive care, early
intervention, and reduce emergency treatment costs, improving the
quality of life for rural Veterans.
Telehealth. In FY 2023, the VA delivered more telehealth services
than in any previous fiscal year, while achieving increased Veteran
trust and satisfaction. Over 11.6 million telehealth episodes were
delivered to over 2.4 million unique Veterans, with over 2.9 million
delivered to over 770,000 rural Veterans. Further, 48.6 percent of
rural Veterans identified telehealth as their preferred mode of care.
Telehealth also allows VA to expand clinical capacity and address
health care disparities in rural areas by sharing clinical services
across its health care system. The Clinical Resource Hub program
delivered over 340,000 telehealth encounters to over 144,000 rural
Veterans in FY 2023, a 21 percent increase in the number of encounters
delivered to rural Veterans. Additionally, VA Health Connect offers 24/
7 access to dedicated clinical triage registered nurses, urgent care
providers, clinical pharmacy, and pharmacy support. It provides four
essential core services: scheduling and administrative services,
clinical triage, virtual clinic, and pharmacy. In the last fiscal year
alone, VA Health Connect saw an increase of 3 million calls from rural
Veterans and a nearly 70 percent increase in Virtual Clinic visits by
rural Veterans.
Community Care. VA provides care to Veterans through community
providers when VA cannot provide the care needed. The department does
so through Third-Party Administrators (TPA), who maintain and
strengthen the provider network, particularly in rural areas with fewer
providers. The reliance on community care in rural areas continues to
grow; it remains critical that we maintain a network of providers to
ensure Veterans receive needed care. In cases where there are not
enough providers in certain areas, VA works with TPAs to adjust
reimbursement rates. The rate waiver process allows TPAs to request
higher rates to attract providers to the network. The relationship with
TPAs is a two-way dialog, with ongoing monthly meetings to address
standing and emerging needs. If TPAs are not meeting designated
metrics, they must develop a corrective action plan and report
regularly on measures they are taking to improve access to care.

Beneficiary Travel

The beneficiary travel program addresses the financial and
logistical challenges of traveling long distances for specialized
medical care for rural Veterans. This program reimburses eligible
Veterans for travel expenses, such as mileage, lodging, and meals,
ensuring they receive the care they need. It not only improves access
to necessary medical appointments but also alleviates financial stress,
allowing rural Veterans to prioritize their health without worrying
about associated costs. VA's commitment to beneficiary travel is an
important part of providing comprehensive and inclusive health care
services to rural Veterans.

Homelessness

VA is committed to ending homelessness among Veterans because it is
our Nation's duty to ensure all Veterans have a safe place to call
home, including Veterans living in rural areas. One of the programs
making that possible is the VA Grant-Per-Diem (GPD) program, which
provides 365 transitional housing grants, including to rural
organizations. These grants provide 10,500 total GPD beds nationwide.
The program operates in all 50 states, Washington, DC, and Puerto Rico.
GPD grantees establish programs to meet their communities' unique
needs. They collaborate with VAMCs to identify resource gaps and
determine how their proposed grants may fill them. Grant funding
decisions consider factors like geographic dispersion, equity, and
responsiveness to community needs. GPD continues to support rural
communities and end homelessness among Veterans by providing
transitional housing resources.
Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, thank you for the opportunity
to discuss VA's efforts to best serve Veterans living in rural
communities. Through our collaborative efforts, we are proud to have
expanded our reach and provided more benefits and more care to more
Veterans than ever before. Rural Veterans, and all Veterans, benefit
from the strong working relationship between VA and Congress. We
appreciate your continued partnership as we embrace our collective
responsibility to serve those who have served.
______

Prepared Statement of Alyssa Hundrup
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Marisa Schultz

Introduction

I want to begin by thanking Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano
and Members of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs for this
opportunity to speak as a representative of the rural veteran
community. I greatly appreciate the Committee's dedication to our
Veterans and their families.
My name is Marisa Schultz; I am a disabled combat veteran and
veteran advocate. I served in the Illinois National Guard, having
deployed to Iraq in 2004. I have personal and professional experience
utilizing the Department of Veterans Affairs healthcare system in a
rural area. I serve professionally, helping veterans in my community
identify their needs and helping them access VA healthcare systems,
community care, and other outside providers. Today, I come to you as a
veteran looking to help my fellow veterans get the best access and care
possible at the VA. To make the most substantial difference for rural
veterans, the Committee can direct its attention toward enhancing the
programs and services below.

Telehealth

Telehealth has emerged as an invaluable asset in healthcare,
notably benefiting me personally. I have been able to secure mental
health services through community care with a telehealth provider who
resides in another state. This kind of healthcare connection would only
exist with telehealth. It's crucial, however, to highlight my access to
stable internet and ability to navigate technology and how this
supports my positive experience with telehealth. Along with my own
experiences, I can also attest to the experiences of veterans
challenged by rural geography, low incomes, and homelessness.
The flexibility of telehealth has significantly expanded
accessibility yet brings some notable challenges. The elderly/aging
population encounters challenging barriers due to inexperience with
technology, hindering the seamless use of the telehealth system.
Furthermore, rural low-income and homeless veterans face complex
limitations. Limited phone minutes, a glaring issue among this
demographic, challenge the full utilization of telehealth services.
Additionally, the dire need for internet access among rural low-income
veterans poses an additional financial burden. Despite the availability
of iPads equipped for telehealth within the VA system, I have seen that
the procurement process proves complex and presents hurdles, thus
delaying timely access to care.
The CARES Act improved communication between providers and
veterans; however, rural areas still lack adequate access. Implementing
tailored training programs for our aging and digitally illiterate
veterans and enhancing digital literacy can help bridge the gap.
Reestablishing the VA Homeless program: The disposable smartphone
initiative would be another way to reduce communication barriers and
provide better access to telehealth for our rural veterans. Also, those
accessing the VA Homeless Disposable Smartphone Initiative can now
answer calls regarding VA appointments and have the ability to receive
calls about potential jobs. Additionally, staff education on services
that could help our rural veterans is necessary. Addressing these
challenges and implementing robust solutions, the VA can provide access
to quality healthcare regardless of veterans' location or digital
literacy.

Beneficiary Travel

VA beneficiary travel poses considerable challenges for rural
veterans. Criteria for VA transportation include individuals who must
be at least 30 percent service-connected or have low income.
Additionally, specialized transportation is a prerequisite, making
accessibility a hurdle. While mileage reimbursement supports those with
personal vehicles, reaching a VA facility in rural areas often demands
one or two hours of travel. We are speaking of a population whose
vehicles cannot be correctly maintained due to low income. Traveling
hours at a time, risking the vehicle that gets them to basic needs and
work, is challenging for rural veterans. In my own experience, I have
witnessed rural veterans struggle with meeting the criteria for VA-
provided transportation to appointments.
I have observed numerous veterans missing appointments due to a
lack of transportation and availability. One specific veteran who has
chronic pain from a helicopter crash, while deployed, requested
transportation to VA appointments. This particular veteran was
authorized travel assistance, but when it came time for them to be
picked up, transportation did not show. After being assured this would
not happen again, this happened three more times, leading this veteran
to call 988 (suicide hotline) due to the stress and frustration of a
system they felt failed them. This is often aggravated by appointment
cards arriving only days before or after scheduled appointments,
leaving inadequate time for transportation arrangements.
Seeking reimbursement for beneficiary travel also presents
challenges for our aging and digitally illiterate rural veterans.
Several veterans I work with require assistance submitting mileage
reimbursement claims due to difficulties navigating va.gov and the
Beneficiary Travel Self Service System (BTSSS).
Improvements for beneficiary travel could involve enhanced VA
transportation by expanding coverage and ensuring reliability. This can
involve better scheduling systems for more time to arrange
transportation. When making appointments, an option to sign up for
travel reimbursement as part of the scheduling process could
significantly reduce veteran frustration. Rural areas often lack local
transportation services or community organizations to provide reliable
transportation options for veterans residing in rural areas; forming
partnerships with service organizations for ease of use would be
beneficial. Increasing the availability and promotion of telehealth
with education and access could reduce the need for physical visits.
Simplifying the reimbursement process for beneficiary travel, creating
a user-friendly system, or providing assistance programs to aid
veterans, especially those aging and with digital illiteracy, can
assist rural veterans in claiming reimbursements for their travel
expenses. Policy changes are needed to address limitations in VA
beneficiary travel criteria. This will make it more inclusive for rural
veterans who face challenges in meeting the current requirements.
As a more significant consideration for rural veterans, the
deployment of Mobile Medical Units (MMU), especially in rural areas,
could provide essential medical services directly to veterans, reducing
the need for extensive travel. In August 2023, the Department of
Veterans Affairs announced they were deploying 25 Mobile Medical Units
nationwide, with 23 presently active. Although the current MMUs focus
on large homeless populations, utilizing MMUs in rural areas could be a
game changer. With the ability to ``meet veterans where they are,''
providing sign-up services, primary care, mental health clinics, access
to social workers, women's health, audiology, laboratory, and education
on telehealth for those who do not have access to VA medical centers
due to transportation limitations could significantly increase
healthcare access to our rural veterans.

Inadequate grant and per diem rates for homeless veterans

The VA Grant and Per Diem program aims to assist organizations in
offering homeless veterans transitional housing, care, and other
supportive services. During the COVID-19 pandemic, several adjustments
were made to support homeless veterans in GPD programs. Rates have
since decreased and significantly affected the ability to assist
effectively in rural areas. If rates were returned to the previous
years' rates, rural grant per diem programs could offer competitive
wages to retain employees for consistency of care. GPD sites could hire
additional staffing for housing navigation and landlord recruitment to
facilitate low-barrier entry into housing and better facilitate same-
day access/enrollment in GPD programs. For those unable to be housed
immediately, there would be funds for emergency hotel stays. Rural GPD
programs would also be able to contract transportation for veterans,
making access to care more manageable for those in the GPD programs
through the VA.
Insufficient funding can limit the quality and range of services
available to our rural homeless veterans. Emergency funding provided a
short-term solution but did not address the long-term financial needs
of GPD programming. The need for sustained and adequate support for
homeless veterans remains a critical issue. In supporting this
vulnerable population, regular assessments and adjustments of grant and
per diem rates that align with the actual costs of providing housing
and supportive services are a must.

Adequate access to healthcare providers

Shifting the focus to access to healthcare providers, I find myself
fortunate to be a part of a community that houses a Community-Based
Outpatient Clinic (CBOC). With the privilege of owning a vehicle and a
job that supports flexibility for medical visits, coupled with the
convenience of digital communication through va.gov and myhealthyvet
portal, my access to healthcare stands at a level that eludes many in
our rural areas.
Recognizing this privilege fuels my passion for aiding rural
veterans, especially those grappling with low income or homelessness,
to secure equitable access to healthcare. I encounter veterans who lack
transportation means, making it nearly impossible for them to reach
healthcare providers. It's evident that meeting veterans where they
are, particularly in rural areas, is pivotal for their well-being.
I've witnessed veterans neglecting their health needs due to
financial constraints or employment vulnerabilities. I have worked with
a veteran working hard to get out of homelessness, putting their mental
health on hold because they want to do better for themselves and their
family, and the risk of losing their job prevented them from getting
proper care. For many, the fear of losing their jobs due to taking time
off for medical appointments further complicates matters. I have seen
dental care for our rural veterans be impossible to get, affecting
their overall health. A veteran who was injured on deployment has
needed extensive dental work, bone grafts, and posts. It has taken
three years to get an appointment for an assessment, causing extreme
emotional distress to the family and veteran. I have seen veterans who
request mental health appointments have to wait months to be seen.
One potential solution is expanding health care services such as
Mobile Medical Units (MMU) for primary care. These units, strategically
deployed to areas where traditional healthcare access is limited, have
the potential to bridge that gap. Extending VA hours, including weekend
appointments and introducing MMUs, can significantly enhance healthcare
accessibility for rural veterans. The Department of Veterans Affairs
initiative in 2023 to deploy mobile medical units nationwide is
promising. However, I have noticed a concentration of these units in
major metropolitan areas, often neglecting rural regions where the need
for accessible healthcare is equally critical. For real transformation
for rural veterans, healthcare access with MMUs must extend its reach
beyond urban areas. It's essential to devise a more coordinated
approach that considers the geographical disparities and prioritizes
areas with limited access to traditional VA medical centers. In
addition to the MMUs, enhancing telehealth services, making them more
accessible and user-friendly for veterans and rural regions, and
providing transportation solutions are all ways to combat limited
access to healthcare for our rural veterans. I urge you today to
consider ``meeting our veterans where they are.''

Compensation and pension exams

Accessing compensation and pension examinations has been a
significant challenge, particularly considering the logistical hurdles
and emotional strain involved. Drawing from my personal encounters,
these examinations are critical for veterans' well-being; however, they
are often presented with formidable obstacles. In my case, securing a
female provider, a basic yet serious request, necessitated a two-hour
commute, reflecting a limited availability of specific practitioners in
my rural location. My first-hand experience took me through four
different towns for these examinations, each site requiring a
considerable travel distance, none closer than an hour away. This
exhausting journey was compounded by the emotional toll often
accompanying such assessments.
Witnessing veterans struggling with transportation barriers has
compelled me to assist them in reaching their appointments. One
incident stands out vividly: I supported a veteran on a two-hour drive
only to face an abrupt cancellation 15 minutes before the scheduled
examination. This unforeseen disruption added distress to an already
trying experience underlying the emotional preparation veterans invest
in these evaluations. Working closely with another veteran, I
encountered a stark reality that there would be a three f1/2-hour
commute for their compensation and pension exam. This individual
struggling with homelessness and lacking personal transportation faced
an audacious journey to attend that appointment. Through collaborative
efforts with the local veteran support organization, we managed to
arrange transportation, be it with the inherent discomfort of relying
on an unfamiliar volunteer, adding to the distress and an already
emotionally charged examination.
While the VA system has made strides in enhancing these
examinations utilizing outside organizations, there remains a clear
need for further improvements addressing transportation challenges,
enhancing proximity to examination facilities, and considering the
emotional strain endured by veterans during this process are essential
areas for refinement within the system. Improving access to
compensation and pension examinations can be addressed by establishing
more examination centers in rural or underserved areas to consider
reduced travel distances for veterans. These centers could offer a wide
range of examinations to minimize the need for extensive travel.
Expanding transportation assistance programs specifically tailored for
veterans attending examinations can alleviate the burden of long
commutes. Recognizing the emotional impact of these examinations and
providing support services or counseling to veterans before and after
examinations could help alleviate the stress and anxiety associated
with the process. The central focus is meeting veterans where they
are--in rural communities, so they have the ability to access the
healthcare they have earned.

Conclusion

As you deliberate on these strategies to improve rural access to
healthcare for rural veterans, keep these stories in mind. Each
narrative underscores the imperative need for actionable solutions.
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in today's
hearing on rural healthcare access and how VA can better meet veterans
where they live. I and other veterans like me sincerely appreciate your
continued support of veterans.
______

Prepared Statement of Buu Nygren

My name is Dr. Buu Nygren, and I serve as the President of the
Navajo Nation. I come before you today to discuss the critical and
ongoing issue of access to care and benefits for our Navajo veterans,
who have a proud and storied history of military service.

Background

The Navajo People hold a special place in American military
history, having made extraordinary and unparalleled contributions.
During the harrowing years of World War II, a select group of Navajo
patriots, known as the Navajo Code Talkers, were pivotal to securing
the Allied victory in the Pacific Theater. Harnessing the complexity
and beauty of the Dine language, these heroes crafted an unbreakable
code that confounded the Japanese military intelligence.
In the blood-soaked sands of Iwo Jima, Navajo Code Talkers operated
with relentless precision, flawlessly transmitting over 800 messages in
the span of the first 48 hours of combat. Their efforts were
impeccable, their dedication unwavering, and their impact on the war,
immeasurable. Astoundingly, the participation of the Navajo people in
World War II was not a mere footnote; over one in ten Navajos answered
the call to serve--a testament to their indelible spirit and enduring
patriotism.
For more than two decades, the Code Talker program was shrouded in
secrecy, their vital role in the Allied victory hidden from public
accolades. Unbeknownst to many, the threads of Navajo valor continued
to be woven through the fabric of American military engagements, from
the bitter cold of Korea to the arid landscapes of the Middle East.
The legacy of military service within the Navajo Nation is not just
a chapter in history; it is a venerated tradition, a badge of honor
that reflects the unyielding courage, resourcefulness, and sacrifice
that define the Navajo people.
The commitment of Native Americans to the United States military
tapestry is not limited to the Navajo Nation. Native Americans have
enlisted to serve at the highest rate of any ethnic group,
demonstrating a profound dedication to the country. This tradition of
service stretches back to the earliest days of the nation, from the
Oneida warriors who fought alongside the Continental Army to the
Cherokee and Choctaw Code Talkers of World War I, who used their
languages to secure communications.
Remarkably, this level of service was provided at a time when
Native Americans were not yet fully recognized as American citizens.
Despite this, an estimated 15,000 Native Americans served in World War
I, accounting for nearly a quarter of the Native American adult male
population of the time. Their valor was undeniable, yet it took until
2008 for the United States to officially acknowledge and honor the
contributions of the Native Code Talkers from both World Wars.
In a profound expression of reverence for those who have served,
the Navajo Nation took a significant step in 2016. The 23rd Navajo
Nation Council, in a unanimous decision, enacted Legislation No. 0006-
16, establishing the Navajo Nation Veterans Administration (``NNVA'')
as an entity dedicated to the welfare of Navajo veterans. This historic
move, spearheaded by President Russell Begaye, was not simply
administrative; it was a declaration of the inherent value and dignity
of Navajo servicemen and women.
This commitment bore fruit on May 2, 2022, when the NNVA was
acknowledged by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs as the
first tribal organization to be entrusted with assisting Native
American veterans in navigating their benefits. This recognition is not
just an administrative success; it is a beacon of respect and
acknowledgment for the sacrifices and service of all Native American
veterans, who have shown time and again that their bravery and . . .
who have shown time and again that their bravery and loyalty know no
bounds.
The story of the Navajo warriors and Native American servicemen and
women is one of unheralded sacrifice, of silent valor that echoes
through the generations. It is a narrative that deserves its rightful
place in the forefront of our nation's consciousness, a narrative that
should be taught to our children as an integral piece of the American
tapestry. These warriors, from the deserts of Arizona to the forests of
the Northeast, have not only defended the United States but have also
enriched its character, strengthened its resolve, and honored the very
principles upon which it was founded.
The Navajo Nation, along with the greater Native American
community, has exemplified a commitment to service that transcends the
call of duty. Their contributions have been etched into the stone of
our nation's history, a permanent reminder of the price of freedom and
the enduring strength of the human spirit.
As we pay tribute to the Navajo Code Talkers and all Native
American veterans, let us not simply remember their deeds as acts of
the past. Instead, let them inspire us and guide us toward a future
where their dedication to community, country, and valor are the
standards to which we all aspire. The legacy of the Navajo Nation's
contribution to military service is not just a chapter in history; it
is a continuing journey of honor, resilience, and an unwavering
commitment to the ideals of liberty and justice for all.

Healthcare

Through programs like pensions for Revolutionary War veterans and
institutions like the Naval Asylum (1811) and the Soldiers' Home
(1851), America has always sought to reward veterans for their service
and sacrifice. From the first consolidation into the Veterans Bureau in
1921 to the Department of Veterans Affairs today, the VA has striven to
continue this mission of caring for those who have sacrificed for
America. Today, the VA operates over 1,600 healthcare facilities across
the Nation, and nearly 75 percent of service-connected American Indian/
Alaskan Native (''AI/AN'') veterans utilize VA healthcare.
Despite the rich history of service, Navajo veterans face
significant barriers in accessing the care and benefits afforded them
through their patriotism and sacrifices. The closest VA medical centers
are hundreds of miles away from the Navajo Nation, in Phoenix, Arizona,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Salt Lake City, Utah. Distance presents a
formidable obstacle, and our veterans are often forced to travel long
hours, at great personal expense, across remote areas and countless
miles to receive basic services such as routine exams. This burden is
compounded by social determinants that disproportionately affect our
community, such as high rates of poverty, unemployment, and limited
access to transportation, internet, and other necessities.
To put the distance into perspective, a Navajo veteran living in
Shiprock, NM, our largest community with over 8,000 residents, would
need to drive 214 miles, roughly 4 hours, one-way to reach the closest
full-service VA medical center, in Albuquerque, NM. A Navajo veteran
living in Kayenta, AZ with over 5,000 residents located in the
northwestern part of the Nation, would need to drive 291 miles, roughly
5 hours one-way, to reach the closest full-service VA medical center in
Phoenix, AZ. A Navajo veteran living in Montezuma Creek, our
northernmost community in Utah would have to drive a staggering 351
miles, roughly 6 hours without breaks to reach the VA Medical Center in
Salt Lake City. These are rural roads that can be unpassable in winter.
The distance between AI/AN veterans and centers is a significant
factor in their likelihood to delay care, as well as not getting
through the phone and not getting timely appointments. Additionally,
AI/AN veterans tend to be less likely to get dental care, prescription
medications, medical care and glasses than white veterans, despite
being more likely to need these services due to the difficulty for them
to get full services from the VA. The challenges of not having a full-
service VA medical center are exacerbated when veterans need specialty
care.
There are only three VA clinics on the Navajo Nation (Chinle, Tuba
City, and Kayenta) and their focus is on primary care, laboratories,
and less severe mental health issues. Considering that AI/AN veterans
who use VA mental health services tend to experience Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD) at a greater rate than all other veteran groups,
the fact that the three VA clinics on the Nation focus on less severe
mental health issues is a present concern. Another present concern is
that AI/AN veterans are diagnosed with chronic pain and diabetes at a
higher rate than any other veteran group, and that AI/AN veteran women
are two times more likely to experience pregnancy difficulties due to
hypertension or diabetes than white veteran women. None of the clinics
can provide specialty care such as cardiology, oncology, or osteology.
A veteran should not have to travel several hours each way to see a
specialist, especially when those medical conditions may have been the
price for their service to the United States.
Furthermore, in addition to the difficulty AI/AN veterans have
accessing vital health resources to get treatment for medical
conditions that might have stemmed from their time in the military,
they also share the same negative social determinants of health that
other AI/AN citizens have. For the Navajo, whether they are a veteran
or not, the average life expectancy is that of 72.3 years, 4.2 years
lower than the average U.S. life expectancy, and Navajo have a 31
percent higher mortality rate than the U.S. average. The leading cause
of death for the Navajo is unintentional injury, and the second one is
heart disease.
Another challenge is the cost of travel to the full-service
facilities. According to the Department of Veteran Affairs, AI/AN
veterans have the lowest personal incomes among veterans of other
races/ethnicities. The median income of an AI/AN veteran is $29,920,
over $10,000 less annually than white veterans. The median income of
Navajo veterans is in line with these disproportionate numbers at
$30,682. Considering that a Navajo veteran would likely need to stay at
a hotel given the 8-hour or more roundtrip drive to receive specialized
care and the high cost of gas, the commute to VA medical centers has a
disproportionate economic effect on Navajo veterans.
The current mileage reimbursement by the VA is $0.415 per mile
approved. The same veteran traveling from Shiprock, NM would travel 428
miles roundtrip and be reimbursed $177.62. With a current national
average gas price of $3.088 as of January 05, 2023, it would cost a
Navajo veteran $74.11 to fill up a 24-gallon tank, not to mention wear
and tear on their vehicle. Given the heavily agricultural economy of
the Nation along with the severe winter storms we experience, most
Navajo citizens drive larger vehicles which are not fuel efficient.
Lower income levels also translate into older vehicles and therefore
are even less fuel efficient and subject to more costly/frequent
maintenance. The cost of transportation in gas and maintenance can
easily exceed the mileage reimbursement.
Telehealth services, while beneficial, are not a cure-all for our
veterans. The digital divide is a stark reality for the Navajo Nation,
where many veterans lack adequate internet access, or the technology
needed to utilize telehealth effectively. This limitation is not just a
matter of convenience, but a barrier to essential healthcare, mental
health services, and benefits assistance.
According to the FCC, about 23 percent of households in the Nation
do not have access to download/upload internet speeds of at least 25/3
mega-bits per second (mbps). This is the minimum speed a single device
needs to have an adequate video call assuming no other devices are
connected at the same time. Only 3.54 percent of households in the
Navajo Nation have download/upload speeds of at least 100/200 mbps,
which is typical of a single to small household.
The VA's beneficiary travel program is critical, yet it does not
fully offset the high costs and logistical challenges associated with
long-distance travel to VA facilities. Furthermore, grant and per diem
rates for homeless veterans do not reflect the higher costs of living
in remote areas, which further disadvantages our veterans in need.
I am respectfully requesting Congress to consider appropriating
funds to build a full-service VA medical center ion the NavajoNation.
Having this center on the Nation would contribute greatly to providing
the quality of care our veterans deserve. It would also have a
tremendous and positive economic impact for the Nation. The medical
center would not just serve Navajo veterans, but much of rural Arizona,
New Mexico, and Utah. The tax dollars generated from gas, food, and
other items purchased within the Nation would be contributed to
providing more services to our Dine people. It would also help keep our
limited Navajo tax dollars in the Nation instead of going to our
surrounding states.
My recommendation on how to meet veterans where they are and
provide competent and quality care breaks down into five parts:

First, Congress should work with the Department of Veterans Affairs
to conduct a comprehensive needs analysis, incorporating key factors
such as population demographics, healthcare consumption trends, and the
incidence of specific health conditions among Navajo veterans. This
data-driven approach will provide an accurate understanding of
healthcare needs of Navajo veterans and pave the way for targeted
interventions.

Second, we should foster collaboration between Congress, the VA,
Navajo Nation leaders, and tribal health authorities. This will be
instrumental in gaining a nuanced understanding of the existing
healthcare infrastructure, identifying synergistic partnership
opportunities, and ensuring the proposed VA medical center aligns with
the cultural values and healthcare expectations of Navajo veterans.

Third, we should commit resources for infrastructure development by
allocating sufficient funds and resources for constructing and
operationalizing the VA medical center. It is imperative to ensure that
the center is appropriately staffed with healthcare professionals who
are adept at managing the unique healthcare needs of Navajo veterans.

Fourth, we should integrate telehealth services by incorporating
and expanding telehealth services to provide remote healthcare access,
especially for those veterans residing in distant areas where travel to
a VA medical center is difficult. This digital platform can enhance
healthcare accessibility while reducing travel-related barriers.

Fifth and finally, we should adopt a culturally competent care
model. The healthcare services at the VA medical center should be
culturally competent, integrating traditional healing practices and
respecting the cultural and linguistic diversity of the Navajo Nation.
Such an approach will foster a sense of belonging and trust among
Navajo veterans, thereby encouraging them to seek and adhere to
necessary healthcare services.

Other Services

Another challenge our Navajo veterans face is inadequate access to
information regarding their benefits and entitlements. In 2017, less
than half of AI/AN veterans used at least one VA benefit or service.
The Navajo Nation Veterans Administration is proposing the
construction of a regional Veterans Administration Center / Veterans
Benefits Administration Center, a one-of-a-kind community-based
outreach center of sorts, that is available to all veterans but focuses
services on Native American veterans. The purpose of this facility is
to provide much needed services in a geographical area that are not
currently being delivered by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
This facility would serve as a hub for a variety of services that
include non-emergency / non-urgent care services typically found
outside of a Veteran Affairs Medical Center (``VAMC''), such as
physical or occupational therapy, mental health services, vocational
training and education, temporary / transitional housing, and
transportation services, as well as serving as an administrative
facility for Navajo Nation, state, and federal VA staff to administer
program services.
The Navajo Nation has already chosen a location for this facility
and taken the legal step of ``withdrawing'' the land so that it is
preserved for this facility. It is situated on New Mexico's Highway
264, less than two miles from the Arizona state line, and adjacent to
the Navajo Nation capital in Window Rock, Arizona. It is located
adjacent to the future Navajo Code Talkers Museum site. This site has
easy access to public roads with heavy traffic, as well as existing
power, water, and sewage. It has been determined through surveys that
the site is appropriate for the construction of a project of this
magnitude. This facility is also consistent with the master plan for
this area's development, which will boost the Navajo Nation's economic
development efforts. Congress must provide adequate funding for
facility construction.
The Navajo Nation also has a very high portion of senior citizen
veterans. Over 46 percent of veterans living on the Nation are aged 65
or older. Many of these veterans need quality nursing home care and are
severely underserved. There are no VA recognized nursing homes on the
Nation, or within a reasonable commute. Our veterans living in the Utah
portion of the Nation again have the longest distance with the closest
VA contracted nursing home being 327 miles away from Montezuma Creek.
The distance makes it difficult for families to visit their loved ones
in their retirement and final years. I respectfully ask Congress to
work with both the Navajo Veterans Affairs Administration and the US
Department of Veteran Affairs to get our nursing homes VA contracted.

Conclusion

The lack of adequate VA care on the Navajo Nation dishonors the
contributions the Navajo people have made to the defense of this
country. Our veterans have earned the right to accessible, quality care
and benefits through their service and sacrifice.
I urge this Committee and Congress to take decisive action to
address these critical issues faced by Navajo veterans. We need
increased funding aimed specifically at improving infrastructure and
services in rural and highly rural areas, tailored to the unique
challenges of these regions. We must bridge the digital divide to
ensure telehealth is a viable option for all veterans. It is essential
to adjust grant and per diem rates to reflect the true cost of living
in remote areas, and to expand the beneficiary travel program to
alleviate the significant financial burden on our veterans.
Our Navajo veterans have honored their commitments to our country.
It is time that we honor our commitments to them. Thank you for your
time and consideration.
Ahehee' (Thank you).
______

Prepared Statement of Jon Lovald

Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and Committee Members, my
name is Jon Lovald and I'm the Chief Operations Officer for the
Minnesota Assistance Council for Veterans--MACV. We are a 501c3
statewide nonprofit with the mission to end veteran homelessness in
Minnesota. I began with MACV in May 2017. Before my time at MACV, I
served in the Army and Minnesota National Guard for 25 years, retiring
as a Lieutenant Colonel. I am beyond honored to be a part of MACV and
our mission, working to incorporate housing for all Minnesota veterans
with wrap-around services for stability.
MACV has served veterans and families experiencing or facing
homelessness since 1990. We do so with a wide-reaching, comprehensive
network of over 100 staff, as well as community partners throughout the
state. The experience, professionalism and compassion our team shows
the veterans we serve speaks to a devotion to mission. MACV's services
include housing stability case management, landlord engagement,
employment, healthcare navigation, legal services, permanent and
transitional housing, financial management and representative payee
services launched through the VA's Money Management Intervention pilot.
MACV operates statewide through offices in the Twin Cities, Duluth,
Saint Cloud, Moorhead, Mankato, Bemidji, and Rochester. The key to
success in all our programs is the combination of individualized
services each client receives with MACV's singular goal for all
veterans to achieve or maintain housing stability.
MACV is proud to receive more than $7 million in federal grants
each year. Our awards include grants through the U.S. Veterans
Administration (Supportive Services for Veteran Families--SSVF, Grant &
Per Deim transitional and case management grants - GPD, and Legal
Services for Veterans - LSV), the U.S. Department of Labor (Urban and
Non-Urban Homeless Veteran Reintegration Program - HVRP), and the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (four rural Continuum of
Care grants). These federal grants make up the single largest source of
funding for MACV and our mission.
MACV operates 225 beds of transitional and permanent supportive
housing scattered across the state. These units, including 52 in
Greater Minnesota, have gradually come online through a combination of
federal, state, and philanthropic partnerships. This year, we plan to
open at least 11 new housing units in the Twin Cities metro, and an
additional 8 in Greater Minnesota. We are excited to offer supportive
housing in the Rochester area for the first time in the coming months,
providing much-needed options in one of Minnesota's hardest-hit regions
for lack of affordable housing.
Our staff has witnessed a significant uptick in veterans needing
assistance since the end of the COVID-19 pandemic. In many rural
communities, the scarcity of local support makes MACV's outreach and
engagement activities even more crucial. Strategic outreach provides
rural communities with a wide array of resources that empower veterans
to stay ahead of crises and remain in their communities. We leverage a
variety of federal, state, and philanthropic resources to address the
needs of veterans affected by homelessness.
We are proud to count our partners within the VA, DOL, and HUD
among our strongest allies in the fight to end veteran homelessness in
Minnesota, including our rural communities. The funds appropriated to
MACV by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs are especially
important to our mission's success. In 2023, MACV enrolled 937 veterans
in comprehensive services in Greater Minnesota to end or prevent an
episode of homelessness. This figure represents a 22 percent increase
in the number of rural veterans served in 2021. Of those 937
individuals:

66 percent have a documented disability, including 52
percent with a service-related disability.

47 percent are 55 years of age or older

19 percent have minor children

18 percent identify as Veterans of Color

12 percent were female veterans

62 percent had household income below 50 percent Area
Median Income

43 percent were below 30 percent Area Median Income

107 veterans were placed into employment

Minnesota is determined to become the fourth state in the union to
achieve Functional Zero for veteran homelessness statewide by the end
of 2025. The United States Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH)
has already qualified MACV and our network of statewide partners as
functionally ending veteran homelessness in eight of Minnesota's 10
homeless Continuums of Care (CoC) regions, including its seven rural
CoCs. While this declaration does not mean there are no veterans
experiencing homelessness within these geographies, it does mean that
each region has the systems and partnerships in place to ensure that
veteran homelessness is rare, brief, and non-recurring.
MACV utilizes numerous tools in pursuit of achieving our mission.
Resources including Minnesota's Homeless Veteran Registry (HVR) provide
a real-time snapshot of veterans experiencing homelessness anywhere in
the state. The HVR allows us to keep count of those experiencing
homelessness, their most recent location, the amount of time spent in
homelessness, as well as other key pieces of information. As of January
5, 2024, there are 262 veterans on the HVR, including 46 veterans in
rural CoCs. Program staff for the HVR partner agencies of MACV, the
Minnesota Department of Veterans Affairs, and the VA homeless program
teams throughout the state, discuss each veteran on the list at bi-
weekly meetings. Regular case conferencing allows for the organizations
best situated to serve homeless veterans to identify their needs and
barriers, as well as ensure that plans for housing stability are in
place and being followed. The need for this service coordination is
especially high in rural areas, where resources are geographically
spread out.
While each veteran experiencing homelessness has their own unique
set of challenges and goals on the path to housing stability, there are
also noted barriers that the rural veteran consistently faces. Some of
the barriers include:

Lack of affordable rental housing.

Struggling to find jobs that pay a livable wage.

Limited to no public transportation options.

Scarcity of supportive services.

Many communities with no emergency shelter.

The lack of affordable rental housing in rural areas has become
increasingly acute as climbing rents consistently outpace income in
recent years. Once-affordable housing has become much more competitive,
while the criteria for selecting rental tenants have grown narrower. In
addition to having low income, many veterans on the by-name list have
other barriers such as poor credit, a history of prior evictions, a
need for handicapped-accessible units, or past justice involvement.
These barriers lead to many veterans unable to access housing in their
communities even if they can locate an affordable unit. In larger rural
population hubs, such as Duluth, Rochester, and Mankato, significant
student populations and specialized workforces such as professional
staff for the Mayo Clinic in Rochester further reduce the number of
affordable housing units available to MACV-served veterans.
The challenge experienced by veterans in finding living wage
employment closely ties to a lack of public transportation in rural
communities. One MACV-served veteran walked 30 miles per day to make it
to work until the season changed and that was no longer an option.
Veterans without reliable transportation are relegated to finding jobs
within walking distance from where they are staying or moving to larger
population hubs to find work or job training. As nearly half of the
veterans MACV serves in rural communities are over 55, finding living
wage employment that is not physically demanding is an even greater
challenge in rural areas without diverse industries. To have
transportation, many veterans take on the added expense of a vehicle.
These vehicles are often unreliable based on what the veteran can
afford. This creates additional burdens of repairs, insurance, and fuel
that veterans in urban centers can avoid by relying on public
transportation. High vehicle costs make it even more challenging to
afford housing, leading to difficult choices of paying for housing or
for their vehicle to maintain work. Far too often, the vehicles become
housing themselves.
Many nonprofits, healthcare, chemical health, and mental health
services are located in urban centers. The inequity in service
availability to obtain and then sustain housing stability is a
challenge for rural veterans experiencing homelessness. These services
help to navigate a complex web of benefits and resources and require a
hands-on approach. With many veterans experiencing housing instability
in rural areas having inconsistent access or proficiency with
technology, make person-to-person connections more critical, and the
shortage of providers more destabilizing.
In addition to the challenges of obtaining support for long-term
stability, most of rural Minnesota does not have emergency shelters
available for homeless community members. As a result, veterans without
a place to stay must either leave their home communities to find a warm
place to sleep, or survive in the Minnesota winters by sleeping in
tents, in trailers with no heat or water, in vehicles, or fish houses.
With a lack of shelter in the winter, if a friend or family member of a
veteran lets them stay, the veteran may then lose eligibility for
homeless designated housing programs and services, putting them back at
square one once they are no longer able to temporarily double up.
Federal programs that benefit veterans experiencing homelessness
are an incredible resource. However, many are not available to veteran
households in rural areas. HUD-VASH, which provides a Section 8 voucher
coupled with VA clinical case management, does not provide vouchers to
many Minnesota rural geographies based on distance to VA supportive
services. Where HUD-VASH can provide services, vouchers are scarcer
than in urban centers. Local VA Medical Centers in Minnesota have done
great work in expanding their geography to cover more communities
outside of metropolitan hubs, there remains significant geography
outside of the catchment for this resource. Of the 276 rural veterans
on the Homeless Veteran Registry throughout 2023, over 80 percent were
eligible for HUD-VASH, while only 11 percent received a voucher. In
addition, VA Community Based Outreach Clinics (CBOCs) and DOL funded
veteran services at American Job Centers, which are often in rural
population centers, are miles from many of our most rural Minnesota
veterans.
While not all federal resources are available in each rural
community, as the only VA Supportive Services for Veteran Families
grantee in our state, MACV is pleased with the efforts of the VA to
ensure that each county in the nation is served by SSVF. Telehealth has
also become a great resource for many veterans that we serve by
assisting eligible individuals with access to key healthcare resources.
While this has been a fantastic expansion of federal support, it is a
challenge for the rural veteran experiencing homelessness to use. Many
veterans with low incomes have limited or no access to reliable
technology like cell phones, or access to laptops. Many veterans simply
do not feel comfortable or knowledgeable enough to utilize telehealth,
another perennial challenge to an otherwise helpful initiative on the
part of the VA.
Specific initiatives undertaken by individual VA facilities have
also improved client outcomes across Minnesota in recent years. MACV
supports Fargo VA's process of opening a Community Resource and
Referral Center. This center focuses on serving homeless veterans,
particularly rural veterans in the Fargo/Moorhead community, and is an
asset to the State. The Minneapolis VAHCS has recognized the dearth of
VA presence in many of Minnesota's rural regions and expanded its HUD-
VASH catchment to serve more veterans than the standard 30-mile radius
around the VA campus. The Minneapolis VA has elected to include 10
public housing authorities in rural Minnesota and Wisconsin, in
addition to its standard HUD-VASH catchment area. We are lucky to have
such amazing partnerships with our local VA partners on the ground
throughout the State. We hold these partnerships up to anyone in the
country.
Minnesota is fortunate to have a State Department of Veterans
Affairs with a shared mission of ending veteran homelessness through
innovative practices and initiatives. Addressing the lack of affordable
housing in Minnesota, the State has granted funds for housing
development for veterans on the Homeless Veteran Registry with the most
significant barriers to accessing housing. MACV has used this
investment to strategically develop housing in Greater Minnesota. The
State has also granted funds to MACV to develop a statewide housing
subsidy program with clinical case management, similar to HUD-VASH,
specifically targeting veterans who cannot enroll in HUD-VASH. One of
the largest beneficiary groups for the subsidy, titled MNVEST, is the
veteran population in rural communities that simply do not offer HUD-
VASH as a subsidy program. The State has also worked to fill the gap in
rural emergency shelters through the administration of a reimbursable
hotel shelter program. The State also funds County and Tribal Veteran
Service Officers for each county and tribal nation. We know how lucky
we are that the State has stepped up to help fill gaps for resources
that are not available federally.
MACV regularly reaches beyond Minnesota's traditional veteran
service agencies in the course of our work. Some of our strongest local
allies include County or Tribal Veteran Service Officers, who are
county employees working to connect veterans to the benefits and groups
which can change the trajectory of their lives. County and Tribal VSOs
can assist with the MACV intake process and gather documents and
signatures to speed up the time from initial contact to housing
solutions. MACV has forged relationships with local American Legion and
VFW posts throughout the State. Local chapters of Disabled American
Veterans provided more than 7,500 free rides covering 373,000 miles to
rural veterans who lack transportation options for important medical
appointments in 2023. Leveraging local groups who know the veterans in
their community is a key component of our rural outreach strategy that
has allowed us to achieve the benchmarks of functional zero in 85 of 87
Minnesota counties. MACV has partnered with thousands of veterans and
their families in accessing the resources these individuals earned
through service to our country. We understand the many strengths that
rural communities have when it comes to taking care of local veterans.
While MACV has offices in rural population centers, we intentionally
build strong partnerships with those closest to the veterans living
everywhere in Minnesota.
Federal resources, when implemented locally by the people who best
know their community, are key components of Minnesota's progress in
ending veteran homelessness. When we equip veterans with tools and
support for their success, the resilience of this group is proven to be
remarkable. The VA and their federal USICH partners have taken the
initiative to lead this effort using proven methods that lift veterans
and their loved ones out of homelessness and into the safety and
dignity of housing suited to every veteran's needs. Expanding the
availability of HUD-VASH, responsively addressing rural transportation
barriers for veterans, providing access to technology, and other
supportive services targeting rural veterans are simply essential to
preserve the progress Minnesota has made in our smaller communities.
The VA's temporary expansions for addressing the need for rideshares
and cell phone provision made remarkable impacts on the well-being of
rural veterans across our state. We hope to see these initiatives
reimplemented in the future because they simply work.
Thousands of veterans MACV and our VA partners serve each year have
unique stories. One veteran, whom we'll call Ryan, served our country
for four years in the U.S. Coast Guard before receiving an honorable
discharge. He contacted MACV after he lost his wife. Struggling to care
for himself while grieving, Ryan was hospitalized and had a partial
amputation of his foot. When he was discharged, Ryan was several months
behind on rent and about to lose his housing. MACV provided emergency
financial assistance to get Ryan back in the black. After a family
member living with Ryan was arrested, Ryan was evicted from his home.
The lack of reliable transportation and communication put him out of
contact with his care team for significant amounts of time. This stint
of homelessness ended with Ryan being hospitalized for three months
with a life-threatening infection. Following discharge from the
hospital, Ryan was placed in a hotel room for emergency shelter while
securing more sustainable supportive housing. Today, Ryan resides in a
supportive housing unit secured by his MACV team and focuses his time
and energy on applying for the benefits and programs that will improve
his long-term stability. The story is one with challenges, but the
outcome of Ryan living in his own apartment and having his life back as
a member of the community is the result that MACV strives to give every
single veteran affected by homelessness in Minnesota.
MACV has a vision for every veteran we serve to have a way to
afford housing, access housing, and have the services and support
needed to sustain long-term stability. We could not do this critical
work without the support of our federal partners, VA, HUD, DOL, USICH,
and Congress. Thank you for your past support of the key federal
programs targeting veterans of the U.S. military, and consideration of
future initiatives toward achieving our mission to end veteran
homelessness in Minnesota and in the United States.
______

Prepared Statement of Mark Holmes

Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the Committee:
My name is Mark Holmes. I am the Director of The Cecil G. Sheps
Center for Health Services Research and North Carolina Rural Health
Research Center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. I
am also a professor in the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health.
I have been a rural health researcher for 25 years; my expertise is in
hospital finance and health policy, especially federal public insurance
payment policy. Growing up in Michigan's rural Thumb, I witnessed
firsthand some of the health challenges facing our rural communities.
The Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research is one of
the nation's leading institutions for health services research. Our
interdisciplinary researchers undertake innovative research and program
evaluation to understand health care access, costs, delivery, outcomes,
equity, and value. The Sheps Center has a long-standing reputation for
conducting high-quality, objective research that informs science,
practice, and policy. The Center's Program on Rural Health Research is
one of many Sheps Center programs generating the evidence to inform
policy makers about the challenges and opportunities in ensuring access
to health care services. For today's hearing, I will speak primarily
about challenges facing the non-VHA rural health care system. Rural
veterans may qualify to access community (``non-VHA'') providers, so
it's important to recognize the fragility of the rural health care
system as part of their care. I am unable to cover all the salient
issues in rural health today, so I will focus my comments on three main
points relevant to today's topic:

1. Rural health care infrastructure continues to erode, and
this threatens the health and well-being of the 60 million
Americans - including the 4 million veterans--who live in rural
areas.

2. Congress can improve the health of rural communities by
addressing some specific policy issues in rural health
workforce.

3. The common narrative of rural places having sicker, poorer,
and older populations is mostly accurate, but is too
fatalistic--many rural communities have also shown remarkable
ability to use their strength to overcome challenge.

Threats to a Robust Rural Health Care System

Since 2005, nearly 200 rural communities have seen their hospital
close, or close its inpatient service.\1\ Although roughly half of
these hospitals have continued to provide some kind of health care to
their community, the remainder have not; they've become condominiums, a
car wash, or more often completely abandoned. In addition to providing
health care, we also know how important hospitals are to rural
economies. Recent research has shown that hospital closures can lead to
decreases in the size of the labor force and the population living in
the community.\2\ Those hospitals that do survive have steadily gotten
smaller. Rural hospitals have cut services like maternity care and home
health services,\3\ and inpatient care in rural hospitals has fallen by
13 to 20 percent in the last decade,\4\ with most of this decrease
driven by rural residents being increasingly likely to receive
inpatient care at urban hospitals (bypassing local care).\5\ Access to
specialty care is also affected. Approximately 20 percent of Americans
live more than 60 minutes from a medical oncologist,\6\ and the
financial burden of increased travel time reduces the use of life-
saving treatments and, paradoxically, increases the cost of care;
geographic barriers to care actually lead to higher costs in the long
run.\7\ Rural residents who drive an hour a day - each way - for five
weeks in a row to get their radiation treatment are facing fatigue of
long car travel while fighting cancer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Rural Hospital Closures. The Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health
Services Research, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. https:/
/www.shepscenter.unc.edu/programs-projects/rural-health/rural-hospital-
closures/
\2\ Malone, TL, Planey, AM, Bozovich, LB, Thompson, KW, Holmes, GM.
The economic effects of rural hospital closures. Health Serv Res. 2022;
57( 3): 614-623. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.13965
\3\ Knocke K, Pink G, Thompson K, Randolph R, Holmes M. Changes in
Provision of Selected Services by Rural and Urban Hospitals between
2009 and 2017. NC Rural Health Research Program, UNC Sheps Center.
April 2021. FB 174.
\4\ Malone, T.L., Pink, G.H. and Holmes, G.M. (2021), Decline in
Inpatient Volume at Rural Hospitals. The Journal of Rural Health, 37:
347-352. https://doi.org/10.1111/jrh.12553
\5\ Fiedman HR, Holmes GM. Rural Medicare beneficiaries are
increasingly likely to be admitted to urban hospitals. Health Serv Res.
2022 Oct;57(5):1029-1034. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.14017.
\6\ Levit LA, Byatt L, Lyss AP, Paskett ED, Levit K, Kirkwood K,
Schenkel C, Schilsky RL. Closing the Rural Cancer Care Gap: Three
Institutional Approaches. JCO Oncol Pract. 2020 Jul;16(7):422-430.
https://doi.org/10.1200/OP.20.00174.
\7\ Rocque GB, Williams CP, Miller HD, Azuero A, Wheeler SB, Pisu
M, Hull O, Rocconi RP, Kenzik KM. Impact of Travel Time on Health Care
Costs and Resource Use by Phase of Care for Older Patients With Cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2019 Aug 1;37(22):1935-1945. https://doi.org/10.1200/
JCO.19.00175.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This diminishing access has led to increasing rural-urban
disparities in health outcomes. In 1999, the death rate in the most
rural counties was 6 percent higher than it was in large urban
counties; in 2019, it was 28 percent higher.\8\ Meanwhile, research led
by experts at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
found that communities where a rural hospital closed saw an increase in
preventable admissions.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Analysis of United States Department of Health and Human
Services (US DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), Multiple Cause of Death
1999-2020 on CDC WONDER Online Data base, released 2021. Data are
compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions
through the Vital Statistics Cooperative Program.
\9\ Khushalani JS, Holmes M, Song S, Arifhanova A, Randolph R,
Thomas S, Hall DM. Impact of rural hospital closures on
hospitalizations and associated outcomes for ambulatory and emergency
care sensitive conditions. J Rural Health. 2022 May 5. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jrh.12671.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hospitals have had weak and declining finances for years. In 2018,
roughly half of rural hospitals were unprofitable, and financial
distress is one of the leading causes of rural hospital closure. As
hospitals close, residents face a decrease in access to health care.
Facing this decline in access, Congress, the Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission and others have often proposed new models of care that focus
on a hospital's emergency department services. The Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2021 created a new type of health care provider--
the Rural Emergency Hospital (REH). This model has some appealing
elements, and at this time 18 rural hospitals have officially converted
to REHs, but interest has been more modest due to some program design
elements that can only be addressed legislatively. I applaud Congress
for acting innovatively to address rural health needs. Continued
monitoring of this provider type will be necessary to ensure it is
meeting the needs Congress intended.
While REHs try to take root, the growth of hospital systems and
consolidation continues to raise questions. Increasingly, rural
hospitals are becoming part of a larger health care systems, and this
can lead to further service erosion. Work by researchers out of the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality has found that rural
hospitals that merge are more likely to close their obstetric and
surgical units.\10\ Given that one study concluded female veterans may
be more dependent on non-VHA providers to receive certain gender-
specific services, like obstetric and gynecologic care,\11\ the erosion
of these services in rural communities is especially notable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Henke RM, Fingar KR, Jiang J, Liang L. and Gibson TB. Access
To Obstetric, Behavioral Health, And Surgical Inpatient Services Ager
Hospital Mergers In Rural Areas. Health Affairs 2021 40:10, 1627-1636
\11\ Marshall V, Stryczek KC, Haverhals L, Young J, Au DH, Ho PM,
Kaboli PJ, Kirsh S, Sayre G, The Focus They Deserve: Improving Women
Veterans' Health Care Access, Women's Health Issues 2021, 31(4): 399-
407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.whi.2020.12.011

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rural Areas are Facing Acute Health Workforce Shortages

Rural places have faced persistent workforce shortages. Over the
past 20 years, it has become even more difficult to recruit, retain,
and sustain rural health care workers ranging from doctors to nurses to
emergency medical service (EMS) personnel in rural areas.\12\ Without
an adequate health workforce, it is becoming more difficult for
individuals in rural areas to access health care.\13\ Many proposed
policy solutions to address these workforce challenges focus on one
profession, for example nurses, or one stage of the career, such as
graduate medical education. To shore up and grow the rural health
workforce, it is critical that we look to solutions that aren't siloed
in this fashion and support health care workers across their entire
career trajectory.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Rural Health Research Gateway. Trends in Health Workforce
Supply in the Rural. U.S. https://www.ruralhealthresearch.org/projects/
926
\13\ Strengthening the Rural Health Workforce to Improve Health
Outcomes in Rural Communities Council on Graduate Medical Education
24th Report. 2022. https://www.hrsa.gov/sites/default/files/hrsa/
advisory-committees/graduate-medical-edu/reports/cogme-april-2022-
report.pdf
\14\ Fraher E, Brandt B. Toward a system where workforce planning
and interprofessional practice and education are designed around
patients and populations not professions. J Interprof Care. 2019 Jul-
Aug;33(4):389-397. https://doi.org/10.1080/13561820.2018.1564252.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evidence-based investments that increase the number of health
professionals training in rural areas, increase the number of
preceptors and faculty, provide support to early career health care
workers, and focus on retaining mid to late career health care
professionals can be further scaled. Health professionals that train in
rural areas are five times as likely to remain in practice in rural
areas.\15\ By growing the number of rural training opportunities and
then ensuring that resources are available to retain that workforce
across their careers, we can ensure that the workforce needed to
support rural areas is there for decades to come.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Russell DJ, Wilkinson E, Petterson S, Chen C, Bazemore A.
Family Medicine Residencies: How Rural Training Exposure in GME Is
Associated With Subsequent Rural Practice. J Grad Med Educ 1 August
2022; 14 (4): 441-450. https://doi.org/10.4300/JGME-D-21-01143.1
\16\ Kumar S, Clancy B. Retention of physicians and surgeons in
rural areas--what works?, Journal of Public Health December 2021,
43(4), 689-700, https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdaa031
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Decades of research have taught us that one of the most effective
ways to boost health workforce in rural and underserved areas is to
train them in rural and underserved areas.\17\ Efforts to expand
physician training have paid great dividends; for example, during the
five-years of the Rural Residency Planning and Development program,
there have been more new rural residency slots (463) than were
established during the prior decade (418). Meanwhile, the VHA has
increased the number of residency slots by 1,500, with many rural VHA
facilities receiving priority for additional slots.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ E.g. Holmes G.M. Increasing physician supply in medically
underserved areas. Labour Economics. Volume 12, Issue 5, 2005, Pages
697-725, ISSN 0927-5371, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2004.02.003.
\18\ Klink KA, Albanese AP, Bope ET, Sanders KM. Veterans Affairs
Graduate Medical Education Expansion Addresses U.S. Physician Workforce
Needs. Acad Med. 2022 Aug 1;97(8):1144-1150. https://doi.org/10.1097/
ACM.0000000000004545.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress has enacted legislation to address rural physician
shortages via training. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021
included provisions that expand rural resident training opportunities.
Section 126, for example, increased the number of physician residency
slots, to be phased in over several years. To qualify, training
programs must meet one of four criteria, including being located - or
being treated as being located - in a rural area. Legal decisions have
led to a rapid increase in the number of urban hospitals that
reclassify as rural; this means that, under current legislation, they
are treated as rural hospitals in all respects, including eligibility
for residency slots. Despite a ten-percent floor on the number of
expanded residency slots allocated to rural hospitals, only five
percent of slots were allocated to hospitals located in rural areas;
another 42 percent were allocated to urban hospitals that have been
reclassified as rural.\19\ This may not have been Congress's intention.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Rains J, Holmes GM, Pathak S, Hawes EM. The Distribution of
Additional Residency Slots to Rural and Underserved Areas. JAMA.
2023;330(10):968-969. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.14452
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Behavioral health is a particularly important health care service
for our veterans. Veterans experience certain conditions - notably,
traumatic brain injury and substance use disorders - more often than
their civilian counterparts.\20\ Although behavioral health remains a
crisis across the country, compared to urban residents, residents
living in rural areas receive less care, from providers with less
specialized training, and the care they received is less likely to be
innovative.\21\ This creates a particularly acute challenge for rural
veterans - there are fewer health care providers to treat and manage
their more prevalent behavioral health needs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Olenick M, Flowers M, Diaz VJ. US veterans and their unique
issues: enhancing health care professional awareness. Adv Med Educ
Pract. 2015 Dec 1;6:635-9. https://doi.org/10.2147/AMEP.S89479.
\21\ Morales DA, Barksdale CL, Beckel-Mitchener AC. A call to
action to address rural mental health disparities. J Clin Transl Sci.
2020 May 4;4(5):463-467. https://doi.org/10.1017/cts.2020.42.

Rural Can Innovate and Lead When Policies Are Rural-Appropriate and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Supportive

We commonly hear about rural America being sicker, poorer, and
older. It is also relatively well-known rural residents are less likely
to have health insurance,\22\ more likely to travel farther for health
care,\23\ and more likely to have chronic diseases. The CDC found that
rural residents are more likely to die of the five leading preventable
causes of death.\24\ These are accurate descriptions of a population
that provides much of America's food, fun, and fuel. Although accurate,
I often worry that it suggests government is powerless to improve rural
health. Historically, when Congress and policymakers have developed
policy to address rural needs, it has led to dramatic improvements in
conditions for relatively small expenditures. In the early 1990's,
rural hospitals were closing at a dramatic pace, and Congress
introduced the Critical Access Hospital program in 1996. That program
has stabilized the rural health care system for over 1,300 rural
communities. Although roughly one quarter of acute care hospitals are
CAHs, the program only accounts for five percent of total hospital
outlays by Medicare.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Turrini G, Branham DK, Chen L, Conmy AB, Chappel AR, and De
Lew N. Access to Affordable Care in Rural America: Current Trends and
Key Challenges (Research Report No. HP-2021-16). Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. July 2021.
\23\ Ostmo P Rosencrans J. Travel Burden to Receive Health Care.
Rural Health Research Gateway. 2022. https://
www.ruralhealthresearch.org/assets/4993-22421/travel-burden-recap.pdf.
\24\ National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion. Rural Health: Preventing Chronic Diseases and Promoting
Health in Rural Communities. https://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/
resources/publications/factsheets/rural-health.htm
\25\ Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Critical Access
Hospitals Payment System. https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/
2021/11/medpac_payment_basics_21_cah_final_sec.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Perhaps because of the more limited resources in rural communities,
there are many examples where rural health care innovation has led the
way. Telehealth, community health workers, expanded scope of practice
and task shifting, drones, new payment models, and leveraging strong
trust in community leaders (faith leaders, agriculture, other community
organizations) are all examples where lessons from rural innovation has
helped fuel transformation throughout the health care system. One word
of caution, however; the pandemic saw dramatic increases in the use of
telehealth, which seems particularly well-suited to the challenges
described today. Telehealth-based solutions may be one promising
strategy, but will not be effective for all veterans; roughly one
quarter of rural veterans do not have internet in their home.

Conclusion and Future Directions

Although rural residents - and those who visit rural communities -
face real barriers to achieving their full health potential, there are
policy strategies that Congress can consider to mitigate some of the
barriers. History has shown that thoughtful legislation designed to
address rural-specific challenges and leverage the assets of rural
America has been successful in improving the lives of the 60 million
who live in our rural communities. It is important to continue to
recognize that rural health care systems are different, and not simply
``small versions of urban'' and can yield similar outcomes, when given
the opportunity.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Rural-Urban
Disparities in Health Care in Medicare. November 2020. https://
www.cms.gov/files/document/omh-rural-urban-report-2020.pdf

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of American Association of Nurse Anesthesiology
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of American Nurses Association

The American Nurses Association (ANA) applauds the House Veterans'
Affairs Committee for holding this oversight hearing on ``Rural Access:
Is VA Meeting All Veterans Where They Live.'' As a leading voice of the
nursing profession, ANA is committed to working with the U.S. House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the U.S. Department of Veterans'
Affairs (VA) to ensure that our nation's veterans and their families
have timely access to highly qualified healthcare professionals,
especially in rural and underserved communities. With this mission in
mind and given how nurses provide care for VA patients on a national
basis, ANA would like to respectfully share its perspective on how the
VA can better serve our veterans through the issuance of national
standards of practice (NSPs) for certified registered nurse
anesthetists (CRNAs).

Development of National Standards of Practice

The VA has been developing NSPs for various non-physician health
care professionals employed at VA facilities nationwide. These
standards aim to improve patients' access to care by ensuring that the
delivery of healthcare by medical professionals covered by these
standards are uniform throughout the VA system, regardless of what is
permitted by state licensure laws. According to the VA, the development
of these standards would allow the VA to ``Ensure safe, high-quality
care for the Nation's Veterans. Standardize the practice of each health
care occupation irrespective of State requirements. More Efficiently
Allocate resources to support organizational missions to include
national disasters and pandemics. (...) Leverage a modernized, mobile
workforce to support rural areas and crisis response.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``VA National Standards of Practice,'' The Department of
Veterans Affairs, 2023. http://www.va.gov/STANDARDSOFPRACTICE/index.asp
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The VA announced their NSPs for advanced practice registered nurses
(APRNs) in December 2016 and extended full practice authority (FPA) to
three of four APRN roles. While we are pleased that nurse practitioners
(NPs), clinical nurse specialists (CNSs), and certified nurse midwives
(CNMs) were granted FPA, this rule excluded CRNAs.\2\ This decision was
made despite a body of evidence in support of granting FPA to CRNAs
that was incorporated into the rule and its supporting documents. In
fact, the VA's own Supplementary Information provided with the Rule
rebuffed arguments against FPA for CRNAs and agreed with comments
supporting CRNA full practice. CRNAs were not granted full FPA due to
vocal opposition from the physician community, which sent 100,000
comments opposing FPA to the VA. The VA, in the final rule,
acknowledged that these comments were not substantive and agreed that
granting FPA to CRNAs in the VA system would not eliminate the team-
based care approach to the delivery of health care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Advanced Practice Registered Nurses, Final Rule'' The
Department of Veterans Affairs, 2016. https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2016/12/14/2016-29950/advanced-practice-registered-nurses

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anesthesiologist Shortage

Anesthesiologists, and their allies, oppose FPA for CRNAs on the
ground that there is no shortage of anesthesiologists practicing at the
VA, which contradicts existing evidence. The American Medical
Association has stated that there is a general physician shortage that
is expected to worsen.\3\ While this shortage is for physicians in
general, there is a shortage of anesthesiologists as well. In fact, a
March 2018 report on the critical deficiencies at the Washington, DC.
VA Medical Center showed that procedures are being delayed or canceled
due to a lack of anesthesia staff.\4\ Furthermore, there have been
reports that the VA is having trouble recruiting anesthesiologists.
Specifically, 25 percent of VA facility chiefs of staff are having
issues recruiting or hiring anesthesiologists. These are some examples
of how our Nation's veterans are not receiving timely access to trained
medical professionals. By allowing CRNAs to practice to the top of
their education and training at VA facilities, the department can
alleviate the healthcare professional shortage and greatly improve the
care that our veterans and their families are receiving.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``The physician shortage crisis is here - and so are bipartisan
fixes'' American Medical Association http://www.ama-assn.org/practice-
management/sustainability/physician-shortage-crisis-here-and-so-are-
bipartisan-fixes, November 6, 2023
\4\ ``Critical Deficiencies at the Washington DC VA Medical
Center,'' (Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of the Inspector
General, 2018 http://www.oversight.gov/sites/default/files/oig-reports/
VAOIG-17-02644-130.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the VA commissioned a study published by the Temple
University Beasley School of Law in 2022 that concluded that policy
decisions on CRNA standards should be guided by currently available
data. The data provided in the study shows that removing restrictions
on CRNAs would have no negative impact on patients and may also be a
cost-effective solution to physician shortages and increasing access to
care.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  ``Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist Scope of Practice
Laws,'' (DeAnna Baumle, JD, MSW,2022).  http://www.va.gov/
STANDARDSOFPRACTICE/docs/CRNA_PolicyBrief_Temple.pdf

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Meeting Patients Where They Live

The title of the hearing asks whether the VA is meeting patients
where they live. Unfortunately, the answer to this question is no.
There are dire physician shortages in rural areas and APRNs are used
extensively in these areas to meet the required demand of the patients.
The previously referenced Temple study stated that APRNs, ``including
CRNAs, are typically more accessible to historically underserved
populations and geographic areas. For instance, rural facilities are
more heavily reliant on CRNAs for anesthesia and surgical practices.''
Granting FPA to CRNAs at rural VA facilities would promote the VA's
goal of ensuring that our veterans have access to safe, high-quality
care.
The VA is also trying to create a mobile workforce that can respond
to emergencies and be available in areas where there are shortages.
Given the lack of a national standard for CRNAs, those CRNAs employed
by the VA in states that allow FPA will likely choose to stay in these
states, thereby undermining efforts to expand the heath care workforce
in other states. Adopting NSPs for CRNAs will allow the VA to shift
these highly qualified professionals to facilities in states where they
are needed without worrying about whether they will be able to practice
to the top of their education and training.

Conclusion

In closing, our veterans and their families deserve access to the
highest quality healthcare regardless of where they live. To bring this
aspiration to fruition, the VA must bring an end to the current
supervisory model of care for CRNAs and move toward a model where both
physicians and CRNAs work independently to provide direct patient care.
ANA appreciates this opportunity to share the nursing community's
perspective and stands ready to partner with this committee and the VA
to improve healthcare for veterans and their families in rural and
underserved communities. Should you have any questions, please reach
out to Tim Nanof, Vice President of Policy and Government Affairs, at
(301) 628-5081 or
[emailprotected]
.
______

Prepared Statement of Center for Healthcare Quality and Payment Reform
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of NeuroFlow
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of QTC Health Services, a LEIDOS Company
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of U.S. VETS Prescott

My name is Carole Benedict, National Director of Executive
Leadership for U.S. VETS, formerly serving as the Executive Director at
the U.S.VETS Prescott, Arizona location. U.S. VETS, the leading
nonprofit organization committed to the welfare of at-risk veterans and
their families experiencing homelessness, is the largest provider in
this sector. Our mission is to ensure a smooth transition for military
veterans and their families back into civilian life, offering an array
of supportive services including housing, counseling, career
development, and comprehensive support. Since inception in 1993,
U.S.VETS has engaged with over 179,000 veterans, provided homes for
more than 57,000, and placed nearly 15,000 veterans into employment.
I am privileged to present this statement on behalf of U.S.VETS in
Prescott, Arizona, and the veterans in rural communities they serve at
the oversight hearing of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs on January
11, 2024.
Since opening in 2003, U.S.VETS--Prescott has been a critical
resource in Arizona, providing housing and comprehensive services to
over 8,500 veterans in the past 21 years. In Arizona, particularly
within Yavapai County where Prescott is located, challenges are
pronounced due to the rural setting. The county, with a population
density of only twenty-six people per square mile and 11 percent of
whom are veterans, faces unique challenges. The cost of housing here is
significantly high, 42 percent above the national average. Furthermore,
the Northern Arizona VA Healthcare System, covering a vast area of
65,000 square miles, includes regions with some of the highest rates of
veteran suicides in Arizona from 2015 to 2022. During the 2021 point-
in-time count, over 15 percent of individuals in Arizona's homeless
shelters were identified as veterans.
At U.S.VETS--Prescott, the team confronts these challenges daily.
Despite the Veterans Affairs' (VA) advancements in providing care and
benefits, significant obstacles remain. These include difficulties in
travel, inadequate funding for homeless veterans, and a lack of
affordable housing. The VA's Community Based Outreach Clinics (CBOCs),
although beneficial, do not fully address the vast distances and
transportation challenges inherent to rural environments, nor do they
comprehensively address the complex health issues faced by many
veterans. The existing grant and per diem rates for homeless veterans
are insufficient, failing to reflect the actual costs of service
provision in these areas.
One of the major barriers for rural veterans in Prescott is
transportation, as there is no public transportation system. U.S.VETS--
Prescott offers three scheduled van trips daily to the VA and
healthcare providers over one hundred miles away in Phoenix and other
outlying areas. This service is crucial for veterans who would
otherwise be unable to access necessary care due to distance and
transportation challenges.
U.S.VETS--Prescott's onsite services are comprehensive. They
provide three meals daily along with snacks, case management,
employment assistance, transportation, career development, individual
and group counseling, and housing navigation. The organization offers
six different housing interventions, including emergency shelter,
transitional housing, long-term supportive housing, housing for frail
elderly, transition in place, rapid rehousing, and specialized housing
for veterans who are victims of military sexual assault.
In addition to these services, U.S.VETS--Prescott contracts with
local community providers to offer unique therapies often inaccessible
to veterans, such as equine therapy, acupuncture, biofeedback, and CNA
care for elderly veterans. These therapies are vital for veterans who
lack financial and transportation resources to access specialized care.
In September 2023, U.S.VETS--Prescott opened the Veteran Connection
Hub in Prescott, focusing on suicide prevention among veterans. The Hub
offers a range of support services, including counseling, support
groups, access to mental health professionals, and benefits counseling.
Their approach is proactive and preventative, focusing on early
intervention and resilience-building strategies.
Moreover, U.S.VETS--Prescott annually hosts a 2-day Stand Down
event, bringing together over thirty-five providers from various
sectors, including the local health department, motor vehicle services,
VA, Department of Economic Security, and other community service
organizations. 185 veterans were assisted at this event in 2023. This
event serves as a one-stop resource for veterans, offering a range of
services in one location. Notably, the Stand Down event also includes a
full-day veteran court, which has proven highly effective, with over
forty veterans having their cases resolved in a single day.
U.S.VETS--Prescott's collaboration with the Northern Arizona VA
Healthcare System is multifaceted and enhances their service delivery.
This partnership provides the flexibility to tailor programs to fill
gaps in services that the VA may not cover, including specialized
programs and support services designed to address the specific
challenges faced by the veteran community. Additionally, their
collaboration with the VA ensures a smooth transition for veterans
requiring services through the VA, reducing bureaucratic hurdles and
delays, and providing veterans with timely and efficient access to a
wide range of resources and support.
U.S.VETS--Prescott is more than just a service provider; it is a
community dedicated to supporting veterans in every aspect of their
lives. However, the sustainability of their work is challenged by the
low per diem rates, which are incongruent with the escalating costs due
to inflation and the growing complexity of the needs of the veterans
they assist. U.S.VETS has been a strong advocate of H.R. 3848, the HOME
Act, and requests your strong advocacy with the Senate to pass this
bill which will bring per diem rates in line with actual expenditures,
particularly in rural areas, that will help them better serve veterans
in rural areas.
U.S.VETS--Prescott believes in a collaborative approach with
federal, state, and local entities, along with veteran service
organizations, to develop effective solutions. Their goal is to ensure
that every veteran has equitable access to the care and benefits they
deserve. U.S.VETS--Prescott looks forward to working with the Committee
on Veterans' Affairs and other stakeholders to enhance support and
access for rural veterans.

References:

https://dvs.az.gov/sites/default/files/2022-07/2022-07-14-
AVSAC%20Strategic%20Policy%20Objectives%20-%20APPROVED_.pdf
https://cvpcs.asu.edu/sites/default/files/2023-11/
vetsuicide2023_july_v2_003.pdf
https://population.us/county/az/yavapai-county/
https://www.bestplaces.net/cost_of_living/county/arizona/yavapai

Prepared Statement of ATA Action
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Western Governors' Association
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Impact
Movement

The Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM)
appreciate the opportunity to submit this statement for the record for
the United States House Committee on Veterans' Affairs hearing on
``Rural Access: Is VA Meeting All Veterans Where They Live?''. The
Association and AIM thank the Committee for its continued leadership on
issues, such as rural health care access, that are important to our
nation's veterans living with Alzheimer's and other dementia and their
caregivers. This statement highlights the importance of dementia care
and support programs at the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and
discusses how our nation's veterans living with dementia are benefiting
from such programs.
Founded in 1980, the Alzheimer's Association is the world's leading
voluntary health organization in Alzheimer's care, support, and
research. Our mission is to eliminate Alzheimer's and other dementia
through the advancement of research; to provide and enhance care and
support for all affected, and to reduce the risk of dementia through
the promotion of brain health. AIM is the Association's advocacy
affiliate, working in a strategic partnership to make Alzheimer's a
national priority. Together, the Alzheimer's Association and AIM
advocate for policies to fight Alzheimer's disease, including increased
investment in research, improved care and support, and the development
of approaches to reduce the risk of developing dementia.
Nearly half a million American veterans have Alzheimer's--and as
the population ages, that number is expected to grow. In 2015, an
estimated 486,000 veterans were living with Alzheimer's. The annual
number of veterans newly diagnosed with dementia has increased by more
than 22 percent since 2008. For veterans, the prevalence may grow even
faster in future years because they have a higher risk of developing
dementia. The significant increase in the number of veterans with
Alzheimer's and other dementias will place a heavy burden on the VA
health care system, and in particular, rural health practices.
Rural communities often face higher prevalence rates of dementia
due to risk factors such as an aging population, limited access to
healthcare services, and socioeconomic challenges. And, while the
Committee develops policy proposals in this space, we ask that you take
into consideration that the rate of Alzheimer's and dementia among
veterans continues to increase, and so does the need for well-trained
physicians in dementia and cognitive care. The United States will have
to nearly triple the number of geriatricians to effectively care for
the number of people projected to have Alzheimer's in 2050, while
efforts to increase recruitment and retention remain slow. From 2016 to
2026, the demand for direct care workers is projected to grow by more
than 40 percent, while their availability is expected to decline.
Meanwhile, veterans with dementia are 2.6 times more likely to be
hospitalized than other veterans--and hospital stays are, on average,
2.4 times longer. Not only do longer hospital stays add to the great
financial toll dementia has on families, but this can also prove
burdensome for rural hospitals with limited bed space and providers.
While we are deeply grateful for the VA's comprehensive approach to
dementia and the people it affects, more can always be done to ensure
veterans are better able to receive high-quality care in rural areas.

VA's Continued Role in Addressing Alzheimer's Disease in Rural Areas

We are grateful for the VA's participation in the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) Advisory Council on Alzheimer's
Research, Care, and Services, which plays a key role in developing and
annually updating the National Plan to Address Alzheimer's Disease - as
set forth by the National Alzheimer's Project Act (P.L. 111-375). The
National Plan is a roadmap of strategies and actions of how HHS and its
partners can accelerate research, expand treatments, improve care,
support people living with dementia and their caregivers, and encourage
action to reduce risk factors The most recent update to the Plan was
released in December 2023, and includes a number of highlights on VA's
continued work to better serve our nation's veterans living with
dementia.
VA continues to collaborate with federal agencies on a number of
the key goals of the National Plan detailing rural health care,
including Action 2.A.1 to educate health care providers on Alzheimer's
disease. The VA's Geriatric Scholars Program is a workforce development
program to infuse geriatrics into VA primary care settings by
conducting intensive training in geriatrics, including rural
interdisciplinary team training. The program includes an intensive
workshop in quality improvement and each participating Scholar
initiates a local quality improvement project to demonstrate learning
and improve care or clinic efficiency. The program also includes a wide
variety of training activities focused on dementia, including training
sessions on dementia caregiver coordinator education and rural
caregiver education. Finally, the program provides participants with
hands-on experience and practical skills in geriatric care necessary
for adequately treating the aging population.
We also ask that the Committee continue to support the Veterans
Health Administration's 20 Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical
Centers (GRECCs), which are geriatric centers of excellence focused on
aging. GRECCs reported in the 2023 National Plan Update that their work
included 78 research grants in dementia covering basic science to
clinical care and health services research and 25 clinical innovation
projects that directly served veterans with dementia and their
families. GRECC faculty have developed numerous clinical programs to
aid family members and care providers including e-Consults for
Behaviors in Dementia, Health Care Directives for Veterans with
Dementia, Reaching Out to Rural Caregivers and Veterans with Dementia
Utilizing Clinical Video-Telehealth and Virtual Dementia Caregiver
Support Programs. The GRECC Program produced 56 educational programs
for staff and trainees on best practices in dementia care, including
the use of simulation technology to demonstrate techniques for
communication and facilitating ADLs for veterans with dementia.
Finally, GRECC authors published 259 manuscripts in peer-reviewed
journals in Fiscal Year 2022 on their research and clinical work in
dementia. VA must continue supporting the GRECCs in disseminating
findings from this research to integrate scientifically proven dementia
interventions into local and rural communities.
The VA also continues to collaborate with the Indian Health Service
(IHS) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on the National
Plan Action 2.A.6 to strengthen the ability of primary care teams in
Indian country to meet the needs of people with Alzheimer's and related
dementias and their caregivers. For example, in 2022 the IHS launched
the Indian Health GeriScholars Pilot, developed with the support and
collaboration of the VA Office of Rural Health. Modeled after the VA
Geriatric Scholars Program, the Indian Health GeriScholars pilot is
providing primary care clinicians at IHS, Tribal, and Urban Indian
Organization health programs with an individual intensive learning
track for professional continuing education.
These are only a few examples of ways in which the VA remains
involved in working to ensure a high-quality, well-trained dementia
care workforce, and continue bridging the gap in cognitive services in
rural areas. The National Alzheimer's Project Act as a whole has led to
great achievements in the treatment and research of Alzheimer's
disease; however, this important law expires soon. The bipartisan NAPA
Reauthorization Act (H.R. 619/S. 133) and Alzheimer's Accountability
and Investment Act (H.R. 620/S. 134) would extend the National Plan,
and ensure researchers at NIH continue to receive the funding necessary
to sustain vital Alzheimer's and dementia research. These bills will
ensure the nation continues addressing Alzheimer's as a national
priority, providing continuity for the community.

Program for Advancing Cognitive Disorders Education for Rural Staff
(PACERS)

The VA Employee Education System and South Central Mental Illness
Research Education and Clinical Center administer the Program for
Advancing Cognitive Disorders Education for Rural Staff, also known as
PACERS. The PACERS program at the VA is designed to enhance dementia
care through a specialized training program for clinicians who care for
veterans with cognitive disorders. It aims to improve outcomes for
veterans and their caregivers, especially those living in rural
communities. The program includes six e-learning courses and five
videos that focus on normal cognitive aging and dementia caregiving,
addressing decision-making and safety in dementia, and reviewing case
studies in treating dementia. In rural settings with limited resources,
the PACERS program is a crucial tool for healthcare professionals to
better provide dementia patients with high-quality care within the
constraints of rural healthcare infrastructure. The VA may consider
adopting similar online programs to further enhance dementia care
training for rural physicians at the Veterans Health Administration.

Conclusion

The Alzheimer's Association and AIM appreciate the Committee's
steadfast support for veterans and their caregivers and the continued
commitment to advancing issues important to the millions of military
families affected by Alzheimer's and other dementia. We look forward to
working with the Committee and other Members of Congress in a
bipartisan way to advance policies that will ensure access to high-
quality dementia care and support in rural areas, especially as the
population of veterans living with dementia continues to grow.

Prepared Statement of American Society of Anesthesiologists
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of John Mikelson

Chairman Bost , Ranking Member Takano, and distinguished members of
the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs - thank you for inviting me to
submit this written statement for the record of today's hearing on
rural health care provided by the Veterans Health Administration (VHA)
within the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). I have looked at
the VA's data and there are 4.4 million rural and highly rural Veterans
with 2.7 million enrolled in VA. 61 percent of rural Veterans are
enrolled in the VA health care system; a significantly higher rate than
the 41 percent enrollment rate of urban Veterans. I appreciate your
attention to this topic and am pleased to share my perspective.
I love the Iowa City VA Health Care System. I get all my care there
since 2004 and have a great relationship with their leadership and
staff. However there are a few rough spots.

Appointment Travel

The Beneficiary Travel Self Service System (BTSS) is difficult to
operate especially for non computer literate elderly. In my experience,
BTSS assumes that all veterans are computer savvy, and have access, to
computers. 27 percent of rural veterans do not access the internet at
home according to the VA's own Rural Health page.
Often times veterans give up applying for a benefit that is
rightfully theirs because the VA removed the most accurate and
available resources, which was the convenient Kiosks located in the VA
Hospitals main corridor to be used to check in for appointments and
file for travel the veterans were attending their appointments. I don't
why they were removed.

Recreational Therapy

Iowa City VA HCS only has 1 Recreational Therapist, and she is only
associated with the inpatient mental health unit. She is not associated
with the VA's National Disabled Veterans Golf Clinic held locally each
September; the Golf For Injured Veterans Everywhere (GIVE); nor does
she have time to assist with other National VA therapy programs like
coordinating local entries for the VA's National Creative Arts
Festival. How can we best connect rural Veterans with others to
maintain a healthy lifestyle. Other VA Hospitals in more urban
locations offer more activities for socialization through sports
recreation or creative expression.

Telehealth

I truly believe in the importance of telehealth and asks that you
continue to leverage its benefits for the veteran community. I live in
Louisa County. We do not have a single Red/Amber/Green Stoplight in the
entire county. No paid firefighters or EMTs. We depend on surrounding
areas for support. The Iowa City VA is a good 40 minute drive. Rural
Veterans enrolled in VA's health care system are also significantly
older: 55 percent are over the age of 65. Telehealth and telemedicine
services should be expanded to improve access to care, especially for
veterans in remote areas. Telehealth enables virtual consultations,
remote monitoring, and the delivery of healthcare services, reducing
the need for veterans to travel long distances for appointments.
While telehealth has been critical to expanding access to health
care services; telehealth cannot simply replace in-person service
delivery. Patients, in consultation with their providers, must be able
to choose whether telehealth or in-person services are most appropriate
for their needs. Outside of VA, some health plans have implemented
strategies to limit consumers' options by offering ``telehealth only''
or ``telehealth first'' coverage, which bars or limits access to in-
person care. For individuals who need a higher level of outpatient
care, residential care, or inpatient care to treat their MH/SUD
condition(s), a ``telehealth only'' option can negatively impact
treatment options, further delay an appropriate level of care, and can
be a significant financial barrier if individuals find they must pay
out-of-pocket for additional services.
Even when telehealth is available, however, the 3-4G network is
spotty across Iowa and 5G is only available in major Metro areas.
Public resources can help, but there is a lack of public video access
points including the Iowa Workforce Development terminals in libraries
and National Guard Readiness Centers. While these are State owned
systems for employment but they could be cross purposed for telehealth.
I understand that is a state issue but can Congress empower the VHA to
coordinate resources in joint State/Federal buildings? Not all veterans
have a computer, my self included, or an adequate Wi-Fi connection to
VA. VA software is not always compatible with off the shelf platforms.
My physical therapist had to go to Zoom because my phone could not
handle the VA platform.
I ask your support of the telehealth provisions in S. 1315, the
Veterans Health Empowerment, Access, Leadership, and Transparency for
our Heroes Act of 2023, and H.R. 3520, the Veteran Care Improvement Act
of 2023. Both bills include measures that would require VA to discuss
telehealth options for care, both at VA and in the community, if
telehealth is available, appropriate, and acceptable to the veteran.
Congress should continue to work with VA and other stakeholders to
ensure that the necessary balance is found between the efficiencies of
telehealth and veteran preference.

Women Veterans

OB care is still lacking. The Veterans Affairs Medical Centers are
understaffed in the OB/Gyn field, so are the rural communities. Seeking
Care in the Community is often hard find. Due in part to Mercy Hospital
going under and being purchased by University Of Iowa Hospital and
Clinics, high malpractice cost and restrictions on women's health care,
some of those OB/Gyn resources have left the area. This is certainly
not the VA's fault but many young veterans do their initial tour of
Duty and get out to go to college or start a family. Those 22-30 year
olds are in their prime child bearing years. I ask that this
subcommittee continue expanding resources for our female veterans and
support the recommendations of the Woman's Veterans Task Force.

Mental Health

Mental health bed space is in short supply across the Midwest. Not
just in the VHA system but across the board. Iowa has been short since
the facility in Knoxville closed years ago and has not been able to
replace them. Wait times for admission persist. We need to incentivize
careers in Mental Health fields to ensure veterans can get timely
access to the help they need when they need it rather than when it's
available.
To be clear, there is no shortage of VA programs nationally to
support veterans and their families, but not enough mental heath beds.
However, in that abundance, many in this population remain confused by
the number and types of VA services, employee roles in their delivery,
and eligibility criteria. Veterans and the general public cannot
discern between what is a County or State issue versus VHA or VBA
territory much less a concern for Big VA. For having no Active Duty
installations in Iowa, we do a pretty fair job differentiating the
Marines from the Air Force from the Army National Guard or Navy
Reserves. We need to do a better job of promoting VHA services and
eligibility. More than 301,000 rural Veterans served in Iraq and
Afghanistan. When I retired in 2004 from Active Duty (Title 32 AGR) and
was granted a 60 percent VA Disability Rating I went to a county
veteran services office and was told they could not assist me since I
was National Guard and ineligible for VA Health Care. He just didn't
know any better. That County has since hired a much more knowledgeable
CVSO and the State now requires each County to have a VA Certified
Service Officer. But, the misconceptions persist in the community and
among service members past or present.
On a positive note there exist a Recovery in Action group at the
Iowa City HCS the includes Mental Health Inpatient staff, Outpatient
staff, Suicide Prevention Team, the Vets Center, VR&E, Iowa Workforce,
University of Iowa Veterans staff, the local NAMI Chapter and other
community resources to ensure there is no wrong door for care. The
Cedar Rapids Vet Center has a Mobile Office (A converted camper) that
travels to surrounding counties and veterans events and does have
telehealth capabilities. I would love to see more of these community
integration efforts to bring the VHA to the rural communities as the VA
does not exist in a vacuum.

CLOSING

I would like to thank the House Committee on Veteran Affairs its
distinguished members for inviting me to submit this statement. I am
grateful for your attention and efforts to ensure that veterans receive
the best possible care and outcomes through the Veterans Health
Administration, particularly through well-coordinated care. I am
greatly appreciative of this opportunity to share my experience and
perspective with you all today. I look forward to continuing to work
with you on these issues and am standing by to assist in any way I can
toward our shared goal of serving those that have served this country.

[all]
