- TRUST IN TRANSPARENCY: HOLDING VA ACCOUNTABLE AND PROTECTING WHISTLEBLOWERS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRUST IN TRANSPARENCY:

HOLDING VA ACCOUNTABLE AND

PROTECTING WHISTLEBLOWERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-221          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia, Chairwoman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana, Ranking
American Samoa                       Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
Florida

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2023

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Jennifer A. Kiggans, Chairwoman....................     1
The Honorable Frank J. Mrvan, Ranking Member.....................     2

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Mr. Bruce P. Gipe, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     4

Accompanied by:

Mr. Eric Calhoun, Director, Investigations Division, Office
of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Ted Radway, Executive Director, Investigations and Acting
Executive Director, Compliance and Oversight Directorate,
Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Ms. Emilee Collier, Chief, Investigation and Prosecution
Division, Office of Special Counsel............................     6

Mr. Thomas Costa, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income
Security, Government Accountability Office.....................     7

Panel 2

Mr. Tristan Leavitt, President, Empower Oversight................    19

Ms. Samantha Feinstein, International Director and Staff
Attorney, Government Accountability Project....................    21

Mr. Joe Spielberger, Policy Counsel, Project On Government
Oversight......................................................    22

Mr. Paul Pearson, Vice President, Whistleblowers of America......    24

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Bruce P. Gipe Prepared Statement.............................    35
Ms. Emilee Collier Prepared Statement............................    39
Mr. Thomas Costa Prepared Statement..............................    41
Mr. Tristan Leavitt Prepared Statement...........................    60
Ms. Samantha Feinstein Prepared Statement........................    62
Mr. Joe Spielberger Prepared Statement...........................    63
Mr. Paul Pearson Prepared Statement..............................    69

TRUST IN TRANSPARENCY:

HOLDING VA ACCOUNTABLE AND

PROTECTING WHISTLEBLOWERS

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jen Kiggans
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kiggans, Rosendale, Mrvan, Pappas,
and Cherfilus-McCormick.
Also present: Representative Obernolte.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Kiggans. Good morning. The committee will come to
order. I want to welcome our witnesses. I also ask unanimous
consent that Representative Obernolte will be able to
participate in questioning. Hearing no objection, we will
proceed.
The first hearing I held as the chairwoman of this
subcommittee was titled Accountability at VA, Leadership
Decisions Impacting its Employees and Veterans. At that
hearing, and at many other hearings over the past 10 months, my
colleagues and I have stressed the importance of building a
culture of accountability at the Veterans Affairs Department.
It is clear that when accountability slips at VA, it is the
veteran who suffers.
The bipartisan VA Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection Act of 2017 was an important step in the second
largest Federal agency's accountability journey. The law gave
the Secretary new tools to hold poor performing employees
accountable and swiftly remove employees who are not carrying
out VA's mission of putting veterans first. A culture of
accountability cannot exist at the VA if their leadership
continues to tolerate employees that harm veterans and harass
fellow employees.
The culture of accountability also cannot exist if VA
employees are not empowered to speak out when they see this
harm and harassment. That is why in addition to the
disciplinary authorities created, the 2017 law established the
Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection, or OAWP.
OAWP was given the explicit task of investigating and making
disciplinary recommendations concerning senior executives and
whistleblower retaliators. It is broadly accepted that the
first few years of OAWP's existence were an absolute failure.
At best, OAWP was a completely ineffective organization. At
worst, it was a tool used to retaliate against the same
whistleblowers it was tasked with protecting.
Last Congress, a bipartisan legislation that passed the
House which would have taken away OAWP's investigative
authority, was not considered by the Senate. This Congress,
OAWP has confidently told my staff that things are much better
now and that they have put the right people and policies in
place.
I do not doubt that OAWP has many good employees who are
attempting to make things right. I also know that these
employees are fighting an uphill battle. Many VA employees I
engage with do not trust OAWP, and as a result, they are
hesitant to engage with the Office. It is not hard to
understand why these employees are hesitant. Many VA employees
do not view OAWP as independent, as OAWP's leadership reports
directly to the VA Secretary. VA employees know about OAWP's
past failings, and the Office has not earned VA employees'
trust. Many employees who have engaged with OAWP, quite simply,
have not seen results.
Also, VA whistleblowers have other avenues to ensure they
receive necessary protections. The Office of Special Counsel,
or OSC, has existed for more than 40 years and seems to do a
decent job. OSC conducts investigations on almost every Federal
agency, including almost as many VA investigations as OAWP. OSC
also seems to get results. In 2022, they negotiated favorable
actions with agencies in 12.5 percent of its prohibited
personnel practice cases. By contrast, OAWP only recommended
discipline in 3.4 percent of its cases.
I know that OSC and OAWP have somewhat different missions,
and I know the OSC has had decades to work out the kinks. I am
still left wondering if OAWP's juice is worth the squeeze.
OAWP's budget request this year is $30 million, only $4 million
less than OSC's. Last Congress, this committee decided some of
this 30 million could be better spent by OSC or in other ways
that protect veterans and whistleblowers. I look forward to
examining whether OAWP is money well spent to build a better
VA. I am also eager to learn about how VA is working to ensure
that all VA whistleblowers are heard, protected, and empowered
to speak out free of retaliation.
I appreciate our witnesses being here today to share their
expertise on whistleblower protections at VA. I am looking
forward to our discussion this morning. With that, I now
recognize Ranking Member Mrvan for his opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF FRANK J. MRVAN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chair Kiggans. I appreciate you
holding this hearing today. I also want to commend the work of
the subcommittee on whistleblower issues over the last two
Congresses under the leadership of my colleague Representative
Pappas. I am pleased to continue our robust oversight of the
Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection, or OAWP,
at the Department of Veteran Affairs.
Whistleblowers are unsung heroes of our government that
expose corruption, abuse, fraud, and waste. Reporting evidence
of wrongdoing from the inside is a courageous task, and
whistleblowers often risk their livelihoods to expose critical
issues. Their actions are paramount in holding the government
accountable, and whistleblowers should be commended for the
courage it takes to come forward. VA is entrusted with caring
for our Nation's veterans. VA employees must feel empowered to
call out problems, including wrongdoing. Managers need to be
trained on rules and policies so they are also empowered to
create and foster an open and transparent culture which
benefits everyone from the public, to staff, to veterans that
engage with VA.
Over many decades, Congress has authorized important
institutions which are charged with the oversight and
investigative authority with administrating whistleblower
protection laws and with holding the Federal Government
accountable. We have the VA Office of Inspector General (OIG),
the Office of Special Counsel, and the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) as longstanding parts of that
oversight and accountability structure.
In 2017, Congress established another layer by creating the
OAWP in response to a very serious and catastrophic
accountability failure, which is the Phoenix Wait Time scandal.
However, OAWP quickly failed at its mission due to egregious
abuses by leadership in the former administration, which were
investigated by the Inspector General (IG). Current leadership
has had an uphill battle rebuilding the OAWP into an office
that could possibly meet the mission established by Congress.
From my perspective, OAWP has done a commendable job. It is
now staffed up with dedicated individuals who are taking its
responsibility seriously. We are starting to see outputs that
show the Office can and wants to do the job. From our oversight
work, we can see significant progress on the investigations
side of the Office. Over the past year, OAWP has worked to
clear the backlog of complaints. Improvements have been made in
case timelines and referrals. Now we are starting to see what
is possible on the accountability side. We need more fidelity
on how VA is implementing OAWP's recommendations and
understanding if this work is leading to institutional change.
OAWP has a mandate to advise the Secretary on
accountability matters and to do data analysis to identify
trends and issue reports. We have seen some of the results of
efforts in these areas, but there are a lot of areas that would
benefit from the analytics work, such as the settlement
agreements ensuring that disciplinary actions are being used
equitably across the VA, and how the Department can further
build a culture that values accountability. From reading the
testimony of the organizations on the second panel, it is clear
that a trust gap still exists between the whistleblower
community and OAWP. I know OAWP is working in earnest to bridge
the gap, but I would like to discuss a few more specifics about
ongoing concerns with both VA and the good government groups.
I know there have been questions since the 2017 law was
passed about ways to enhance OAWP's independence, and there are
also fundamental questions about its purpose and how it should
or should not differ from other oversight investigations such
as the IG, the OSC. I hope we can have a thoughtful discussion
on these and other issues.
Whistleblower protection and accountability are different
sides of the same coin. They should not be in conflict. We
should work hard toward accountability so that employees do not
have to become whistleblowers. They should be able to speak up
about concerns and have those concerns taken seriously by
management. This is the goal we all should be working toward
because that is what we owe to the veterans. With that, I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses and I yield back my time.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Ranking Member Mrvan. We will now
turn to witness testimony. Testifying before us today on our
first panel, we have Mr. Bruce Gipe, who is Acting Assistant
Secretary at the Office of Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection. We have Mr. Eric Calhoun, Director of the
Investigations Division at the Office of Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection. We have Mr. Ted Radway, Executive
Director of Investigations and Acting Executive Director of
Compliance and Oversight at the Office of Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection. We have Ms. Emilee Collier, Chief of
the Investigations and Prosecution Division at the Office of
Special Counsel. We have Mr. Thomas Costa, Director on the
Education, Workforce, and Income Security Team at the
Government Accountability Office.
On our second panel, which will be next, we have Mr.
Tristan Leavitt, President of Empower Oversight, Ms. Samantha
Feinstein, International Director and Staff Attorney,
Government Accountability Project, Mr. Joe Spielberger, Policy
Counsel at the Project on Government Oversight (POGO), and Mr.
Paul Pearson, Vice President, Whistleblowers of America.
For the first panel will the witnesses please stand and
raise your right hand, and we will swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Let the record reflect that the
witnesses answered in the affirmative. Mr. Gipe, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF BRUCE GIPE

Mr. GIPE. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Kiggans,
Ranking Member Mrvan, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, the Office of Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection appreciates your dedication to protecting
whistleblowers and strengthening VA's workforce. Our former
Assistant Secretary, Maryanne Donaghy, recently retired, but
her passion for our mission and hard work continues to be a
major factor in our success. In her absence, I am honored to be
here testifying before you today.
In 2019, when the Inspector General released his report,
OAWP was an agency in crisis. That is no longer the case. We
have implemented the IG's recommendations and made significant
improvements, which are resulting in concrete benefits for the
Department and the veterans we serve. We have greatly improved
the quality of our investigations and our recommendations for
discipline. In Fiscal Year 2021, 32 percent of our
recommendations were not accepted by VA management. By
contrast, this year, all, each and every recommendation we made
has been accepted by VA management in some form, excluding
those cases where someone retired prior to discipline.
We have also improved the timeliness of our investigations,
cutting the average number of days it takes to do an
investigation from 251 days in 2021 to just 82 days this year.
Last year, we established the Investigative Attorney Division.
Our attorneys help us identify issues, properly scope
investigations, and provide legal sufficiency review for our
reports of investigation.
The Division also addresses an important issue that has
been raised before in this forum, our independence from the
Office of General Counsel (OGC). While OGC serves as the
Department's legal counsel, they do not review our
investigations or our recommendations for discipline.
Training is another major part of OAWP's mission. We lead
the whistleblower training required by statute for all VA
employees, and we provide supplemental in person training upon
request, and we receive a lot of those requests. We also led
the Department's successful effort to receive recertification
under OSC's 2302(c) Certification Program.
We recently improved service to VA employees by
establishing a whistleblower navigator. As the title suggests,
this position helps potential whistleblowers navigate the
various choices available to an employee raising concerns or
reporting wrongdoing. We continue to operationalize the
portions of our statute not tied to investigations. Under the
Advice to the Secretary provision, we have produced a series of
reports about how the Department can provide better services to
veterans who have experienced military sexual trauma. The
recommendations in these reports will have a direct impact on
veterans and improve available services and care.
We also recently conducted our inaugural climate review,
which examines the extent to which a facility or office is
fostering an environment where whistleblowers feel safe raising
concerns. The information gathered will allow VA management to
proactively address issues and create an environment that is
safe for whistleblowers. Our Compliance and Oversight
Directorate fulfills our statutory mandate to track and record
oversight entity recommendations. We track more than 7,700
individual recommendations, and we examine trends in OAWP
complaints and patient care recommendations. We also track
whistleblower settlement agreements. This work provides insight
into potentially systemic issues that can be proactively
addressed by the Department.
These accomplishments are a credit to our dedicated and
hardworking employees. I think they are the best in the Federal
Government. The strength of our workforce is highlighted by our
recent scores in the Federal All Employee Viewpoint Survey.
OAWP received the highest Organizational Health Index scores
and ranked as the most improved of all VA central offices.
Chairwoman Kiggins, Ranking Member Mrvan, and distinguished
members, I want to thank you for this opportunity to discuss
our progress and our path forward. We are committed to
partnering with you to help improve OAWP and the Department,
and we look forward to any questions you have. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Bruce Gipe Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much. We are looking forward to
hearing from the other members on the panel as well, but a vote
has just been called in the House that we will need to go to,
and so the subcommittee will stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair. We will be back.
[Recess]
Ms. Kiggans. All right, we will resume where we left off.
Let us see. Ms. Collier, you are recognized for 5 minutes to
provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF EMILEE COLLIER

Ms. Collier. Good morning, Chair Kiggans, Ranking Member
Mrvan, esteemed members of the subcommittee, and fellow
panelists. Thank you for holding this important hearing on
protecting the brave civil servants who blow the whistle at the
Department of Veterans Affairs. The Office of Special Counsel
is strongly committed to supporting veterans and to helping the
VA create a positive whistleblowing culture for its employees.
Ensuring that whistleblowers are empowered to speak up about
potential misconduct without fear of reprisal enables the VA to
best protect the health and safety of our veterans. Indeed, as
we all know, whistleblowers are an indispensable resource for
oversight entities like the VA's Office of Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection, OSC, Congress, and other
organizations seeking to promote good government and
accountability.
The statutes governing OSC's work allow us to support
whistleblowers in three main ways. First, OSC provides a safe
channel for making disclosures of wrongdoing. Second, OSC
protects Federal employees from prohibited personnel practices,
including retaliation for whistleblowing. Third, OSC provides
training and stands as a partner with other Federal agencies
and Congress in upholding the merit system. One noteworthy
aspect of OSC's role as a safe channel for disclosures is the
high degree of whistleblower involvement in our process. OSC
relies on information provided by the whistleblower to
determine whether an agency should investigate the alleged
wrongdoing. Once we receive the whistleblower's disclosure, we
make every effort to respond quickly to those concerns.
In fact, OSC's disclosure unit decides whether an
investigation is required within 45 days in virtually every
case. If the allegations warrant further inquiry, the Special
Counsel will refer the case to the head of the agency, who must
investigate and provide a report to our office. OSC then gives
the whistleblower an opportunity to review and provide comments
on the report. After taking the whistleblower's input into
account, the Special Counsel determines if the report is
reasonable and statutorily sufficient.
Finally, OSC provides that determination, the report
itself, and the whistleblower's comments to the President and
to Congress. OSC also provides an avenue for employees who file
a complaint if they believe they have suffered a prohibited
personnel practice, including whistleblower retaliation. OSC's
process for handling these cases differs significantly from our
disclosure work in that on the prohibited personnel practice
side, our staff conduct the required investigations themselves.
OSC has enforcement authority to pursue corrective and
disciplinary action in these matters when it is appropriate,
and our office has a highly effective alternative dispute
resolution program, which also facilitates meaningful, often
creative relief for employees who file with us.
As a chief in OSC's Investigation and Prosecution Division,
I am especially pleased to note that in each of the last 2
fiscal years, staff working on prohibited personnel practice
matters obtained record numbers of favorable actions, including
individual and systemic relief, as well as disciplinary action.
This combination of enforcement authorities and successful
resolutions sends a strong message that OSC will conduct
independent, objective inquiries in an effort to bolster
whistleblower protections and the merit system as a whole.
While it is imperative that OSC maintain its investigative
independence, there are many opportunities for cooperation with
other departments and agencies. Indeed, a key element of OSC's
approach to assisting whistleblowers is our robust outreach and
training program, whereby we train Federal managers and
employees on all facets of OSC's mission. In the last fiscal
year, OSC conducted the highest number of trainings in the
agency's history, increasing our visibility among those who may
need our assistance.
In addition, OSC has regular meetings with representatives
from OAWP, the VA's Office of the General Counsel, and Veterans
Health Administration's Office of the Medical Inspector. During
these meetings, we discuss individual cases that merit high
level attention, as well as general issues that impact our
work. Developing a good working relationship with the VA
through open lines of communication has been critical in
working toward our shared goal of promoting better government
through transparency and accountability. We remain steadfast in
our commitment to helping the VA and this committee provide the
best possible service to veterans by ensuring that any reported
wrongdoing receives appropriate consideration.
VA employees are among the greatest patriots in Federal
service as they have devoted their professional lives to
serving veterans, and of course, many are veterans themselves.
It is imperative that they feel supported in doing their jobs
without fear of reprisal. I am here today on behalf of OSC to
describe how our work contributes to that important goal. Thank
you again for holding this hearing. I look forward to answering
any questions you may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Emilee Collier Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Ms. Collier. Mr. Costa, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS COSTA

Mr. Costa. Thank you. Chairwoman Kiggins, Ranking Member
Mrvan, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss our work looking at VA whistleblower
retaliation.
Federal employee whistleblowers can protect the government
from fraud, waste, and abuse by reporting wrongdoing. However,
whistleblowers may also risk reprisal from their agency for
these disclosures. VA whistleblowers can choose to submit
complaints of retaliation both internally through OAWP and
their union, as well as externally through OSC and the Merit
System Protection Board's appeals process. OAWP investigates
misconduct against senior agency officials, and the independent
OSC is responsible for investigating whistleblower retaliation
and other prohibited personnel practices across the Federal
Government. My statement is based on our May report as well as
related preliminary observations from our ongoing work, and
will address 1) OAWP whistleblower retaliation investigations,
2) OSC's investigations of VA whistleblower retaliation, and 3)
how VA resolves these cases using settlement agreements.
First, the number of whistleblower retaliation cases that
OAWP receives has increased since Fiscal Year 2020, though the
number of other types of cases has also increased.
Specifically, OAWP received almost 580 whistleblower
retaliation cases in 2020 and 740 in 2023, more than a 25
percent increase. We will continue to analyze this data in our
ongoing work. Second, Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) cases
arising from VA employees make up about one-third of OSC's
workload. From fiscal years 2018 through 2022, over two-thirds
of VA PPP cases involved allegations of whistleblower
retaliation. However, unlike the increase in OAWP cases, the
total number of VA whistleblower retaliation cases at OSC had
generally decreased from about 900 to 515 over the last 5
years. That said, the percentage of whistleblower retaliation
cases with a favorable action for the complaints has increased
from 3 to 10 percent, which, according to OSC officials, has
also contributed to longer case times.
If warranted, OSC recommends corrective action, such as
back pay or damages, or it facilitates a settlement agreement
between the parties. OSC cases can have multiple allegations
that can each have a different closing disposition. However,
OSC closed most cases due to insufficient evidence. Less than 1
percent were closed due to a settlement agreement.
Which brings me to my third point. Settlements can be
initiated at any juncture in the complaint process. An official
within the applicable VA office serves as a settlement official
and decides on whether to proceed with negotiations. Once
negotiations begin, VA's General Counsel provides the
settlement official with legal counsel, while complainants can
opt for legal or non-legal representation or represent
themselves. Following an agreement, the settlement official and
related officers monitor its implementation. This process
largely mirrors that for employment discrimination allegations.
However, according to VA officials, the Department does not
have specific guidance for whistleblower retaliation
settlements due to the absence of a statutory or regulatory
mandate. In contrast, VA has guidance for employment
discrimination settlement agreements in response to Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) requirements.
Regarding some of the data around settlement agreements,
OAWP began tracking them in 2021. However, it does not have a
mechanism currently to monitor how long it takes to negotiate a
settlement, and we plan to follow up with OAWP about these
aspects of the process as part of our ongoing work.
As of September, VA had settled 71 whistleblower
retaliation cases since they began tracking them. Most of the
settlements included a monetary award of between $2,000 and
$500,000 for the whistleblower, and they totaled around $5.2
million. Additionally, the settlements may also have provided
for salary adjustments or back pay. More than two-thirds of the
settlements were filed with the Merit System Protection Board,
suggesting many have gone through the appeals process. The
remainder of the cases were filed with OSC, EEOC, VA's Office
of Resolution Management, Diversity and Inclusion, and the
Courts, with only one settlement addressing a complaint filed
with OAWP.
Most settlements address complaints involving Veterans
Health Administration (VHA), the largest of VA's
administrations, but complaints come from across VA's offices.
Specifically, 59 of the 71 settlements addressed allegations at
VHA, while two or more cases involved the Office of Information
and Technology, VA Central Office, and OAWP itself. This
completes my statement, and I look forward to answering your
questions. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Thomas Costa Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Costa. We will now move to
questions, and I yield myself 5 minutes first. Mr. Costa, what
can you tell us about the volume of VA whistleblower
retaliation investigations that are initiated through OSC? I
know you spoke about it a little bit. How does that compare to
OSC's caseload at other Federal agencies? In your remarks or
answering questions, can you also just try to tease out a
little bit more about why we need both? I know you mentioned
about OSC is doing more with the kind of senior level cases,
but, you know, is there like, a finite need for both of these
organizations? It seems like they are duplicative in a lot of
their responsibilities.
Mr. Costa. Thank you. About one-third of OSC's caseload is
from VA, so it is a significant portion of their caseload. VA,
of course, is the second largest Federal agency, so that is not
terribly surprising that it would be a significant portion. The
number of total cases for the years, VA whistleblower cases,
for the 3 years that we have in common for both OSC and OAWP is
around 1,225 cases a year split between the two agencies. That
number has gone up for OAWP as the number has gone down for
OSC. The total numbers have remained relatively stable during
that timeframe. The total number of OSC cases involving VA
whistleblower over the last 5 years was 3,700. As I mentioned,
most of those PPP cases involve VA whistleblower retaliation
allegations.
Regarding the duplicative nature, there certainly is a
duplicative nature to these two agencies. We have not looked
into whether or not that duplication is warranted or not. It
gives VA personnel multiple options to pursue their cases.
There are some subtle differences that we are still looking
into as part of our ongoing work as to when it might be more
advantageous to go one route versus another. In addition, you
also have the OIG, and in some cases, you also have Office of
Resolution Management Diversity & Inclusion (ORMDI) where
whistleblowers could also raise their concerns.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Mr. Gipe, could you also just
address that issue of, you know, why we need the two separate
offices?
Mr. Gipe. Excuse me. Absolutely. First of all, I would
start with I think this is what Congress put in place, and they
wanted to have more options rather than fewer options. I think
that was a wise thing. I think if you look at the past 2 years
and we talked about the rough start OAWP had at the beginning,
and you spoke about trust in your opening statement, I think
you can see that the trust is we are growing that trust. The
good work we are doing is helping growing that trust.
I think it is a good option to have more options, but it is
also a very good option for our employees who want to come to
us. If you look at our stats, because we have increased both
the recommendations that are being taken and we have increased
the time that--decreased the time that it is taken to do
investigations, we are working faster and better. Also, OSC
tends to focus on corrective action, and we have, until now,
focused more on accountability. I think that is another
important part.
The last thing I will say is OSC looks at PPPs,
whistleblower retaliation, PPPs, but we also look at senior
leader misconduct and poor performance and retaliation by a
supervisor. Our mandate's a bit larger. Then that is only one
side of our house. We have a whole other side of the house that
does other things. I think we add a lot of value. Thank you.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much. Mr. Calhoun, can you
explain the reasons a VA whistleblower or victim of
whistleblower retaliation would want to contact OAWP rather
than OIG or OSC?
Mr. Calhoun. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question.
Congress gave us different authorities. Our authority is
broader than OSC's when it comes to protecting whistleblowers
within the VA. For example, they receive their authority from
the Civil Service Reform Act, the Whistleblower Protection Act.
None of those laws give them the authority to investigate
general misconduct.
The burden that whistleblowers carry to prove their case is
quite high. The next panel will be addressing that, as they
have done historically, seeking stronger protections for
whistleblowers. We have the ability to use VA policies to make
sure that even if they do not reach that threshold of a
meritorious whistleblower retaliation case, that VA supervisors
and senior leaders are not violating policies in going after
whistleblowers. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. My time is up, so I will yield to
Ranking Member Mrvan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, chairwoman. Mr. Costa, the GAO's
testimony touches on the settlement agreement process. We have
heard concerns from individuals that VA was not meeting the
terms of settlement agreements, leaving employees with little
resources. To what extent did GAO come across this issue during
its review? Could the GAO look at this issue in its plan to
follow up work?
Mr. Costa. Thank you, Congressman. We are actually still in
the middle of our review right now, so we have not actually
delved too deeply into that particular issue. We do have copies
of the 71 settlement agreements that I mentioned, and we are
starting to comb through those. We also hope to be able to talk
to VA officials that participated in that process, as well as
some of the complainants who participated in that process to
get an idea of where the pain points might be in the process.
We have not yet been able to do that work. We are looking
forward to doing that in the coming months.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Mr. Gipe, you are aware of the issue I am
talking about. I know that the OAWP just began monitoring
settlement agreements in 2022. To what extent does this
monitoring include ensuring that VA is upholding its end of the
agreement?
Mr. Gipe. I am going to defer to my colleague, Mr. Radway,
since he is the one who takes care of that. Sorry, got it?
Mr. Radway. Thank you. Currently, that is a future state
that we would like to attain, Congressman. Right now, we are
just tracking the settlement agreements and whether the basic
terms, such as restoration of pay or leave have been fulfilled.
We do not really have--there is a question as to whether we
have statutory authority to go further than that. We are not
quite tracking whether the settlement has been fully
implemented or not yet.
Mr. Mrvan. Is there an entity that is tracking that to see
that it is fully implemented?
Mr. Radway. Each settlement agreement has a provision
alerting the complainant where they can reach out to if they
feel that the settlement agreement is not being fulfilled.
Typically, the EEO complaints, for example, the complainants
would reach out to our EEO office. There is no other office
that is designated to tracking enforcement of the settlement
agreements.
Mr. Mrvan. One last follow up. Then your office in the
future State will have what role, in your vision?
Mr. Radway. In our vision, we would be tracking enforcement
of the settlement agreements, and a complainant could reach out
to OAWP if they feel that the settlement agreement has not been
fulfilled according to the terms of the agreement.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. Mr. Gipe, the Four Corners recently sent a
letter to the VA requesting data about the non-Section 714
authorities VA has used to take disciplinary action since 2017.
VA's response was that it did not have this information broken
down by authority and that its confidence in historical records
was low. Although this was frankly not surprising, it is not
acceptable. What work is OAWP doing in the data analysis space
that might give us a better data moving forward?
Mr. Gipe. With 714, you know, the Secretary decided to stop
using it because it had been chipped away at by the Merit
Systems Protection Board (MSPB), the Federal Circuit, and the
Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA). We are still taking
actions--the VA is still taking actions, but it is under Title
5 rather than title--rather than 714.
However, for our part of what we do is the 714 hold is
still something that is important to protect whistleblowers.
Even though we are not using 714, we have done an internal
policy to make sure that we are achieving the same goals, which
is to protect whistleblowers. Then I will let Ted answer
specifically about any numbers. We do not track numbers. I
think that is big VA does that.
Mr. Radway. Yes, we are no longer requesting 714 holds, so
we do not track. VHA would have numbers. We could get numbers
for you, Congressman, if you are looking for specifics on 714
holds in the past.
Mr. Mrvan. Absolutely. With that, I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. The chair now yields 5
minutes to Mr. Obernolte for questions.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Kiggins, and
thank you to everyone for allowing me to wave onto this
subcommittee. This is an issue that is very near and dear to my
heart. I represent a district with five major military
installations and nearly 40,000 veterans. I think everyone in
this room shares my opinion that they are entitled to the
fulfillment of the promises that we have made to them when they
volunteered their service to our country. I think we are all on
the same team that way.
One of the facilities that I represent is the Veterans
Affairs Hospital in Loma Linda, which is in most respects an
excellent facility. However, in recent years, whistleblowers
have emerged to allege that there are supervisorial employees
there that are creating a hostile work environment. Obviously
this is something that we want to avoid because we want to
attract the best and the brightest to care for our veterans. If
we allow a facility to establish a reputation as somewhere that
is not a good place to work, then we are not going to get the
best care for our veterans there.
An administrative board was convened to investigate this.
They did a very thorough job. They interviewed 36 witnesses, 57
hours of testimony, over 4,000 pages of documents. At the end
of this, they recommended that the supervisorial employee in
question be removed from employment at the VA. Okay? Far the
system has functioned exactly as intended.
However, unfortunately, nothing was done. Those
whistleblowers came to my office earlier this year in
understandable frustration about the fact that they had
followed the rules, they had raised these concerns, a board had
been convened, and then made a recommendation that was not
followed by local administrative staff. When we looked into it,
and Chairman Bost was great about partnering with my office, VA
staff came out, interviewed these whistleblowers with me, and
we were astonished to find out this is the third time this
supervisorial employee had been investigated. He had been
recommended for termination multiple times and yet nothing was
done.
I met with the director and what I was told is that the VA
does not have the legal tools and authority necessary to follow
through on that recommendation. I was a little astonished
because obviously in 2017, Congress passed the VA
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act, one of the
pieces of legislation we have been discussing here in this
hearing, for the express purpose of giving the VA the tools
necessary to deal with situations like this. We are attempting
to close some of the loopholes that were brought up. Chairman
Bost, Chairwoman Kiggans, and I have partnered to introduce
H.R. 4278, a bill that would give the VA more authority in this
respect.
I want to talk to you about why this situation exists and
what we can do to fix it. Mr. Calhoun, I guess I will start
with you. Or you can pass the baton if someone else is more
appropriate, but what would you say? Does the VA have the tools
to effectively discipline and if necessary, terminate employees
in situations like the one I described?
Mr. Calhoun. Thank you, Congressman Obernolte, for the
question. I could only--I do not know the full circumstances. I
believe the individual you are referring to is outside of our
investigative authority. I have very limited knowledge on that.
I would say in previous testimony I have heard Human Resources
and Administration (HR&A) and OGC say that they believe they do
have the tools they need to take appropriate actions in those
cases, but I do not have enough information to discuss the
specific matter you are referring to.
Mr. Obernolte. Okay. Well, if you could follow up----
Mr. Calhoun. Yes, sir.
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. that would be much appreciated,
because if the answer is no, you do not have the tools that you
need, we want to make sure that we equip you with the tools
that you need to make sure situations like this do not develop
in other facilities.
Mr. Calhoun. Yes, sir.
Mr. Obernolte. Mr. Gipe, the whistleblowers that I spoke
with are understandably frustrated with this situation, and
they expressed to me something that I found even more alarming,
which is kind of a hopelessness that they had brought this
situation to everyone's attention and nothing was done. Because
it is a supervisorial employee, when a whistleblower raises
their hand and says, something is wrong here, an investigation
is conducted, their claim is substantiated, and yet nothing is
done, they are fearful that that enhances the chance of
retaliatory action against the whistleblower. I would share
that too, if I were in their shoes, I would be afraid of that.
What can be done to reassure whistleblowers like that
retaliatory action will not take place if they come to OAWP
with a complaint?
Mr. Gipe. Thank you for that question. I would follow up a
little bit on what Mr. Calhoun said. If wrongdoing does take
place, if misconduct takes place, there are definitely the
tools available across the Federal Government, including VA, to
deal with that. I do believe, my understanding is the person
that you are referring to is not within our jurisdiction.
Still, I can give you more of an answer on your specific
question, and we would be happy to give you briefings on any of
the specific cases in a private setting.
There are other things we can do to help improve the
atmosphere and the culture of accountability there. It is a
coincidence that this week we actually kicked off our second
climate review, which again, looks at the atmosphere in a
medical center to see if there is an appropriate atmosphere
that people feel like they can raise allegations of wrongdoing.
The climate review is a several step process. I believe that
the survey went out this week, and will go for 2 weeks, and
then we are doing our site visit in early December.
What you should do is think about this a lot like the All-
Employee Viewpoint Survey. If you just get result--not you, but
if, you know, the medical center gets results and just kind of
looks at them, it does not help much. The results will show
where there are weak points and opportunities for improvement.
I think you can use those, the hospital can use those to make
important changes. We can also increase our training there and
make sure people know all the options they have coming to us,
coming to OSC, going to OIG.
If this was the Administrative Investigation Board (AIB)
that I am thinking about, that you are talking about, that was
not within our jurisdiction, it would be up to the responsible
management official who was getting that to decide what
discipline was appropriate.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Thank you. I see I am overtime. I
want to emphasize we are all on the same team here, but we want
to make sure that you have the tools necessary to set an
environment where this does not happen again. Let us work
together to make sure that that happens. I yield back, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much, Mr. Obernolte. The chair
now recognizes Mr. Pappas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I thank our
panel for their points that they have made here today. I do
appreciate how challenging it is to change the culture in a big
agency like VA. I will say that after 6 years of the
establishment of OAWP, I think it is clear to me that there are
major shortcomings within the initial law that was passed,
certainly with its implementation over the last 6 years,
because we have seen repeated leadership changes, missed
deadlines, and lack of accountability, especially when it comes
to enforcement of those settlement agreements.
We know that the Office of General Counsel plays a role in
whistleblower issues, especially when it comes to
implementation of these agreements. These agreements are
binding, and they are signed by the Department and the
whistleblower. Usually, VA agrees to take specific actions to
reinstate and protect whistleblowers in these agreements.
Unfortunately, this committee has documented instances in
which OGC does not comply with agency agreements and takes
months or years to respond to settlement offers made by
whistleblowers or causes other problems for them. It is
critical to note that since OGC is tasked with protecting the
Department, it has an inherent conflict of interest, I believe,
with whistleblower cases when it is advising OAWP.
To address these concerns, I worked with then Ranking
Member Mann on this subcommittee in the last Congress. We
introduced a bipartisan bill, the Strengthening Whistleblower
Protections at the VA Act. It was a bill that passed the House
at that time. A key provision in this bill was providing OAWP
with greater independence from VA leadership by establishing a
separate Office for General Counsel for OAWP and would prevent
the Department's OGC from directly or indirectly advising on
OAWP cases.
I am wondering, Mr. Gipe, if you can reflect on that
provision. It is something that VA did not support in the last
Congress. Can you talk about this principle of independence and
whether or not that would make a difference here as we think
about some accountability and protection for those that are
coming forward with information to help serve our veterans
better?
Mr. Gipe. Yes, thank you for that question. Usually when I
have heard issues raised about our independence, it really
stemmed more from OGC being involved in our investigations and
recommendations. We set up our own attorney division within
OAWP to make sure that we are doing our own work and OGC has
nothing to do with it. Then on the backside, they are the ones,
as you mentioned, trying to work out a settlement in some
cases.
At this point, the way the law is written, we have our
independence that way, but there is nothing where we are
getting involved in the settlement agreement process. Usually
there is the complainant, the agency, and OGC is representing
the agency and trying to come to a settlement. We are just not
involved in that part. I think the reason that VA, you know,
opposed that provision was we thought we could take care of the
other part with OGC staying out of our investigations.
There is some language in the Leadership, Engagement,
Accountability, and Development (LEAD) Act that I think talks
about us maybe having more involvement in settlement
agreements. We really think probably it makes the most sense
for OGC and VA to be involved in the actual reaching an
agreement, and then we could be tracking and maybe helping
those if they feel like there is a breach of the settlement
agreement after the fact.
Mr. Pappas. Are there either provisions of that bill that I
had mentioned, you mentioned another piece of legislation that
is out there, other things that we can be doing to give you the
tools you need to do your job better and to improve
performance, because clearly there has been a lack of
confidence in the numbers that we have seen over a lot of
years.
Mr. Gipe. Well, I think a couple of things. That first of
all, I think our numbers show that there is a little bit more
confidence in us because I think we have been doing good work.
I think we continue to get more cases, and I think that is a
good thing. Whistleblowers and complainants have another place
to come to, and you can see by those numbers that they are
choosing to come to us quite a bit.
As far as the statute, I will tell you that I think the
statute has really good bones and has a lot of provisions. As
you have noted, we are a brand new, you know, 5 years, 5, 6
years or whatever we have been around, so we are really
continuing to grow into this statute and operationalize it. I
think there is a lot of good stuff there. We are trying to have
continuous improvement. I think a lot of those improvements
that we have been making do not really require statutory
change. There is nothing that jumps out at me that says we must
have this statutory change. At some point there might be, but I
think we are still continuing to grow into and operationalize
the statute, and we are heading on a good trajectory.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Well, I hope you can appreciate the
frustration on this side of the table, because we have heard
similar statements from leader after leader after leader who
have appeared before us talking about implementation of the
statute and about getting it right for our whistleblowers, for
VA employees, and ultimately for, and veterans. We want to
continue to partner with you on that and identify areas where
Congress needs to act to help shore things up. Thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Gipe. Appreciate that.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. I want to do one quick
round of extra questions. I yield a few minutes back to myself
if anyone else has any additional questions. Mr. Radway, for
Fiscal Year 2024, the OAWP requested a budget of approximately
$30 million. Approximately what percentage of this budget is
for OAWP's investigations?
Mr. Radway. Chair Kiggans, I do not have that information.
I do not believe that we have that handy.
Mr. Gipe. I could try.
Mr. Radway. Mr. Gipe.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay.
Mr. Gipe. The breakdown of our office, our office, like
most offices that do this work, OSC is the same way, it is
mostly Full-Time Equivalent (FTE). The investigative side of
the office is kind of the big side of our office. I think 80,
90, employees out of 131. It is the majority of our FTE are
being paid for the investigations.
Ms. Kiggans. The settlement agreements do not come out of
that 30 million. Is that correct?
Mr. Gipe. Our tracking of the settlement agreements happens
under the Compliance and Oversight Directorate, which is Ted's
other job.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Okay. Do you have a cost estimate about
how much each disciplinary recommendation is costing?
Mr. Gipe. No, but we can get that for you.
Ms. Kiggans. I am just curious. Okay, thank you. Mr. Costa,
data you shared in your testimony showed that the proportion of
VA OSC cases spiked in 2019, a few years after the creation of
OAWP, and has since decreased. Do you attribute this change to
OAWP or to other factors?
Mr. Costa. I think it is hard to say since it is only been
a few years. There appears to be a growing awareness, as has
been suggested by OAWP, of what they are doing. They did
address the OIG recommendations, and that might also be a
factor in the growth of their cases. As I mentioned before, the
total number of cases between OSC and OAWP remain about the
same in the 3 years that we have comparable data. It went from
about 1,300 to 1,200 cases. All within that range. It seems as
though some people are moving more of their caseload to OAWP
over the last few years.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much. I now yield to Ranking
Member Mrvan for additional questions.
Mr. Mrvan. Mr. Gipe, if you could clarify something that is
ringing in my head. Representative Obernolte asked a question
about a specific case, and with your answer, you had stated and
I want to separate the specific case to a general question. You
had stated that an employee was not within the jurisdiction of
the VA. Can you explain to me how someone who has an impact on
others at a hospital does not have jurisdiction from the VA or
does not fall under the jurisdiction of the VA?
Mr. Gipe. Sure. If that was exactly what I said, I
misspoke. Let me give you the nuance that I meant to say.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay.
Mr. Gipe. VA would have jurisdiction over all VA employees
for sure. If I said something else that was incorrect. What I
was trying to say was that OAWP has jurisdiction to investigate
senior leader misconduct. Senior leaders are defined in
Directive 0500 and whistleblower retaliation by supervisors. If
we get a lower-level employee who is not a senior leader and
not a supervisor, then we do not have jurisdiction to look into
that case. Other parts of VA do. That is why you have
administrative investigatory boards and other places like that
where they can go.
Mr. Mrvan. Okay. As a point of clarification for me, in an
employee who does not fall in the supervisor category, if
someone is a whistleblower toward that employee, this bill does
not cover that?
Mr. Gipe. It is another nuance. There is two things. If
somebody is making a complaint against an employee for either
misconduct, poor performance, or whistleblower retaliation, we
would have it if it is a senior leader or a supervisor. If it
is a straight whistleblower disclosure about someone or
something, it is very much like OSC's disclosure unit. That is
usually a situation where we are not investigating. The good
example is somebody comes to us and says there is a bunch of
cardboard in the stairway at a hospital and that is a potential
fire hazard. That would be a straight whistleblower disclosure
that would not need an investigation by us. We would refer that
out to the hospital. They would take care of it and will report
back to us and we would resolve that issue. It is a little bit
of a nuance, but that is a big part of our work.
Mr. Mrvan. It is nuanced. I am going to ask this question.
Say someone is abusive from one employee to the next employee,
and that whistleblower does not get the same protections if it
is not against a supervisor or it is just given to a different
organization?
Mr. Gipe. If someone is abusive and, let us say, creating a
hostile work environment and maybe it is not a senior leader or
a supervisor, so it is not within our jurisdiction, there are
still other ways that could be dealt with. That sounds that
sounds more like an EEO case. ORMDI would have jurisdiction
over that. There is also harassment provisions that, you know,
there is a whole mechanism that deals with harassment issues.
Mr. Mrvan. In your opinion, would it be a better service to
veterans in VA and the entire enterprise if the piece of
legislation covered all employees, just not supervisor
positions?
Mr. Gipe. It would give us a lot more work. You know,
definitely if we are resourced to take care of that, we would
be happy to meet that mission, but it would be a strikingly
enlarged mission. Having said that there are processes in place
for people experiencing those things. This is another situation
where, for instance, either our whistleblower navigator or our
intake and referral division, when they get these kinds of
cases, they do not just say like, no, it is not ours. They will
point people in the right direction so they can go where their
problem can be addressed.
Mr. Mrvan. Last question. Does your organization then
follow up on that----
Mr. Gipe. Yes.
Mr. Mrvan [continuing]. and document it?
Mr. Gipe. Yes, both. Our whistleblower referrals, their
disclosures, we call them referrals and we refer them out, they
come back to us. We close the case when we get information that
that issue has been taken care of.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you very much. With that, I yield back.
Thank you.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. The chair now recognizes
Mr. Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Madam Chair. I know I went over a
couple of minutes last time. I will try not to overstay my
welcome here. Mr. Calhoun, going back to you for a question. In
looking at other investigations done by OAWP, it seems to me
that only about 2 percent of OAWP's investigations result in a
disciplinary action. Does that statistic sound about right to
you?
Mr. Calhoun. Thank you for the question. If I could just
expand on that just a little bit to give you some perspective.
If we go back to Fiscal Year 2021, 38 of our recommendations
for discipline resulted in disciplinary action being
effectuated. During that same timeframe, Fiscal Year 2021, 33
of OSC's investigations resulted in disciplinary actions being
implemented.
I think there needs to be some context added to that when
we start talking about percentages. To give you an idea, there
is probably about 3 percent of our investigations that result
in disciplinary actions, but many times that result in some
type of recommendation. We make recommendations for both
disciplinary and non-disciplinary actions. Our non-disciplinary
recommendations also result sometimes in discipline being
taken, but we leave that up to management's discretion as
opposed to our authority to recommend disciplinary action,
which has an oversight provision in it for Congress. Congress
gets notified if we make a recommendation for disciplinary
action and it is not taken by the VA.
Mr. Obernolte. Okay. Just to be clear, when we talk about
disciplinary action, that is not necessarily termination.
Mr. Calhoun. That is correct.
Mr. Obernolte. It could be something as mild as a written
warning or counseling or something like that?
Mr. Calhoun. Yes, sir. If I may, so going back to March
2019, we have received 35 allegations of whistleblower
retaliation from Loma Linda. Of those 35 allegations, 11
resulted in investigations and five resulted in recommendations
for disciplinary action. Of those five recommendations, one was
fully implemented. On three of those events, the employee left
the VA before it could be implemented. On the fifth, no action
was taken by the VA.
Mr. Obernolte. Okay. I do not know if that gives me comfort
or it further alarms me if you are telling me 50 percent of
your investigations of my facility in my district resulted in
disciplinary action. You know, the point obviously is, even if
it is 3 percent and not 2 percent, you know, to me that is a
little alarming. If we are telling these whistleblowers who are
coming forward, you know, at great personal risk to themselves
and their reputations and feeding us information, if only 3
percent of the time their information results in, you know,
action, disciplinary action being taken, you know, that is not
very reassuring to them.
Just with the time I have left, Ms. Collier, if I could
give you a platform if you could just tell us briefly just in
case there are whistleblowers watching and I hope potential
whistleblowers watching, and I hope that there are, can you
tell us how a whistleblower would report retaliation to you and
to the VA?
Ms. Collier. Absolutely. I am happy to speak about how
whistleblowers can come forward with a retaliation claim, at
least to OSC. We have multiple ways of filing a complaint. We
recently launched a new web filing portal that I think makes
the experience quite a bit easier. There is a lot of education
built in about what it requires to pursue and to prove a
retaliation case under the statutes that we enforce.
Whistleblowers are welcome to go to our website and review
those materials, fill out a complaint, which is then processed
by OSC's Case Review Division. They are doing a very quick,
like a few days check to make sure that we have jurisdiction
over the allegation. Then from there, the case is assigned to
the appropriate sort of programmatic unit in OSC, whether that
be our disclosure unit where they are alleging wrongdoing or
they are alleging a prohibited personnel practice like
retaliation. From there, they have sort of a stable point of
contact an OSC attorney that they can talk to as issues arise,
if they have questions about the process and we work our way
through our investigation.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. If they think they have been
retaliated against, they go to OSC, fill out an online form,
and the case is investigated. What is that Uniform Resource
Locator (URL)? Is it something that we can tell people? You
just Google it?
Ms. Collier. Yes. OSC.gov, and there is a big green button
that says file a complaint.
Mr. Obernolte. Excellent. Thank you very much and thanks to
all of our witnesses. I have enjoyed your testimony today. I
yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Obernolte, and also thank you
very much to our first panel. The first panel of witnesses is
now excused. If I could invite the second panel to now take
their seats at the witness table and we will take a few minutes
just for transition. Thank you.
Welcome to all of our members on the second panel. Will you
all please stand and raise your right hand and we will swear
you all in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you. Let the record reflect that
witnesses answered the affirmative. You may be seated. Mr.
Leavitt, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to provide your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF TRISTAN LEAVITT

Mr. Leavitt. Thank you, Chairwoman Kiggins, Ranking Member
Mrvan, members of the subcommittee. I am very pleased to have
been invited back before this subcommittee. I appear today as
the President of Empower Oversight, a nonpartisan nonprofit
that works closely with whistleblowers in order to enhance
independent oversight of government and corporate wrongdoing.
You play a very important role in ensuring the VA properly
cares for our Nation's veterans. I deeply believe the United
States is a land of the free because of the brave women and men
who serve in our armed forces. Our Nation owes them an immense
debt of gratitude. Many know these famous words from Abraham
Lincoln's Second Inaugural Address, ``with malice toward none,
with charity for all, with firmness in the right, as God gives
us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are
in, to bind up the Nation's wounds.'' Less well known is what
he said next, which for nearly 65 years served as the motto of
the VA, ``to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and
for his widow and his orphan.''
Eighteen years after these words were spoken, when Congress
contemplated adopting a merit based civil service system,
providing effective service to the American people was a prime
motivation for Congress. Hiring based on merit would ensure
taxpayers received the best value possible for their hard-
earned tax dollars. As it is later been described, the other
side of the merit coin is the removal of Federal employees who
are not providing effective service.
When the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 was signed into
law 45 years ago, it included new provisions for removing
underperforming Federal employees. It also established
statutory protections for Federal whistleblowers, a first in
our Nation's history. These provisions attempted to strike a
balance that Congress continues to grapple with today how to
ensure accountability for employee performance and misconduct
without chilling whistleblower disclosures or enabling
retaliation.
This is actually more difficult than it sounds since
whistleblower retaliation is almost always disguised as
appropriate discipline. Thus, the Civil Service Reform Act
established the independent Merit Systems Protection Board to
review adverse personnel actions and ensure whistleblowers are
protected, while not impeding accountability for poor
performers or employees committing misconduct. This
administrative process provides a cost-effective way to
consider these cases more so, in my opinion, than sending them
directly to the Federal court system to be decided.
As a Senate confirmed member of the Merit Systems
Protection Board, I considered case after case that hinged on
the appropriateness of adverse personnel actions. I was always
very mindful that we as adjudicators are fallible, that from
time to time, facts buried in the record get overlooked despite
our best efforts, and that no written record can perfectly
capture all the complicated circumstances that often surround
personnel actions. Nevertheless, I felt we tried our best to
identify whistleblower retaliation in the cases we adjudicated
while I was there.
By contrast, I am concerned that our current system does
not strike the right balance to ensure accountability for
Federal employees. This is a concern which this committee has
grappled with for years. Both the Veterans Access Choice and
Accountability Act of 2014 and the subsequent VA Accountability
and Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017 were aimed at this
issue. As I have indicated, I believe MSPB has a very important
role to play in distinguishing whistleblower retaliation from
proper accountability. In my opinion, it would be a serious
mistake to further limit the categories of employees who have
MSPB appeal rights. However, I do not have confidence that in
non whistleblower cases, MSPB always contributes to protecting
the other side of the merit coin by ensuring accountability.
My experience on the board led me to believe the most
important variables for accountability are not timeframes, but
rather how MSPB sees its role in the disciplinary process. In
the seminal 1980 case on this issue, Douglas v. Veterans
Administration, the board held that its function is to assure
managerial judgment has been exercised within tolerable limits
of reasonableness, not, as the board noted, to insist the
balance be struck precisely where the board would choose if it
were in the agency's shoes.
Yet, time and again since then, the board has displaced
management's reasonable judgment regarding disciplinary
decisions. What is more, appellate courts are only granted
limited latitude by the statute in reviewing board decisions.
For these reasons, I support statutorily lowering the standard
of proof required for disciplinary decisions, not just at the
Department of Veterans Affairs, but across the civil service.
Standardizing relevant personnel laws for the civilian
workforce would reduce confusion and contribute to greater
consistency across the Federal Government.
That said, there is wisdom in the observation that you
cannot fire your way to excellence. At the end of the day, the
most important variable for any Federal agency or department
may be cultivating a culture of excellence and accountability,
both for employees and for supervisors. In my opinion, OAWP
would likely be best situated to contributing to such a culture
if investigating whistleblower retaliation was left to the
experienced Office of Special Counsel, and OAWP focused on the
big picture of addressing trends to VA. In my view, this is
what will most help us to do the mission the VA was started
for, to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for
his widow and his orphan. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Tristan Leavitt Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Leavitt. Ms. Feinstein, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SAMANTHA FEINSTEIN

Ms. Feinstein. Thank you. Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking
Member Mrvan, thank you for the opportunity to testify here
today. My name is Samantha Feinstein, and I am a staff attorney
and director of the International Program at Government
Accountability Project, which is a nonprofit, nonpartisan
organization dedicated to the protection of whistleblowers.
First, I want to commend this committee for its bipartisan
support of veterans and making sure that they get the medical
care they deserve as it relates also to accountability and
whistleblower protection, which is what we are speaking about
here today.
It is going to take a change in culture, time, consistent
oversight, and meaningful accountability to change from what
our legal director, Tom Devine previously described as Death
Valley for whistleblowers and turning that into, I think, what
we are already seeing being implemented at the OAWP today,
which has been remarkably improved, I think, since our previous
testimony. It is also going to take some congressional
legislation to institutionalize some of those improvements and
changes that we are currently seeing.
I do want to give credit where it is due to Ms. Donaghy. It
was under her leadership, OAWP has reinstated its Alternative
Dispute Resolution program. The Whistleblower Stakeholder
Liaison has been liaising with the whistleblower group. There
is improved communication, which I think has much improved.
They have been resolving cases meaningfully and operating more
independently than in the past.
It is important that we go beyond the goodwill of good
leaders and institutionalize some of these reforms that we are
seeing today. I just want to go through a few key reasons why I
think legislation is really needed. First, of course, the
cornerstone for a whistleblower office is independence.
Legislation should ensure that they have full independence,
even if counsel are more--operating more independently today
than in the past when there were interferences with the office
or overlap with the Office of General Counsel.
Second, is there is really no supplement for the Office of
Special Counsel's investigative authority because they can
litigate for enforcement of corrective actions, which right now
the OAWP does not have the mandate to do and just structurally
that would be kind of an awkward arrangement if they did have
that authority. Next, is its important to close the loophole to
ensure that state license board referrals as an act of
retaliation is something that OAWP can stop from happening
because then whistleblowers can be blacklisted then through
these board referrals and that can stop them from getting
meaningful employment sometimes for the rest of their career.
The next is just the level of transparency. While it has
improved, it just needs to be institutionalized through
legislation. They should have the same public results published
like the Office of Special Counsel has.
Next, is OAWP's compliance analysis and reporting system.
Findings should be made public and included in reports to
Congress. Additionally, I think its really great that OAWP's
Navigator program has been restored as well as their
Alternative Dispute Resolution program. We would also like to
see that institutionalized through legislation just to ensure
that there is no backsliding in this regard.
I just want to conclude by saying there is still hope for
OAWP and I think that a legislative fix can help ensure that
there is no backsliding into the past here. I want to just
remind the committee Office of Special Counsel was at one point
an agency where the Special Counsel was coaching employers on
how to get away with firing whistleblowers without getting
caught. Today, with congressional amendments, it is the
independent agency that it is today.
I do think that there is hope for OAWP through new
legislation. I just want to say that we are happy at Government
Accountability Project to be a resource for you and help finish
what Congress has started last Congress. I just hope that it
will continue to be a strong, bipartisan issue because I think
we all agree that the veterans who have sacrificed so much for
our country deserve to be supported and people who commit
misconduct and violate patients' rights should be held
accountable. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Samantha Feinstein Appears In
The Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much, Ms. Feinstein. Mr.
Spielberger, you are recognized for 5 minutes to provide your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF JOE SPIELBERGER

Mr. Spielberger. Chairwoman Kiggins, Ranking Member Mrvan,
and subcommittee members, thank you for inviting me to testify
here today on whistleblower protections and accountability at
the VA. It is important to be clear that when we talk about
protecting VA whistleblowers, we are talking about the VA's
ability to fulfill one of the most important mandates of the
Federal Government to serve veterans, their families,
caretakers, and survivors, and most critically, those veterans
who are enduring some of the most personal and isolating
circumstances. Survivors of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD), military sexual trauma, suicide ideation, traumatic
brain injuries, exposure to Agent Orange and toxic burn pits,
physical injuries, whether combat related or otherwise, and
other mental, behavioral, and psychological issues that may
very well impact them for life.
What does it mean when veterans are cutoff from life saving
services or those services are compromised or denied? That is
ultimately what is most at stake here. VA whistleblowers have
exposed systemic corruption, widespread medical negligence, and
abuse within the VA at large, and conflicts of interest, waste,
and whistleblower retaliation directly from within the Office
of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection itself, all of
which implicates and undermines the fundamental health, safety,
and dignity of the veterans they serve. That is why it is so
important to protect VA whistleblowers, not just because we
want accountability for those who have been denied their legal
rights, although we certainly do, but because we are concerned
about the entire system of care.
We are all aware of the historic problems with OAWP that
have stemmed from its lack of independence from the VA. From
the very beginning, POGO raised concerns about housing a
central whistleblower office within the agency without proper
independence. While it was clear that we needed more resources
to address the rise of whistleblower complaints, we knew that
without critical independence, the Office would not be able to
provide the accountability that was and still is so sorely
needed.
No internal whistleblower office can adequately protect
whistleblowers without being independent of their parent
agency, and disciplinary recommendations are only effective if
they are enforceable. That is why, regardless of any other
reforms, OAWP must have its own independent legal counsel with
the authority to enforce discipline without agency
interference. OAWP itself has concurred with this
recommendation at times in the past, noting that coordinating
with the agency's general counsel, at the very least, creates
the appearance of a conflict of interest. During last year's
subcommittee hearing on this topic, then Chairman Chris Pappas
reported that in 2021, OAWP made 15 disciplinary
recommendations against senior leaders who retaliated against
whistleblowers, but the VA acted on only five, and only fully
implemented one. Then Ranking Member Tracey Mann analogized,
``the fox is guarding the hen house, and it is time for a
change.''
With respect to some of the testimony that we heard from
the previous panel where the agency cites numbers of
disciplinary recommendations the VA implements that also
includes recommendations implemented only partially.
Respectfully, this is still one of the many concerns we have
had ever since the GAO's 2019 report showed the VA relying on
advice from the Office of General Counsel, severely mitigated
proposed discipline for any number of reasons.
If Congress simply required OAWP to provide more
transparent data, that would really help determine whether the
issue really is a lack of authority, as some have argued, or
rather the VA's willingness to discipline its senior officials.
We do appreciate many of the recent improvements to OAWP's
internal practices, but any such improvements should be
grounded into law and still are no substitute for OAWP's proper
independence of the VA. We are very pleased to see the
subcommittee engaging to address these issues. We encourage you
to act urgently and provide OAWP with its own independent legal
counsel and authority to enforce discipline against senior
leaders and supervisory officials. That is the best way that we
can protect whistleblowers and bring more accountability to the
agency so the VA can provide the highest standard of care for
America's veterans, their families, caretakers, and survivors.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify here today. POGO is
committed to working closely with the subcommittee on these
issues, and I am happy to answer any questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Joe Spielberger Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Great. Thank you very much, Mr. Spielberger.
Mr. Pearson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to provide
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF PAUL PEARSON

Mr. Pearson. Thank you. Chairwoman Kiggans, everybody here,
my first time. My name is Paul Pearson. I am the Vice President
of Whistleblowers of America. If you guys are not aware,
Whistleblowers of America is, I think, the largest peer support
network for whistleblowers in America. We work with
whistleblowers in all kinds of industries, but veterans is core
to our mission. We take--this subcommittee is very important to
our organization. Jackie generally comes to these, but she was
not able to make it today. I am here to represent
whistleblowers. Jackie has submitted a statement for the
record, eight-page statement. I am only going to go over a
couple of things then I am going to give back my time.
H.R. 4461, we believe that it is draconian in its approach
to justice and it tramples on the rights of the employees. We
feel that H.R. 8510 that was proposed last year, is a much
better piece of legislation and we would like to see that
reintroduced.
The OAWP, we feel that it falls way short of its goals.
According to a GAO investigation that found that while the rest
of the Federal Government saw a decline in retaliation cases,
the VA saw an increase. We would like to work more with the
OAWP in the future. We work closely with the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (CFTC), GAO, and the Whistleblower Ombuds
offices. I would like to invite Mr. Gipe or anybody at the OAWP
to come to our conference or have a meeting with us. I yield my
time.

[The Prepared Statement Of Paul Pearson Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Pearson. We will now move to
questions and I yield myself for 5 minutes. Mr. Leavitt, you
have spent time at both OSC and the MSPB. Are they equipped to
protect VA whistleblowers? Also, would additional resources
allow OSC to better investigate whistleblower retaliation
cases?
Mr. Leavitt. Yes and yes. I mean, in terms of additional
resources, that would allow them to investigate more. I do not
know about better investigate. Where they have resources to
investigate, where they do investigate, I think they do a very
good job. You know, it is been noted that OSC's budget is about
equivalent to that of OAWP. OSC has this jurisdiction for the
entire Federal Government. OSC would certainly benefit from
more resources, but they are very adequately equipped to
conduct these investigations.
Ms. Kiggans. I know that even listening to Ms. Feinstein
and several of you talked about more independence for OAWP, you
know, their own legal counsel and whatnot, you know, we have,
this $30 million request from them already is more to provide
that autonomy that seems to be several of you are asking for.
Is that going to be a larger ask then, as far as budgetary
constraints? Is that something that we need to be thinking
ahead or is that, to provide them with more independence and
authority, OAWP, is it going to cost more?
Mr. Leavitt. I do not have great insight into that. The
challenge in part for all of this, right, is that OAWP is a new
project, it is a new experiment. Each of these steps, including
whether if you were to expand their jurisdiction, it is just
unknown, right? With OSC, there is a track record of several
decades of just figuring out what they can do with a certain
amount of money.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Let us see. Mr. Spielberger, in your
testimony, you note that the percentage of VA prohibited
personnel practices which involve whistleblower retaliation
have generally gone up in the last few years. Can you discuss
this data a little bit further?
Mr. Spielberger. Congresswoman, I think we heard both from
the GAO in their recent testimony and recent reports that both
the number of whistleblower retaliation cases that
whistleblowers have brought to OAWP have increased, as well as
you are referencing the number of prohibited personnel practice
cases that come from VA employees to OSC that include
whistleblower retaliation. I think that just goes to show the
deep concern and underscore the need that regardless of
whatever improvements are being made to training and additional
hiring and those types of internal policies and practices,
those reforms are not, to this point, resulting in the results
that we want to see on behalf of veterans and on behalf of
whistleblowers.
Again, for any of those internal improvements, we would
like to see those codified into law so any progress cannot be
undone by future leadership. We go back to our primary
recommendations about providing OAWP with its own independent
legal counsel and with much greater authority to actually
enforce disciplinary recommendations.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Ms. Feinstein, you testified that while
OAWP may have improved, you believe that the agency's
investigative authority should still be transferred to OSC.
What about the OAWP? What is it about the OAWP that has you
convinced that it should not have investigative authority?
Ms. Feinstein. I think that the difference is in terms of
the issues we have been seeing with corrective action and that
being taken and implemented and followed through. I think that
it would be difficult to give that authority to OAWP because
their assistant secretary reports to the secretary of the
agency. The Office of Special Counsel already has the ability
to litigate, to enforce corrective actions if there is a
finding of retaliation. I think that with the existing
authorities that they have and the resources, but also adding
that actually they could also benefit from increased resources
as well. I do think that they are equipped to be conducting
these investigations.
If I may also offer, I think in terms of the Alternative
Dispute Resolution program, I know that OSC has been helping
and I think maybe they have even been helping some inspectors'
general offices with their ADR mediation programs. I think that
this is something that we have seen, I want to say about 70,
maybe even more than that, percent of OSC cases that go to
mediation end up in some sort of successful settlement result.
It is very successful. They are a very small agency
considerably.
I think that investing resources into these types of
programs gives whistleblowers, I think, more options in terms
of what can provide them with some relief and also just
speedier results, and it is just a lot more cost efficient for
them. I think that is something to keep in mind as well.
Ms. Kiggans. Great, thank you very much. Ms. Feinstein, you
also mentioned you had, I think, five or six things that
Congress could do just to encourage some of the work that OAWP
is doing. Thank you for that pretty specific list.
Mr. Pearson, just curious as to your opinion too. OAWP
seems to have made some progress on being more transparent
about its work. Do you have any recommendations of what
Congress can do to encourage this?
Mr. Pearson. I think some more engagement with the target
audience. Whistleblowers would be great. Generally, peer
support really works when you are like really conversing and
talking with people. I think opportunities like that would be
really great.
Ms. Kiggans. How about Mr. Spielberger, do you have any
comments and specifics on what Congress can do to encourage
more transparency?
Mr. Spielberger. Yes, absolutely. You know, like my fellow
panelists, POGO has advocated in the past for shifting
investigative authority to the Office of Special Counsel. I
think that would also free up agency resources. To make OAWP
more of an educational and resource-based office, again, I
would reiterate the need for more transparency with data. I
think that is still a very big concern, that when we see the
numbers of recommendations that are being implemented in total,
in part, or if an employee is allowed to retire or leave the
agency prior to any discipline being meted out, that is a cause
for concern. I think we would like to see more transparency
with that data, those numbers broken down more, which I think
would again send a very clear message to Congress and the
public again, whether the issue is a lack of authority or an
inability to actually discipline or fire employees when it is
necessary and appropriate.
Ms. Kiggans. I do not disagree. I think transparency is
always a good solution. Thank you very much. I am over time and
I will yield to Ranking Member Mrvan.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairwoman. Ms. Feinstein, we cannot
understate how badly OAWP was misused under the previous
administration. Your testimony acknowledges that the current
leadership has made some improvements, but you do not seem to
believe that OAWP can ever fulfill its mission. Is the solution
in your view that unless OAWP becomes a completely independent
office, it should really cease to exist?
Ms. Feinstein. That is a good question and a tough one. I
do think that independence is the cornerstone for a
whistleblower office to be able to be effective and do its job
and be a safe place for whistleblowers to go. I do think it
does need complete independence. I also think that is
exemplified by some of the issues that we have experienced in
the past. If we have seen these problems come up and if we can
get a legislative fix from Congress to ensure that we do not
backslide into the past, then I do think that there is hope
that we can get there and that it can fulfill its mission.
I think it is implementing in spirit, I think, what
legislation like the Strengthening Whistleblower Protection of
the Department of Veterans Affairs Act has proposed. We just
want to make sure that that does not backslide, of course, into
what we have seen in the past. I think the positivity I feel
about the office stems from just seeing the history of the
Office of Special Counsel and what that used to be like for
whistleblowers and seeing the amount of time that it is taken
for OSC to be the agency that it is today that is able to do, I
think, a lot for whistleblowers. It just takes time sometimes,
and legislative amendments over time to fix some of the
loopholes that we find on some of the issues as they come up.
Mr. Mrvan. I guess my next question, if nothing changes
about the structure of the office in terms of having its own
council, but it continues to improve its operations, can it
ever regain your trust or the trust of the whistleblower
community?
Ms. Feinstein. You mean in terms of having its own general
counsel?
Mr. Mrvan. Mm-hmm.
Ms. Feinstein. I am going to answer what I really think
and----
Mr. Mrvan. Please.
Ms. Feinstein [continuing]. I, you know, I have some
concerns based on what we have seen in the past between the
role of OGC and OAWP. I think that legislation that fixes that
obviously would be preferred to stop that from happening. What
we are seeing in practice is positive. I do not think it is the
only or necessarily most important thing. This is my personal
opinion.
I do think that trust can be restored with many of the
other amendments that we would request in addition to restoring
the Navigator program and ADR and making that permanent and
institutionalized through legislation because that is something
that was removed basically in the past and was recently brought
back. We just do not want to see that happen again because
obviously educating whistleblowers and helping them navigate
the system and helping them resolve their disputes, hopefully
amicably between the parties is always a really important part
of an effective whistleblower program. I also feel like there
is some hope in that respect.
We always advocate for best practices and we even think
that past legislation could go further if you are so inclined.
I do think that what we have seen, at least with the H.R. 8510
from last Congress does lay out some of the key things that we
think are really important and it will surely again take time
to test even some of these amendments and find more problems as
we might in the future. Yes, I think that there is hope with
the other amendments. That is a long answer to your question,
sorry.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you for telling us how you feel. Greatly
appreciate it. With that I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. I have a couple of other
questions. I think we are waiting for one more member to arrive
also. Mr. Leavitt, can you tell me in your opinion, why do you
think so many VA whistleblowers are distrustful of the OAWP?
Mr. Leavitt. Well, the history is a clear starting point
and just specific examples, word of those kinds of things
travels when someone feels like they are ill used in an office.
I thought it was very interesting what Bruce Gipe, who I worked
with at OSC and have great respect for, what he mentioned,
which is that OSC is focused on corrective actions and OAWP is
focused on accountability.
If you are a whistleblower and you are going to put your
career on the line by coming forward because nothing is, you
know, obligating you to do that, you do it because you want to
see the agency be a better place. You want veterans to be cared
for. If you are doing that, if you run the risk that there is
not going to be corrective action for you, that you are not
going to be made whole for doing what you did, why would anyone
be motivated to do that? I think that is part of the dynamic
that can drive any office.
You see it with IG offices also that are very motivated to
find the wrongdoing and that is good, and they sometimes are
not as focused on then making sure that the sources of their
information are protected. That is where OSC excels and so that
is where I think that is where distrust can stem from if
someone goes to OAWP and again feels like it is a bad
experience. I have spoken with a number of whistleblowers in
that position over the years. That is the big challenge for any
whistleblower is to make sure that they feel that it was worth
it, what they did.
Ms. Kiggans. Do you think that the transparency that we
talked about, greater transparency and some of the results,
would be beneficial then, for empowering whistleblowers or not?
Mr. Leavitt. Transparency can be helpful. Again, my
personal view is the cornerstone has to be that the
whistleblower is protected. Transparency about what happens, I
mean, that is studies show that that is the biggest deciding
factor. Whether people come forward or not is actually not
whether they will be protected, but whether the problem will be
fixed. That is significant, but people also have to be
protected in that. Having transparency about what happens, what
the outcome is, is good as long as you also still have your
job.
Ms. Kiggans. Right, right, thank you. Thank you very much
for that. Mr. Pearson, can you please discuss just briefly your
opinion of some best practices of how we can ensure
whistleblowers are empowered to speak out?
Mr. Pearson. Yes, I mean, I think I would just definitely
have to agree with what Tristan said about transparency and
being protected. A lot of whistleblowers well, I will say a lot
of people, they see what happened to their coworkers and they
do not want to do the same thing. I am sure I will not blow the
whistle. No, I cannot think of anything off top of my head.
Sorry, I am nervous.
Ms. Kiggans. Okay. Thank you for that. Then Mr. Spielberger
last question, do you believe OAWP's Investigative Attorney
Division will help create its independence? Is that enough of a
step?
Mr. Spielberger. I think that change is a significant step
in the right direction, and that is the type of reform that
should be better codified. My question would be what the legal
grounding is for that change? If that is just an internal
practice right now, that is exactly the type of legislative
change that we would want to see to make sure that future
leaders cannot undo that progress.
At the same time, we know that the Office of General
Counsel still plays a role in determining and implementing
discipline and settlement agreements. We still have a lot of
concerns about their role in that process and seeing what can
often be strong recommendations for discipline or corrective
action coming from OAWP that then get mitigated down severely.
Where, you know, we have seen more egregious disciplinary
recommendations become more of a slap on the wrist, or, you
know, verbal counseling, and that sort of thing. Again, it is a
step in the right direction, but we want to codify those
changes, and there is still much more that we need to do.
Ms. Kiggans. Great. Thank you very much. I will yield to
Mr. Rosendale for questions for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, whistleblowers play a vital role in detecting and
preventing corruption. They have saved our government millions
of dollars by uncovering malfeasance and wrongdoing.
Whistleblowers also help expose and shine a light on bad actors
who violate their positions of power and trust.
In my State of Montana, whistleblowers played a key role in
helping me bring about needed accountability and change that I
am optimistic will lead to improved care for veterans across
the state.
To recap, whistleblowers contacted my office in late 2022,
raising serious concerns about mismanagement that was taking
place at the Fort Harrison VA facility in Helena. After hearing
directly from whistleblowers, I started to investigate these
issues. One such egregious example included a doctor who was
performing unauthorized surgeries that resulted in serious
patient harm.
I worked closely with Secretary McDonough and
Undersecretary Elnahal to ensure that an investigation was
completed. The investigation led to an incompetent director
being removed. In my book, that is what the definition of
accountability is. She was removed. We are in the process of
implementing many positive changes.
The whistleblowers who contacted my office showed immense
bravery, and their efforts will lead to better care for
thousands of veterans in Montana. Congress must do all that it
can to protect whistleblowers and ensure that they are not
subject to retaliation. One of President Trump's great
accomplishments was to improve the VA to ensure our veterans
receive the care they have earned and deserve. One of his main
focuses was protecting whistleblowers. President Trump directed
the VA to establish the Office of Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection and signed the Department of Veterans
Affairs Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act of
2017, which formally codified and expanded OAWP's functions.
While the idea was great in merit, the VA has failed to use
the office properly.
Mr. Leavitt, in your testimony, you allude to the fact that
the most important variable for any Federal agency or
department is cultivating a culture of excellence and
accountability for employees and supervisors. In your
experience, how do you cultivate this?
Mr. Leavitt. That is a million-dollar question, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. Actually, it turns out to be a multibillion-
dollar question, unfortunately.
Mr. Leavitt. You are absolutely right. It is clear and
there is a lot of data on this, but it is clear that how we
select managers and how we select leaders within agencies is
probably the most neglected thing in our whole entire Federal
Government. Finding good, you know, career civil service
managers who can do the hard work of not just not retaliating
that is good, that is the baseline, right, but also being good
leaders and making the hard decisions, like firing people when
it needs to be done. That is just not a skill that comes
easily. A lot of people are conflict averse, and so I think
that is where that culture starts.
Of course, leadership at the top matters. That is something
that Empower Oversight has spoken up about with regard to the
recent nominee and now current deputy secretary. You know, at
the end of the day, the real building blocks, I think, start
with the managers in every office and ensuring that they care
about these things and they pursue excellence.
Mr. Rosendale. Before I go into hiring the right people,
how does the poor culture result in worse care for veterans?
Mr. Leavitt. In every way you can imagine. Obviously
anywhere. We have all been in offices before where we feel we
have seen people maybe not do their jobs or other things like
that. When your job is not just approving a report or something
else, but the care of veterans, there are all kinds of ways
that I have seen it break down. At OSC specifically, a number
of the, you know, of course the veterans wait time scandal in
2013 was because of whistleblowers who went to OSC. Then it
became clear that it was a nationwide problem. In that case, it
was particularly dire. There were other medical centers where
it became clear that veterans were not receiving the care they
needed.
I have read lengthy reports on flies infesting operation
areas. I mean, you have all seen this. Veterans need good
medical care, and the number of ways they can receive, you
know, subquality care are innumerable. That is what we are----
Mr. Rosendale. We have substandard care for the veterans,
and we have substandard mental health state morale for the
other employees that are surrounded by, okay, these folks that
are underperforming. You astutely point out that hiring based
on merit ensures taxpayers receive the best value possible for
their hard-earned tax dollars.
The Biden Administration is filled with bureaucrats who
were hired not on merit, but based on sex, race, and what they
do in their bedroom. How does that harm the taxpayer? We have
witnessed how it hurts the organization, and we have witnessed
how it hurts the veterans. How does it hurt the taxpayer?
Mr. Leavitt. Well, in any administration, if people are not
hired on the basis of being the best candidate, then the
taxpayers are losing out. That can range from people getting
through who are completely not qualified and you see
misconduct. That is been a concern, you know, since the 1800's,
that is when the civil service system was created. You also, if
someone is just again, not--there are better people out there
who are better candidates, those are the people that are going
to provide the best service for the taxpayers. That is what
taxpayers deserve, is to just have the best. They expect that
government, regardless of party, is going to do the best that
it can to provide the--fulfill the missions that it is
assigned. That is why merit to me is such a key thing. It is
truly the lodestar of civil service and personnel issues.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much. Thank you for attending
today. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much
to our panel members from this panel and the previous panel
just for taking time to answer our questions today. We are all
here to ensure VA whistleblowers are protected and to ensure
every veteran receives the quality care and benefits they have
earned. I appreciate all your comments. I know we have work to
do now with staff to hopefully put in place some of those
changes so we can make whistleblower protections and just
accountability throughout the VA system better.
I look forward to working with this committee to ensuring
that structures are in place to achieve this worthy goal. I ask
unanimous consent that all members shall have 5 legislative
days in which to revise and extend their remarks and include
any extraneous material. Hearing, no objections, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Bruce Gipe

Good Morning Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan and
distinguished Members of the Sub-Committee on Oversight and
Investigations, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on
the Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection (OAWP).
Accompanying me are Mr. Ted Radway, Executive Director, Investigations
and Acting Executive Director, Compliance and Oversight, and Mr. Eric
Calhoun, Director, Investigations Division. OAWP appreciates Congress'
longstanding support and unwavering dedication to strengthening VA's
workforce. As you know, protecting VA whistleblowers is paramount, not
only to the integrity of this Department, but to the health and well-
being of the Veterans we serve. We thank Congress for continuing to
extend opportunities to partner in our shared goal of maintaining an
accountable and safe environment for VA employees.
The 2017 statute establishing OAWP gave VA critical tools to build
an office of highly specialized employees to investigate senior leader
misconduct and whistleblower retaliation by supervisors, receive and
refer whistleblower disclosures within the Department, advise the
Secretary on matters of accountability, track and confirm
implementation of audits and much more. Today, VA is proud to share the
significant strides OAWP has made over these last few years to
operationalize the statute and bring value to VA. OAWP continues to
improve upon its execution of these important accountability tools
given by Congress.

1. Intake and Referral Division

OAWP's Intake and Referral Division (IRD) receives all disclosures
and complaints filed with OAWP. In the last fiscal year, IRD reviewed
over 2,700 submissions. In September 2023, OAWP completed a refresh to
the online complaint form that focused on improving the end-user
experience and reducing redundancies in the form.
Complainants are contacted within 3 days of receipt to initiate
development of their disclosure. Veteran complainants seeking
assistance with health care or benefits receive a direct referral to
the client relations team of either the Veterans Health Administration
(VHA) or the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA). In the last year,
IRD assisted over 180 Veterans by referring their patient care and
benefits concerns. Because IRD is the frontline for receiving Veteran
complaints and there are times when Veterans may be in crisis when
communicating with IRD staff, IRD has partnered with the Veterans
Crisis Line office to obtain first-hand Suicide Prevention training.
This comprehensive training has improved IRD staff's abilities to be
better prepared to recognize and assist Veterans in crisis for the
purpose of referring the caller to the Crisis Line.
IRD works with a complainant to fully develop their disclosure and
to determine if the matter is appropriate to refer to an Administration
or Staff Office for action or if it falls within the scope of OAWP's
investigative authority. In the last year, IRD transmitted 552
submissions that were outside of OAWP's scope (for example, criminal
matters or health care concerns) to the Office of the Inspector General
(OIG), Office of the Medical Inspector (OMI) and VA Administrations and
Program Offices.
Whistleblower disclosures received by OAWP that do not involve
allegations of whistleblower retaliation by a supervisor or senior
leader misconduct are developed by the IRD and referred to the
appropriate VA Administration for investigation. There were 663
whistleblower disclosure allegations referred in the last fiscal, and
174 allegations were substantiated by the VA Administration that
conducted the investigation. Of the referred substantiated
whistleblower disclosures, 86 percent involved violations of law, rule,
regulation. IRD closed a total of 299 whistleblower disclosure cases
last year within an average of 115 days from the date the disclosure
was filed with OAWP. Disclosure referrals are closed when OAWP receives
a satisfactory response from the Administration or Program Office,
which includes a plan for addressing the merits of the disclosure with
appropriate remedial actions.
IRD is responsible for the preliminary review of all matters that
involve whistleblower retaliation or senior leader misconduct or poor
performance allegations. We receive these matters directly from VA
employees, applicants, Veterans, concerned citizens and other entities.
When IRD receives matters that are within OAWP's investigative scope,
the case is quickly transferred to the Investigations Division on
average within 9 days. In the last fiscal year, IRD transferred 775
cases involving allegations of whistleblower retaliation or senior
leader misconduct or poor performance to the Investigation Division for
further review.

2. Investigations

OAWP's investigations of senior leader misconduct, poor
performance, and whistleblower retaliation; reports of investigation;
and disciplinary recommendations have improved immensely in recent
years. These improvements include more timely investigations and higher
quality reports of investigations and disciplinary recommendations,
resulting in OAWP's disciplinary recommendations being accepted by
management in a far greater percentage of cases than in recent years.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2021, OAWP investigations took, on average, 251
days from the date of case receipt to the date of case conclusion, and
for cases resulting in a report of investigation the average was 496
days to case conclusion. For FY 2023, OAWP's investigations took an
average of 82 days from the date of case receipt to the case date of
conclusion, and for cases resulting in a report of investigation the
average was 180 days.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.030

In fiscal year (YY) 2021, OAWP disciplinary recommendations were
not implemented in 32 percent of cases, but in calendar year 2023, some
form of disciplinary action (or voluntary retirement prior to
discipline being taken) was taken in 100 percent of cases in which OAWP
made a disciplinary recommendation. In some of those cases the
recommended discipline was modified because the deciding official
considered the Douglas Factors, which are mitigating and aggravating
factors established by the Merit Systems Protection Board that must be
considered by the deciding official when determining the appropriate
disciplinary action, but which are not taken into consideration when
OAWP makes a disciplinary recommendation.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.002

There are many reasons for the improvement in OAWP's investigations
and disciplinary recommendations, including:

Development of standard operating procedures based on the
Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency quality
standards for investigations;

System enhancement to provide efficiencies and automation
in support of the investigative workflow;

Development and implementation of standardized basic
training and advanced training for all OAWP investigators;

Staffing and structuring the Investigations Division to
meet the workload; and

Strengthened reports of investigation which are more
informative and educational to management.

3. Investigative Attorneys Division

OAWP's independence is crucial to avoiding a conflict of interest,
or the appearance of one, in VA investigations. OAWP was founded on
these principles to ensure that whistleblower and senior leader
misconduct and poor performance investigations are not led by VA
Medical Center or Program Office leadership, who may have a conflict of
interest in the investigations. To help ensure independence, in 2022
OAWP created the Investigative Attorneys Division (IAD), which is
comprised of attorneys highly skilled in whistleblower and/or Federal
personnel law. IAD reports to OAWP's Assistant Secretary, through the
Executive Director for Investigations, and its attorneys are
independent of VA's Office of General Counsel. IAD assists
investigators in allegation reviews, investigative planning and in the
drafting and finalization of investigative reports and recommendations.
OAWP's use of specialized attorneys to assist the investigators
throughout the investigations has led to more properly scoped,
efficient and timely investigations, and has contributed to the greater
adoption of OAWP's disciplinary recommendations in FY 2023.
VA recognizes and respects the independent authorities of OAWP.
OAWP is not subordinate to VA's Office of General Counsel. OAWP relies
on IAD for investigative support and legal sufficiency review of its
investigations, and the Office of General Counsel does not participate
in OAWP's investigations or in discussions on case-specific
disciplinary recommendations.

4. Alternative Dispute Resolution Pilot and Section 2302(c)
Certification Program

VA is excited to share that beginning in October 2023, OAWP [is
launching] an Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Pilot Program. The
initial focus of this pilot ADR program will be both on whistleblower
retaliation cases and cases involving allegations of senior leader
misconduct or poor performance, which will allow for potential
corrective action to be addressed upfront via a binding settlement
agreement. If mediation is not successful, the case returns to OAWP for
investigation. All mediation cases will be subject to an accountability
review after a successful mediation.
This year, VA became re-certified under the U.S. Office of Special
Counsel's (OSC) 5 U.S.C. Sec.  2302(c) certification program. OAWP
obtained this certification for VA and continues to ensure the annual
requirements of 2302(c) certification are met. OSC's 2302(c)
Certification Program allows Federal agencies to show that they meet
the statutory obligation of informing their workforce about the rights
and remedies available to them under the Civil Service Reform Act, the
Whistleblower Protection Act, the Whistleblower Protection Enhancement
Act, the new requirements of the Dr. Chris Kirkpatrick Whistleblower
Protection Act of 2017 and other related laws.

5. Training and Outreach

Under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  733, VA is required to provide training to
employees on whistleblower rights and protections. In FY 2023,
approximately 405,154 VA employees and 43,771 supervisors were
compliant with OAWP's mandatory education on whistleblower rights and
protections provided through our online education platform (Talent
Management System).
In addition to the online training, OAWP also provided live,
supplemental training to the employees of VA. In FY 2021, OAWP provided
live, supplemental training on whistleblower rights and protections to
1,535 employees. Just two years later, in FY 2023, OAWP provided 169
sessions of this live, supplemental training to 13,210 employees, an
861 percent increase. Additionally, in April 2023, OAWP started
conducting in-person supplemental training sessions for supervisors in
VA. OAWP conducted 18 sessions across the country and reached over
1,700 supervisors in-person.
At the start of FY 2023, OAWP established a new position, the
Whistleblower Navigator, that is designed to assist whistleblowers
navigate the myriad of entities who have investigative authority. The
Whistleblower Navigator provides direct information on OAWP's
processes, procedures and practices, and helps to identify relevant
laws and policies that may affect whistleblowers.
In addition to supporting whistleblowers, OAWP recently initiated a
senior leader outreach and education program directed at senior leaders
in VA facilities across the Nation. These live, in-person presentations
include instruction on whistleblower rights and protections and OAWP
recommendations. These presentations also provide an opportunity for
meaningful discussions with VA leadership on OAWP's investigations and
recommendations, management's obligations and ways OAWP can continue to
make improvements.

6. Advice to Secretary

Through its Compliance and Oversight Directorate, OAWP provides
advice to the Secretary on all matters relating to accountability and
similar matters that affect public trust. Under the advice to the
Secretary provision, the Directorate also reviews the efficiency and
effectiveness of VA programs and operations across the enterprise. In
FY 2023, OAWP provided four inaugural reports to the Secretary under
this provision. Three reports focused on the critical role of VHA's
Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Coordinators, specifically, training of
MST Coordinators, resources for and accountability of MST Coordinators,
and governance of the MST Coordinator program. The fourth report
focused on VBA's use of trauma-informed communications in its claims
correspondence with Veterans. VHA and VBA are taking steps to address
OAWP's MST recommendations.

7. Climate Review and Tracking Data

In 2023, OAWP conducted its inaugural climate review to evaluate
whether VA facilities and Program Offices are fostering an environment
where employees feel safe raising concerns. OAWP climate reviews are
critical to VA's accountability efforts. When employees feel empowered
to blow the whistle on waste and misconduct, their disclosures can lead
not only to a more accountable workforce, but to powerful systemic
changes that ultimately improve the way VA serves the country's
Veterans.
The Compliance and Oversight Directorate is also comprised of a
Compliance Analytics and Reporting Division (CARD) that fulfills the
statutory mandate to track and record oversight entity recommendations.
To date OAWP has tracked and recorded at least 1,369 reports with 7,748
individual recommendations from OIG, OMI, OSC and the U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO). CARD has begun work on reviewing and
confirming implementation of recent recommendations and tracking
disciplinary recommendations to identify cases of potential senior
leader misconduct within OAWP's authority to investigate. The
Directorate is working on operationalizing the statutory requirement to
review recommendations by planning performance audits or reviews that
would look at whether the VA's implementation of OIG, OMI, OSC and GAO
recommendations actually solved the underlying problems identified by
those oversight entities, and whether systemic issues need to be
addressed.
CARD also produces calendar year and quarterly reports examining
trends in OAWP complaints and is creating a real-time dashboard that
will be available to the field to identify critical areas/issues
(including potential Climate Review sites). The trend analyses can be
used to spot burgeoning problems and identify areas where education or
focused attention would be productive. At the beginning of FY 2023,
CARD presented its inaugural meta-analysis of oversight entities'
patient care recommendations across Veterans Integrated Services
Networks (VISN), essentially a composite of OIG, OMI and GAO reports on
patient care issues, but consolidated by area of health care and VISN.
This adds value and drives accountability by giving VISN directors
insight into potentially systemic issues across their VISN before they
become substantial problems.
CARD is also responsible for tracking whistleblower retaliation
settlement agreements. Once the agreements are received from OGC, CARD
enters them into its custom data base, recording the underlying cases
resolved by the settlement and the amount of settlement, among other
things. To date over 65 settlements have been recorded. Settlements
above a certain financial threshold amount are sent to the
Investigative Attorneys Division for an accountability review--to
determine if the underlying conduct that gave rise to the settlement
needs to be addressed. If so, OAWP would conduct an investigation and
make a disciplinary recommendation as appropriate.

Conclusion

OAWP could not have done any of this without our incredible staff.
OAWP's ongoing employee engagement efforts aim to create a supportive
and fulfilling work environment where employees can thrive personally
and professionally. By fostering a culture of active participation,
open communication and continuous improvement, we are enhancing
employee satisfaction and strengthening our organization's overall
health.
OAWP's Employee Engagement and Organizational Health Index (OHI)
scores are captured through the VA's annual All Employee Survey (AES).
During the 2023 AES (polled in June 2023), 89 percent of employees
participated in the survey. OAWP received two awards as the highest
Organizational Health Index scoring site and the Most Improved site for
2023 for all VA Central Offices. The combined measures of employee
engagement and our OHI score are a testament to OAWP's employees and
their ongoing commitment to the VA I-CARE values of Integrity,
Commitment, Advocacy, Respect and Excellence.
VA is committed to accountability and OAWP employees work hard
every day to continue to operationalize the tools provided in the
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017 to protect
whistleblowers and create a culture of accountability. Because of this
hard work, OAWP will continue to add value and serve as an asset to the
Department, its whistleblowers and employees, and the Nation's
Veterans.
Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan and Members of the Sub-
Committee on Oversight and Investigations, thank you for allowing VA
the opportunity to discuss the progress of OAWP.
______

Prepared Statement of Emilee Collier

Good morning Chair Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, esteemed members
of the subcommittee, and fellow panelists.
Thank you for holding this important hearing on protecting the
brave civil servants that come forward to blow the whistle at the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The U.S. Office of Special Counsel
(OSC) is strongly committed to supporting veterans and to helping the
VA create a positive culture of whistleblowing for its employees.
Ensuring that whistleblowers are empowered to speak up about potential
misconduct without fear of reprisal enables the VA to best protect the
health and safety of our veterans.
Indeed, as we all know, whistleblowers are an indispensable
resource for oversight entities like the VA's Office of Accountability
and Whistleblower Protection (OAWP), OSC, Congress, and other
organizations seeking to promote good government and accountability.
The statutes governing OSC's work allow us to support whistleblowers in
three main ways. First, OSC provides a safe channel for making
disclosures of wrongdoing. Second, OSC protects federal employees from
prohibited personnel practices, including retaliation for
whistleblowing. Third, OSC provides training and stands as a partner
with other federal agencies and Congress in upholding the merit system.
One noteworthy aspect of OSC's role as a safe channel for
disclosures is the high degree of whistleblower involvement throughout
the process. OSC relies on information provided by the whistleblower to
determine whether an agency should investigate the alleged wrongdoing.
Once we receive the whistleblower's disclosure, we make every effort to
respond quickly to those concerns. In fact, our Disclosure Unit decides
whether an investigation is required within 45 days in virtually every
case. If the allegations warrant further inquiry, the Special Counsel
will refer the case to the head of the agency, who must investigate and
provide a report to our office. OSC then gives the whistleblower an
opportunity to review and provide comments on the report. After taking
the whistleblower's input into account, the Special Counsel determines
if the report is reasonable and statutorily sufficient. Finally, OSC
provides that determination, the report itself, and the whistleblower's
comments to the President and to Congress.
OSC also provides an avenue for employees to file a complaint if
they believe they have suffered a prohibited personnel practice,
including whistleblower retaliation. OSC's process for handling these
cases differs significantly from our disclosure work in that, on the
prohibited personnel practice side, our staff conduct the required
investigations themselves. OSC has enforcement authority to pursue
corrective and disciplinary action in these matters when appropriate.
And our office has a highly effective alternative dispute resolution
program, which also facilitates meaningful, often creative, relief for
employees who file with us. As a chief in OSC's Investigation and
Prosecution Division, I am especially pleased to note that in each of
the last two fiscal years, staff working on prohibited personnel
practice matters obtained record numbers of favorable actions,
including individual and systemic relief, as well as disciplinary
action. This combination of enforcement authorities and successful
resolutions sends a strong message that OSC will conduct independent,
objective inquiries in an effort to bolster whistleblower protections
and the merit system as a whole.
While it is imperative that OSC maintain its independence in its
investigative work, there are many opportunities for cooperation with
other departments and agencies. Indeed, a key element of OSC's approach
to assisting whistleblowers is our robust outreach and training
program, whereby we train federal managers and employees on all facets
of OSC's mission. In FY23, OSC conducted the highest number of
trainings in the agency's history, increasing our visibility among
those who may need our assistance. In addition, OSC has regular
meetings with representatives from OAWP, the VA's Office of General
Counsel, and the VHA Office of the Medical Inspector. During these
meetings, we discuss individual cases that merit high-level
intervention, as well as general issues that impact our work across the
board. Developing a good working relationship with the VA through open
lines of communication has been critical in working toward our shared
goal of promoting better government through transparency and
accountability.
We remain steadfast in our commitment to helping the VA and this
committee provide the best possible service to veterans by ensuring
that any reported wrongdoing receives appropriate consideration. VA
employees are among the greatest patriots in federal service, as they
have devoted their professional lives to serving veterans, and, of
course, many are veterans themselves. It is imperative that they feel
supported in doing their jobs without fear of reprisal. I am here on
behalf of OSC to describe how our work contributes to that important
goal.
Thank you again for holding this hearing. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Thomas Costa
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4221.021

______

Prepared Statement of Tristan Leavitt

Chairman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, and members of the
Subcommittee:
I'm very pleased to have been invited back before this Subcommittee
today. I appear today as the president of Empower Oversight, a
nonpartisan nonprofit dedicated to enhancing independent oversight of
government and corporate wrongdoing. In its two years of existence,
Empower has conducted extensive oversight of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA).\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Empower Oversight probes conflicts of interest and resistance
to Congressional oversight at the Veterans Benefits Administration,''
Aug. 6, 2021, https://empowr.us/empower-oversight-probes-conflicts-of-
interest-and-resistance-to-congressional-oversight-at-the-veterans-
benefits-administration; ``Did the Department of Veterans Affairs
Enable Insider Trading?'' Sep. 21, 2021, https://empowr.us/did-the-
department-of-veterans-affairs-enable-insider-trading; Jason Foster,
``Newly Uncovered Documents Show Senior VA Officials Smearing a
Whistleblower to Avoid Congressional Oversight,'' Whistleblower Network
News, Oct. 25, 2021, available at https://whistleblowersblog.org/
opinion/newly-uncovered-documents-show-senior-va-officials-smearing-a-
whistleblower-to-avoid-congressional-oversight; ``Empower Oversight
Obtains Copy of Veterans Affairs Department Letter Being Withheld from
Senate,'' Nov. 9, 2021, https://empowr.us/empower-oversight-obtains-
copy-of-veterans-affairs-department-letter-being-withheld-from-senate;
``Internal Watchdog Uncovers More Evidence of Conflicts of Interest at
the VA After Push from Empower Oversight,'' Mar. 24, 2022, https://
empowr.us/internal-watchdog-uncovers-more-evidence-of-conflicts-of-
interest-at-the-va-after-push-from-empower-oversight; ``Empower
Oversight and Whistleblowers of America Seek Accountability for VA
Watchdog's Findings of Ethical Violations,'' Jun. 16, 2022, https://
empowr.us/empower-oversight-and-whistleblowers-of-america-seek-
accountability-for-va-watchdogs-findings-of-ethical-violations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This Subcommittee plays an important oversight role in ensuring the
VA properly cares for our nation's veterans. I deeply believe the
United States of America is a land of the free because of the brave
women and men who serve in our Armed Forces. Our nation owes them an
immense debt of gratitude. Many know these famous words from President
Abraham Lincoln's second inaugural address: ``With malice toward none,
with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see
the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up
the nation's wounds...'' They were delivered in 1865, one month before
the end of the Civil War and Lincoln's assassination. Less well-known
is what Lincoln said next, which for nearly 65 years served as the
motto of the VA: ``To care for him who shall have borne the battle and
for his widow, and his orphan.''
Eighteen years later, when Congress contemplated adopting a merit-
based civil service system, more effectively serving the American
people was a prime motivation for Congress. Hiring based on merit would
ensure taxpayers received the best service possible for their hard-
earned tax dollars. As it has later been described, ``the other side of
the merit coin'' is the removal of federal employees who are not
providing the best service for the American people.
When the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 was signed into law 45
years ago, it included new provisions for removing underperforming
federal employees. It also established statutory protections for
federal whistleblowers, a first in our Nation's history. These
provisions attempted to strike a balance that Congress continues to
grapple with today: How to ensure accountability for employee
performance and misconduct without chilling whistleblower disclosures
or enabling retaliation. This is usually more difficult than it sounds,
since whistleblower retaliation is almost always disguised as
appropriate discipline. Thus, the Civil Service Reform Act established
the independent Merit Systems Protection Board, or MSPB, to review
adverse personnel actions and ensure whistleblowers are protected while
not impeding accountability for poor performers or employees committing
misconduct. In my view, this administrative process provides a more
cost-effective way to consider these cases than sending them directly
to the federal court system to be decided.
When I last testified before this Subcommittee, in July 2019, I was
serving as the acting head of MSPB because it had no Senate-confirmed
Board members. Later, on March 1, 2022, the Senate confirmed me to that
Board, restoring a quorum after five years without. As a member of the
Board, I considered case after case that hinged on the appropriateness
of adverse personnel actions. I was always very mindful that we as
adjudicators are fallible, that from time to time facts buried in the
record get overlooked despite our best efforts, and that no written
record can perfectly capture all the complicated circumstances that
often surround personnel actions. However, I felt we tried our best to
identify whistleblower retaliation in the cases we adjudicated while I
was there.
By contrast, I am concerned that our current system does not strike
the right balance to ensure accountability for federal employees. This
is a concern with which the Veterans Affairs Committee has grappled for
years. In the spring of 2014, whistleblower disclosures to the U.S.
Office of Special Counsel helped bring to light the scandal of
veterans' wait times at the VA. Just a few months later Congress passed
the Veterans Access, Choice and Accountability Act of 2014. That law
authorized expedited demotion and removal timelines for senior
executives at the VA, and gave MSPB administrative judges 21 days to
decide appeals before they became final. After the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit held it was unconstitutional to limit
appeals to MSPB administrative judges, who are not appointed by the
President, Congress passed the VA Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection Act of 2017. This law addressed the constitutionality issue
by simply eliminating MSPB review of senior executive removal. It
further authorized expedited demotion and removal timelines for large
swaths of VA employees.
As I've indicated, I believe MSPB can play an important role in
distinguishing whistleblower retaliation from proper accountability. I
believe it would be a serious mistake to further limit the categories
of employees who have MSPB appeal rights. However, I do not have
confidence that, in non-whistleblower cases, MSPB always contributes to
protecting ``the other side of the merit coin'' by ensuring
accountability. My experience on the Board has led me to believe the
most important variables for accountability are not timeframes, but
rather how MSPB sees its role in the disciplinary process.
In the seminal 1980 case on this issue, Douglas v. Veterans
Administration, the Board held that it ``must give due weight to the
agency's primary discretion in exercising the managerial function of
maintaining employee discipline and efficiency, recognizing that the
Board's function is not to displace management's responsibility but to
assure that managerial judgment has been properly exercised within
tolerable limits of reasonableness... The Board's role in this process
is not to insist that the balance be struck precisely where the Board
would choose to strike it if the Board were in the agency's shoes in
the first instance.'' \2\ Yet time and again since then, the Board has
in my view displaced management's reasonable judgment regarding
disciplinary decisions. What's more, appellate courts have limited
latitude in reviewing Board decisions.\3\ For these reasons, I support
statutorily lowering the standard of proof required to support
disciplinary decisions--not just at the Department of Veterans Affairs,
but across the civil service. Standardizing relevant personnel laws
across the civilian workforce would reduce confusion and contribute to
greater consistency across the federal government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 5 M.S.P.R. 280 (1981).
\3\ See 5 U.S.C. 7703(c).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That said, there is wisdom in the observation that you can't fire
your way to excellence. At the end of the day the most important
variable for any federal agency or department may be cultivating a
culture of excellence and accountability--both for employees and for
supervisors. The Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
(OAWP) would likely be best situated to contribute to building such a
culture if investigating whistleblower retaliation was left to the far
more experienced Office of Special Counsel, and OAWP focused on the big
picture of addressing trends at the agency.
Congress must also help ensure agency management receives
sufficient training and invest in the intentional cultivation of
leadership in federal agencies. The example at the top matters. The
Senate recently voted to confirm as Deputy VA Secretary an official who
did nothing to protect the confidential information of veterans and
whistleblowers in its VIEWS system, even after she became aware of the
problem through whistleblower disclosures.\4\ Such a lack of leadership
or accountability sets the tone for the agency, and requires that
Congress maintain particular vigilance at this time and vigorously
exercise its oversight responsibilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Empower Oversight Urges Scrutiny of Top VA Nominee's Failure
to Safeguard Veterans' Info,'' Jun. 12, 2023, https://empowr.us/
empower-oversight-urges-scrutiny-of-top-va-nominees-failure-to-
safeguard-veterans-info; ``Whistleblower Coalition Groups Jointly Call
on Senate Committee to Investigate VA Whistleblower Claims,'' Jun. 26,
2023, https://empowr.us/whistleblower-coalition-groups-jointly call-on-
senate-committee-to-investigate-va-whistleblower-claims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Whether promoting the development of better leaders and managers,
removing inadequate or misbehaving employees, or protecting the brave
employees who point out the problems, we should care deeply about the
quality of the VA workforce. They are the front lines: only through
them can we ``care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his
widow, and his orphan.''
Thank you.
______

Prepared Statement of Samantha Feinstein

MR. CHAIRMAN:

Thank you for the opportunity to contribute with testimony at
today's hearing on the Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) Office of
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection. (OAWP) I serve as Legal
Director of the Government Accountability Project, a non-profit, non-
partisan whistleblower support organization. This is the fourth time
GAP has testified on OAWP, Two prior written submissions are attached
as Exhibits 1 and 2 with a summary of GAP's qualifications to assess
the effectiveness of whistleblower support offices like OAWP. The
Committee's persistence in oversight reflects a genuine, bi-partisan
commitment to provide veterans with the medical care they deserve.
Veterans also should appreciate this committee's persistence is
obtaining a rare bi-partisan consensus last Congress for approval of
H.R. 8510, the Strengthening Whistleblower Protections at the
Department of Veterans Affairs Act. I am testifying today to explain
why this solid good government legislation is needed more than ever.
One reason is that the DVA remains the government's most hostile
agency for whistleblowers who challenge patient care breakdowns,
despite the life or death consequences of its mission. As summarized
previously, the DVA is a free speech Death Valley for government
whistleblowers. This is not surprising, because retaliation is an
ingrained tradition. It will take years of aggressive oversight and
accountability before this agency respects the First Amendment or the
Whistleblower Protection Act (WPA) in practice, rather than empty
rhetorical promises.
Despite this long-term challenge, it matters to give credit where
it is due. Under prior OAWP leadership, my docket was dominated by
whistleblowers facing OAWP retaliation from inside and outside this
agency whose job is to protect whistleblowers. Since Ms. Maryanne
Donaghy assumed leadership, all the OAWP reprisal cases have been
constructively resolved and GAP has not received any new complaints of
OAWP retaliation. OAWP administratively has restored programs such as
counseling and Alternate Disputes Resolution (ADR) whose cancellation
initially had sparked internal whistleblowing.
Anecdotal leadership is no substitute for structural reforms to
institutionalize better practices. Otherwise, depending on the whims of
less effective leadership, the prior nightmarish mismanagement and
abuses of power can resume at will. That is why it matters so much
whether Congress institutionalizes reform through the sound good
government mandate of H.R. 8510. That is why groups in the Make It Safe
Coalition will continue our commitment as resources until this goal is
achieved. Below is a summary of why H.R. 8520's legislative teeth are
still needed.

* Independent counsel. This provision should not be controversial,
because the agency already has largely permitted OAWP lawyers to take
control of their cases without vetoes vy the DVA Office of General
Counsel (OGC). However, OGC still will have a decisive role in
assessing discipline, which is the bottom line for accountability,
deterrence and corrective action. Independent counsel is the
cornerstone for a legitimate watchdog mission. Now is the proper time
to institutionalize and H.R. 8510's requirement for complete structural
independence of the current voluntary, partial improvements.

* Transfer of investigative authority to the Office of Special
Counsel (OSC) At firstglance, improvements in OAWP's performance appear
to make this provision unnecessary. Unfortunately, no matter how good
faith OAWP operates, it always will be an inherently inferior
substitute to the Office of Special Counsel. That is because OAWP does
not have enforcement teeth. OSC can litigate to enforce its corrective
action recommendations after confirming retaliation. OAWP can only
recommend that agencies engaging in harassment change their minds and
stop. DVA bullies can and routinely do defy the recommendations with
impunity. If OAWP retains its authority to investigate retaliation, the
only way this role can be legitimate is if Congress expands the scope
of H.R. 8510 to provide the Office with litigative enforcement
authority.

* Retaliatory state licensing board referrals. This common form of
retaliation allows DVA to circumvent the Whistleblower Protection Act
again with impunity to seek permanent blacklisting of agency
whistleblowers. None of OAWP's voluntary improvements have the legal
authority to affect this practice, which can have a worse chilling
effect than firing from an immediate position. The loophole must be
closed.

* Transparency for track record. Again, the agency deserves credit
where due. It hassignificantly expanded public disclosure for the scope
of its work and impact. OAWP also has created a stakeholder liaison
office that appears to operate constructively and in good faith.
Particularly impressive is that office's Climate Review initiative, to
evaluate office environments for whistleblowing. Again, however,
Congress should institutionalize and complete the job. The lights for
transparency still can be turned off at whim.

Further, the current voluntary effort is incomplete. For example,
OAWP now is monitoring and assessing agency corrective action on
whistleblowing referrals. OAWP shares its evaluations with the agency
chain of command. Unlike the Special Counsel under 5 U.S.C. 1213(e),
however, the public does not get to see the results. Congress should
assure that there is parity for OAWP transparency, the same as in the
Whistleblower Protection Act. The assessments should be more than a
management resource. They are vital for congressional and public
oversight.
Similarly, OAWP boasts that 95 percent of its recommendations have
been accepted, at least in part. However, there is a transparency
loophole for the nature of mission breakdowns, recommendations'
substance, and a complete vacuum of data whether the ``accepted''
recommendations actually were implemented in good faith. Agencies
commonly accept recommendations and promise to do better, without
implementing them in whole or part.
Similarly, OAWP has created a Compliance Analysis and Reporting
system to track compliance and prepare trend analyses. However, this
should not be merely an internal management resource. The full results
should be required in an annual report to Congress, and posted on the
OAWP website.

* OAWP navigator. The agency initially had whistleblower counselors
who played an invaluable role in helping over 1,000 whistleblowers to
understand and functionally act on their rights. The program was
canceled, but thankfully OAWP has restored it under current leadership
with the navigator function. This serviced is essential for OAWP`s
mission. It should not be controversial to legislatively
institutionalize this voluntary initiative as a mandatory structure.

* Alternative Disputes Resolution: OAWP initially had a
``mentoring'' program thatachieved promising initial results for no
fault, mediated resolution of reprisal cases. The goal was to find a
new professional home for whistleblowers that would welcome their
initiatives rather than suppress them. Despite promising initial
results, the program was canceled. Under Ms. Doherty's leadership, a
pilot ADR program has been restored. Again, it should not be
controversial to institutionalize this pilot legislatively, mandating
the no fault mediation dimension that has worked well previously.

If this Committee chooses to be more ambitious than H.R, 8510, GAP
stands behind its detailed recommendations listed in prior testimony.
However, that bill reinforced by the counseling and ADR elements, is an
excellent breach had to lock in a legitimate, badly needed resource for
whistleblowers. OAWP was a good idea that went bad due to normal
growing pains and too much discretion to abuse. You have our
organization's unqualified commitment to be a resource finishing what
the Committee started in the last Congress.
______

Prepared Statement of Joe Spielberger

Chairwoman Kiggans, Ranking Member Mrvan, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
whistleblower protection and accountability at the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA).
I am a policy counsel at the Project On Government Oversight
(POGO). POGO is a nonpartisan independent watchdog organization that
investigates and exposes waste, corruption, abuse of power, and when
the government fails to serve the public or silences those who report
wrongdoing. We champion reforms to achieve a more effective, ethical,
and accountable federal government that safeguards constitutional
principles.

POGO's Investigations of VA Abuse and Corruption

Whistleblowers play a key role in exposing misconduct at the VA at
great risk to themselves. Their disclosures have exposed systemic
corruption, medical negligence, and abusive government actors. They
have saved the lives of VA patients and safeguarded taxpayer dollars to
provide better resources to veterans. Congress depends on
whistleblowers in order to fully exercise its own constitutional
oversight and legislative authorities. Unfortunately, whistleblowers
frequently face retaliation for their disclosures while senior leaders
are rarely held accountable for their actions.
In coming forward, whistleblowers risk losing their jobs, ending
their careers, suffering lifelong mental and psychological hardship,
and facing retaliatory lawsuits or even serious criminal charges. All
this simply for speaking out to ensure their agencies fulfill their
missions and maintain the public's trust. Whistleblowers deserve the
safest avenues to make legal disclosures and expose wrongdoing. Agency
officials who retaliate against whistleblowers both violate their legal
rights and do real harm to our government and our country. These
officials betray the public's trust not only by allowing corruption and
abuse of power to continue, unaddressed, but by further exacerbating
it. That is why it is so important to hold retaliators accountable for
their actions and ensure that whistleblowers who experience retaliation
have a fair shot at justice and at being made whole.
This is especially true for VA whistleblowers, whose disclosures
can literally mean the difference between life and death. In 2014,
whistleblowers exposed that VA hospitals were falsifying records,
keeping secret wait lists, and allowing veterans to languish for months
without care.\1\ At least 40 veterans died while waiting for
appointments through the Phoenix, Arizona, VA health care system
alone.\2\ The VA's Office of the Inspector General (IG) later told the
House Veterans Affairs Committee that these secret wait lists
contributed to veterans' deaths.\3\ Officials used fake wait lists and
manipulated wait-list times to make them appear shorter, which
reportedly allowed them to personally collect performance bonuses.\4\
Complaints of inaccurate VA wait lists continued, and were alleged
nationwide in 2019.\5\ The IG later confirmed that wait-time data the
VA relied on was inconsistent and misleading.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ VA Office of Inspector General, Veterans Health Administration:
Review of Alleged Patient Deaths, Patient Wait Times, and Scheduling
Practices at the Phoenix VA Health Care System, 14-02603-267 (August
26, 2014), https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-14-02603-267.pdf.
\2\ Scott Bronstein and Drew Griffin, ``A fatal waitlist: Veterans
languish and die on a VA hospital's secret list,'' CNN, April 23, 2014,
https://www.cnn.com/2014/04/23/health/veterans-dying-health-care-
delays/.
\3\ Jim Avila, ``Phoenix Wait-Lists `Contributed' to VA Deaths,''
ABC News, September 17, 2014, https://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/
2014/09/phoenix-wait-lists-contributed-to-va-deaths/.
\4\ Quil Lawrence, ``Audit Reveals Vast Scale of VA Waitlist
Issues,'' NPR, June 9, 2014, https://www.npr.org/2014/06/09/320375564/
audit-reveals-vast-scale-of-va-waitlist-issues.
\5\ Joe Davidson, ``Whistleblower says there's a secret VA wait
list for care. The department says that's not true,'' Washington Post,
June 3, 2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/whistleblower-
says-theres-a-secret-va-wait-list-for-care-the-department-says-thats-
not-true/2019/06/01/197e59a2-83df-11e9-bce7-40b4105f7ca0_story.html.
\6\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Concerns with Consistency and Transparency in the Calculation and
Disclosure of Patient Wait Time Data, Memo #21-02761-125 (April 7,
2022), https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-21-02761-125.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many of the whistleblowers who played a critical role in exposing
these abusive practices paid with their careers. The VA placed a
California pharmacy supervisor on administrative leave after he raised
concerns about ``inordinate delays'' delivering medicine to patients.
In Pennsylvania, a former VA doctor was removed from clinical work
after he sounded the alarm about on-call physicians failing to report
to the hospital. In Appalachia, a VA nurse was forced out of her job
after reporting concerns regarding her patients being subjected to
medical neglect.\7\ POGO's 2014 investigation into the VA amid the
wait-list scandal exposed what insiders called a rampant ``culture of
harassment,'' one so ``full of fear and intimidation that very few
employees advocate for the [v]eteran.'' \8\ This culture of fear was
not limited to employees, either. Sources told POGO that families of VA
patients at the time reported ``fear of not being able to continue
receiving services, if they complain, or make concerns known.'' \9\
This was a shameful dereliction of duty and catastrophic failure of the
VA's core mission to care for veterans and their families and
caregivers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Whistleblower Claims at the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs: Hearing before the Senate Committee on Appropriations
Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related
Agencies (July 30, 2015) (testimony of Danielle Brian, executive
director, Project On Government Oversight), https://www.pogo.org/
testimonies/testimony-of-pogos-danielle-brian-on-whistleblower-claims-
at-us-department-of-veterans-affairs.
\8\ Lydia Dennett, ``Fear and Retaliation at the VA,'' Project On
Government Oversight, July 21, 2014, https://www.pogo.org/
investigations/fear-and-retaliation-at-va.
\9\ Dennett, ``Fear and Retaliation at the VA,'' [see note 8].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress attempted to address this scandal by establishing the VA's
Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection (OAWP) in 2017.
Congress authorized OAWP to fulfill a critically important mandate: to
improve VA accountability by receiving whistleblower disclosures and
investigating allegations of retaliation and wrongdoing against senior
executives and supervising employees.\10\ Prior to OAWP's
establishment, POGO and other whistleblower advocates raised concerns
about housing a central whistleblower office within the agency without
proper independence. While it was clear that more resources were
necessary to address the rise of whistleblower complaints, POGO
believed the office would not be sufficiently independent from the
agency to investigate and provide accountability.\11\ Reluctance of
employees at the VA to come forward to their own inspector general
indicated a culture of retaliation that likely would not be alleviated
by the creation of another office with similar ``independence'' at the
VA.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 38 U.S.C.Sec.  323(c) (2023), https://www.law.cornell.edu/
uscode/text/38/323.
\11\ Pending Health and Benefits Legislation: Hearing before the
Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs (May 17, 2017) (testimony of Liz
Hempowicz, policy counsel, Project On Government Oversight), https://
www.pogo.org/testimoneys/pogo-testimony-on-va-accountability-and-
whistleblower-protection-act.
\12\ Hempowicz, Pending Health and Benefits Legislation [see note
11].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the time, we warned that OAWP ``may well be a wolf in sheep's
clothing,'' and would risk ``becoming an internal clearinghouse to help
agency managers identify and retaliate against whistleblowers.'' \13\
Since then, POGO has investigated and reported about conflicts of
interest, waste, and whistleblower retaliation within OAWP itself.\14\
POGO also previously warned this Subcommittee that OAWP does not
operate as Congress intended, especially because of its lack of
independence and inability to enforce disciplinary recommendations.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Daniel Van Schooten, ``POGO and Others Oppose `Trojan Horse'
Office for VA Whistleblowers,'' Project On Government Oversight,
September 30, 2016, https://www.pogo.org/analysis/pogo-and-others-
oppose-trojan-horse-office-for-va-whistleblowers.
\14\ Daniel Van Schooten, `` `Terrified' of Retaliation: Inside
Veterans Affairs Whistleblower Office,'' Project On Government
Oversight, March 5, 2020, https://www.pogo.org/investigations/
terrified-of-retaliation-inside-veterans-affairs-whistleblower-office;
Adam Zagorin and Nick Schwellenbach, `` `Protect the Secretary': VA
Chief Robert Wilkie Installs Political Aide at Watchdog Investigating
His Inner Circle,'' Project On Government Oversight, December 16, 2020,
https://www.pogo.org/investigations/protect-the-secretary-va-chief-
robert-wilkie-instaldvjls-political-aide-at-watchdog-investigating-his-
inner-circle; Daniel Van Schooten, ``VA Whistleblower Office Wasted
$300,000 on `Useless' Training,'' Project On Government Oversight,
October 24, 2019, https://www.pogo.org/investigations/va-whistleblower-
office-wasted-300-000-on-useless-training.
\15\ Rebecca Jones, ``Whistleblower Retaliation at the Department
of Veterans Affairs,'' Project On Government Oversight, June 25, 2019,
https://www.pogo.org/testimonies/whistleblower-retaliation-at-the-
department-of-veterans-affairs; Protecting Whistleblowers and Promoting
Accountability: Is VA Making Progress?: Hearing before the House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations (May 19, 2021) (testimony of Melissa Wasser, policy
counsel, Project On Government Oversight), https://docs.house.gov/
meetings/VR/VR08/20210519/112646/HHRG-117-VR08-Wstate-WasserM-20210519-
U1.pdf; Ensuring Independence and Building Trust: Considering Reforms
To Whistleblower Protections at VA: Hearing before the House Committee
on Veterans' Affairs, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
(June 16, 2022) (testimony of Joanna Derman, policy analyst, Project On
Government Oversight), https://docs.house.gov/meetings/VR/VR08/
20220616/114903/HHRG-117-VR08-Wstate-DermanJ-20220616-U1.pdf.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAWP's Lack of Independence and Enforcement Authority

Because OAWP was established without its own in-house general
counsel, the office is forced to coordinate with and rely on the VA's
Office of General Counsel for legal advice and analysis concerning
proposed disciplinary actions against senior VA leaders.\16\ The
authorizing statute only stipulates that OAWP ``shall not be
established as an element of the Office of the General Counsel and the
Assistant Secretary may not report to the General Counsel,'' without
specifying how the two offices should or should not coordinate.\17\
However, in practice, when an OAWP investigation results in a
disciplinary recommendation, OAWP drafts a recommendation in
consultation with the Office of General Counsel and sends their draft
to that office for legal review. OAWP then engages with Office of
General Counsel attorneys and the management officials who will decide
whether to sustain, mitigate, or set aside the proposed disciplinary
action.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Failures Implementing Aspects of the VA Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017, Report #18-04968-249 (October 24,
2019), 6-7, https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-18-04968-249.pdf.
\17\ 38 U.S.C.Sec.  323(c)(3)(e) (2023), https://
www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/38/323.
\18\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Failures Implementing Aspects of the VA Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017 [see note 16].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is a clear conflict of interest because, although OAWP and the
Office of General Counsel are both housed within the VA, they have
conflicting mandates and their interests are not the same. OAWP is
charged with conducting objective, fact-based investigations and
analysis and ensuring whistleblower disclosures are properly
investigated. On the other hand, the Office of General Counsel's
mandate is to represent the best interests and meet the legal needs of
its client, the VA, including limiting its legal liability. POGO has
found department general counsels often believe their job is to protect
the public's perception of the department, future funding, and
individual jobs of senior leaders. It is entirely inappropriate for the
Office of General Counsel to be able to weigh in on a whistleblower
retaliation complaint or other allegations of senior leader misconduct.
The chance of improper consultation is too high and puts whistleblowers
at a severe disadvantage. Agency officials can reject OAWP
recommendations even if it finds senior officials engaged in misconduct
or retaliation. And OAWP lacks enforcement power to implement
disciplinary recommendations or corrective action that the VA chooses
not to implement. Even the appearance of a conflict on the part of the
Office of General Counsel undermines OAWP's independence and
effectiveness.
No internal whistleblower protection office can adequately protect
whistleblowers without real independence from the agency it
investigates. An office without enforcement authority is toothless,
because at most it can only make recommendations to the agency. OAWP
must have its own independent legal counsel, with the authority to
prepare legal opinions without review or approval from the Office of
General Counsel, as well as final decision-making authority for
disciplinary recommendations. This structure is not unprecedented: It
is used elsewhere in the federal government where independence is
critical, especially at offices of inspectors general that have their
own general counsel to provide unbiased and objective legal advice
around disciplinary or other corrective recommendations.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Ben Wilhelm, Congressional Research Service, Statutory
Inspectors General in the Federal Government: A Primer, R45450, updated
May 12, 2022, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45450.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAWP has concurred with this recommendation in the past, noting
that its reliance on the agency's general counsel causes unnecessary
delays in resolving cases and creates at the very least the appearance
of a conflict of interest.\20\ Removing the bias of the agency from
this equation would help better prevent retaliation, protect
whistleblowers, and hold more senior officials accountable for
misconduct.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Department of Veterans Affairs, Report to The Committee on
Veterans Affairs of the Senate and The Committee on Veterans Affairs of
the House of Representatives on the Activities of the Office of
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection, For the Period: June 30,
2017 - June 30, 2018, 22 (July 2018), ANNUAL-REPORT-Office-of-
Accountability-and-Whistleblower-Protections-Activities.pdf.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAWP Retaliation

In addition to concerns about structural independence and conflicts
of interest failing to protect whistleblowers, perhaps most concerning
are instances where OAWP has been the source of retaliation.\21\
Reporting in 2020 showed that OAWP retaliated against Anthony Everett,
a whistleblower leading the security team that protects senior VA
officials. Everett reported to OAWP what he viewed as an ethical breach
and a misuse of taxpayer money by two senior VA officials, then-Acting
Deputy Secretary Pamela Powers and then-Chief of Human Resources Daniel
Sitterly. Everett's disclosure was supposed to be kept confidential,
but just three hours after he made his disclosure, Powers demoted him
with no reason given.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Eric Katz, ``VA Office Meant to Protect Whistleblowers
Actually Helped Retaliate Against Them, IG Finds,'' Government
Executive (October 24, 2019), https://www.govexec.com/management/2019/
10/va-office-meant-protectwhistleblowers-actually-retaliated-against-
them-ig-finds/160847/.
\22\ Lisa Rein, ``Biden's new VA chief inherits oversight office
from Trump viewed as abetting corruption,'' Washington Post (February
18, 2021), https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/biden-mcdonough-va-
whistleblower-trump-/2021/02/16/072bab0e-5ced-11eb-b8bd-
ee36b1cd18bf_story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shortly thereafter, then-VA Secretary Robert Wilkie installed
Sitterly, who was under investigation by OAWP at the time, to be
second-in-command of the office. This was over the objections of then-
Assistant Secretary for Accountability and Whistleblower Protection
Tamara Bonzanto, who had already conducted a search for candidates and
selected one to fill the position. According to POGO's sources,
Sitterly repeatedly asked the office's staff about specific
whistleblower cases, including whether employees he identified by name
had made whistleblower disclosures, and whether any whistleblower
disclosures implicated senior VA officials. Other leaders within OAWP
reportedly replied that, for privacy and confidentiality reasons, such
information could not be released, yet he persisted in making those
requests. A whistleblower complaint about Wilkie also cited an exchange
between Powers and Bonzanto regarding the role of whistleblowers at
OAWP. According to the complaint, Bonzanto told Powers that employees
have a right to raise concerns, to which Powers replied, ``Yes, but we
also have to protect the Secretary,'' and that there are ``a lot of
problematic employees in OAWP.'' \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Zagorin and Schwellenbach, `` `Protect the Secretary' '' [see
note 14].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, VA employees have reported similar improper
coordination between OAWP and the VA. This includes OAWP wrongfully
referring whistleblower retaliation cases to other department
components despite having jurisdiction, including to ``the very
facilities or network offices where the complainant worked or that were
the subject of the allegations,'' and requiring whistleblowers to
consent to OAWP releasing their identities before investigating or
referring their case, in direct conflict with OAWP's responsibility to
keep whistleblowers' identities confidential.\24\ The VA's repeated
attempts to undermine or otherwise assert undue influence over OAWP
speaks to the need for the office's greater independence from the
agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Eric Katz, ``VA Office Meant to Protect Whistleblowers
Actually Helped Retaliate Against Them, IG Finds,'' [see note 21];
Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General, Failures
Implementing Aspects of the VA Accountability and Whistleblower
Protection Act of 2017, ii [see note 16].

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAWP's Failure to Hold Senior Leaders Accountable

Another key part of OAWP's mandate is to investigate misconduct of
senior leaders, but early results demonstrate OAWP's failure to hold
high-ranking officials accountable. Despite receiving nearly 2,000
submissions from whistleblowers from June 2017 to June 2018, OAWP was
unable to secure any meaningful disciplinary action against VA
executives or senior leadership. In fact, over the course of OAWP's
first year of operation, only 0.1 percent of disciplinary actions were
taken against VA executives or senior leadership, a figure on par with
the years prior to the office's creation. In contrast, 36.4 percent of
disciplinary actions within the same timeframe were taken against
lower-level VA employees, between GS rank 1 and GS rank 6.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Department of Veterans Affairs, Report to The Committee on
Veterans Affairs of the Senate And The Committee on Veterans Affairs of
the House of Representatives [see note 20].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This failure led to the Office of Inspector General's scathing 2019
report, which found ``significant deficiencies'' in how the VA
Accountability and Whistleblower Protection Act was being implemented
and that OAWP had ``floundered in its mission to protect
whistleblowers.'' \26\ The report even found that in some cases, OAWP
investigations were instruments of retaliation.\27\ Despite this,
accountability was scarce. From June 23, 2017, to March 22, 2019,
officials involved in covered executive disciplinary actions
(proposing, deciding, or grievance officials) mitigated the discipline
recommended by OAWP in 32 of the 35 covered executive cases that
proceeded to a final decision. OAWP's recommendation was accepted only
three times.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Failures Implementing Aspects of the VA Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017, ii [see note 16].
\27\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Failures Implementing Aspects of the VA Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017, iv, 53 [see note 16].
\28\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Failures Implementing Aspects of the VA Accountability and
Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017, 37 [see note 16].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During a 2022 subcommittee hearing on this topic, then-Subcommittee
Chair Chris Pappas (D-NH) reported that in 2021 OAWP made 15
disciplinary recommendations against senior leaders who retaliated, but
the VA acted on only five, and only fully implemented one.\29\ Then-
Ranking Member Tracey Mann (R-KS) reported that an investigation into a
senior official found that they did retaliate, and even though OAWP
recommended discipline and the VA agreed, it was never carried out: The
report was allegedly delayed for more than a year, then finalized the
same week the individual retired. As Representative Mann analogized,
``The fox is guarding the hen house, and it's time for a change.'' \30\
Without more accountability, the VA sends a message to its officials
that they can act with impunity, especially regarding senior leader
misconduct and whistleblower retaliation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Ensuring Independence and Building Trust: Considering Reforms
to Whistleblower Protections at VA: Hearing before the House Committee
on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
117th Cong. (June 16, 2022), https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=RzdMvL_vb_w.
\30\  Ensuring Independence and Building Trust: Hearing before the
House Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations [see note 29].

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent Improvements

OAWP leadership deserves credit for implementing recommendations
from the 2019 report from the Office of the Inspector General,
including hiring needed staff, conducting educational training
exercises, and significantly reducing the backlog of investigations.
However, OAWP's larger structural issues continue to undermine the
office's independence and ability to fulfill its important mission and
mitigate retaliation.
The Office of Special Counsel continues to receive far more cases
from VA employees than any other agency, a majority of which (69
percent) involve alleged whistleblower retaliation.\31\ The percentage
of favorable actions in VA whistleblower retaliation cases at the
Office of Special Counsel increased from 3 percent in fiscal year 2018
to 10 percent in FY 2022. However, while the total number of VA
whistleblower retaliation cases has generally decreased over the last
five years, the proportion of VA cases of prohibited personnel
practices that include a whistleblower retaliation allegation has
generally increased.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\  Office of Special Counsel, Annual Report to Congress for
Fiscal Year 2023, (June 26, 2023), https://osc.gov/Documents/Resources/
Congressional%20Matters/Annual%20Reports%20to%20Congress/
FY%202022%20Annual%20Report%20to%20Congress.pdf; Government
Accountability Office, VA Whistleblowers: Resolution Process for
Retaliation Claims, GAO-23-106111 (2023), https://www.gao.gov/assets/
gao-23-106111.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, while we are hopeful about improvements that new OAWP
leadership has made to the culture of whistleblowing at the VA, any
such improvements can easily be undone by future leadership and are no
substitute for the structural reforms that OAWP needs.

Ensuring Due Process

We appreciate the bipartisan commitment to holding senior leaders
accountable for retaliation and other misconduct and the urgency to
address this issue. At the same time, accountability must include
necessary due process rights for all VA employees. Any departure from
that due process sets the agency up for further scandal, low morale,
and mission failure. Streamlining removal processes may be one way to
rid the agency of bad actors, but it should not come at the cost of
stripping hard-fought workplace protections from all employees,
including whistleblowers themselves.
Without independence from their parent agencies, self-policing
entities will continue to protect senior leaders while facilitating the
removal of lower-level employees, placing whistleblowers at further
risk of retaliation. Stripping civil service protections is a surefire
way to curtail whistleblowing, because employees who are already
vulnerable to retaliation will face increased obstacles to coming
forward. But if, on the contrary, employees have full civil service
protections and safe avenues to report wrongdoing, it will empower more
whistleblowers to speak out and expose misconduct, ensuring the VA can
better fulfill its mission of serving veterans and their families. The
path to better accountability is to provide for OAWP's independence
from the agency; ensure that senior leaders' misconduct is swiftly and
properly investigated; authorize OAWP to enforce disciplinary
recommendations; and ensure that whistleblowers are protected and, when
faced with retaliation, have a fair shot to prevail on the merits of
their claims and to be made whole.
POGO is pleased to see this subcommittee engaging on whistleblower
policy. We encourage Congress to act expeditiously to provide OAWP with
its own independent legal counsel with final determination for
disciplinary recommendations and enforcement authority to ensure that
the VA holds senior leaders accountable for retaliation and other
misconduct. With these suggested reforms, OAWP can become more
independent, better protect whistleblowers, ensure unbiased reviews of
allegations, and bring about more accountability for agency officials.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify before you today. POGO
is committed to working closely with this subcommittee to enact these
recommendations and further explore how Congress can better protect VA
whistleblowers and ensure senior leaders are held accountable for their
actions.
______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Paul Pearson
