- SINK OR SWIM? A DEEP DIVE INTO THE CURRENT STATE OF VA'S HOME LOAN PROGRAM IN A COMPETITIVE MARKET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SINK OR SWIM? A DEEP DIVE INTO
THE CURRENT STATE OF VA'S HOME LOAN
PROGRAM IN A COMPETITIVE MARKET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-53

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-187                     WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California Ranking
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Member
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Derrick Van Orden, Chairman........................     1
The Honorable Mike Levin, Ranking Member.........................     3

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Mr. John E. Bell, Executive Director, Loan Guaranty Service,
Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     4

Panel 2

Mr. Edward J. DeMarco, President, Housing Policy Council.........    16

Mr. Mark Jones, Chairman, Mortgage Bankers Association...........    17

Mr. Steve Sharpe, Senior Attorney, National Consumer Law Center..    19

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. John E. Bell Prepared Statement..............................    27
Mr. Edward J. DeMarco Prepared Statement.........................    34
Mr. Mark Jones Prepared Statement................................    53
Mr. Steve Sharpe Prepared Statement..............................    64

SINK OR SWIM? A DEEP DIVE INTO
THE CURRENT STATE OF VA'S HOME LOAN
PROGRAM IN A COMPETITIVE MARKET

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:42 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Derrick Van Orden
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Van Orden, Ciscomani, Crane,
Levin, McGarvey, and Ramirez.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DERRICK VAN ORDEN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Van Orden. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come
to order.
Before we begin the hearing today, I would like to take a
moment to speak about Mike Gill from the Housing Policy Council
(HPC). Mike was a tremendous source of knowledge on housing
policy to all of us in this room and a good friend to many of
those present here today. We appreciate all the work he did to
make the lives of veterans better and to impact so many people.
We are very sorry to have lost him at such a young age, and our
hearts go out to his family and friends. I would ask you that
you join me in a moment of silence, please.
Thank you. I want to thank everyone for being here today to
discuss Veterans Administration's (VA) home loan program. As I
have said many times, this is not a bipartisan committee. This
is a nonpartisan committee, and it is going to stay that way. I
am very thankful for your cooperation. I just am.
VA's Home loan program is an important benefit for veterans
to achieve the American dream of home ownership. I believe it
is essential that we support that dream for our veterans who
have served our country. I have used this program myself, and
it is awesome.
Last year, the VA helped 145,480 veterans to stay in their
homes through various programs and communication efforts. This
is a great feat, and I do applaud the VA for this on behalf and
like to thank them from all the veterans.
Today, our subcommittee has come together to evaluate the
VA's home loan program and its performance in this current
competitive market, and this program must be protected. As I
said, I have used this and so have many of my friends.
This year, the VA intends to roll out the Veterans Affairs
Service Purchasing program, or VASP, as a new approach to keep
veterans in their homes. I will be honest, I have grave
reservations about this proposed program and the unintended
consequences this may have on the overall home loan program,
and I am concerned that it could actually ultimately destroy
it.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the VA was given the
authority to operate a partial claim payment program to address
the potential surge in foreclosures for veterans. There have
also been proposals to reinstate this authority as an
alternative to VASP. I want to make it clear, I firmly believe
the VA has the best intentions to serve our Nation's veterans.
VA employees across the country work hard to ensure that
veterans use the home loan benefits they have rightfully earned
by defending our country. I am very eager to hear what you are
going to say, what the witnesses are going to say, and the
answers to several questions that will be asked that I have
about the proposed changes and how the current program is
operating.
However, over the last year, the subcommittee has received
little information about how the proposed VASP program would
operate. We have also received little information about the
expected cost of the program and even less information
regarding how much such a program would affect the larger
mortgage markets.
Recently, we have seen a push from the administration for a
moratorium on foreclosures and we have no idea how that is
affecting the markets, and all of this is cause for concern.
While VA has promised to be transparent about the program,
Congress, mortgage lenders, and veterans have been left in the
dark for most of the last year. Even though the subcommittee
has asked for multiple brief explanations regarding VASP and
has even said a bipartisan letter, VA has been silent.
Our current understanding is that VASP will allow veterans
who are at least two payments delinquent to refinance their
loan down to 2.5 percent interest and that the VA would take
over servicing the loan. While this program may benefit some
veterans who are at risk of foreclosure, it also poses real
moral hazards of encouraging veteran borrowers to become
delinquent to take advantage of a much lower monthly payment.
It also poses a risk for VA and other taxpayers who would
become responsible if VA-financed loaned ownership experience
high delinquency rates. According to the Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) last week, VA could be responsible for nearly
21,000 loans under this program. This is very concerning to me
as it makes it seem like the program is going to be used as a
short-term election gimmick, unfortunately, from the White
House, rather than a viable program that would help veterans.
Mr. Bell, I would like to have a follow-up discussion with
Josh Jacobs and the full committee chairman to discuss the
proposals of this program, and I would appreciate it if you
would communicate that message to him and ask him to arrange
that with committee staff. Thank you.
I have also heard from stakeholders about the shortage of
information on the veteran home loan program and the rising
number of foreclosures. This data is essential to understanding
the effect of these programs in the mortgage industry and
markets.
While I plan to introduce a bill shortly that would require
VA to publicly report their home loan data, we need answers on
VASP today. These recent concerns and unanswered questions from
the VA must be solved before the VA can move forward with VASP
in good faith. VA must also be held to the highest standard to
ensure the efficient delivery of benefits without a need for
Congress to intervene repeatedly.
My focus continues to be on ensuring that veterans remain
in their homes whenever possible, and on mitigating housing
instability in cases where maintaining a mortgage has become
untenable. However, the potential delays and issues with the
VASP program's rollout are concerning, especially given that
they could evolve into a financial burden of billions of
dollars in bailouts, which would fall on the shoulders of
taxpayers to bear.
Once again, I thank everyone for coming today. I look
forward to the productive discussion on what is going well and
what needs to be improved in the VA.
With that, I yield to the ranking member for his remarks.
Mike.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE LEVIN, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Levin. I thank my friend, the chairman, and I really
thank him, particularly for holding this hearing on a program
that has long been one of VA's most important benefits to
veterans and has traditionally operated smoothly.
We have an obligation to protect our veterans, especially
during times of financial distress, to ensure that they and
their families do not lose their homes. The VA Home Loan
Guaranty program stood up assistance during the COVID-19
pandemic to do just that, help veterans avoid foreclosure. For
those who were not with the committee during that period, it is
worth noting that VA proactively took action without the need
for congressional authorization. We lauded that decision at the
time, and it likely kept thousands of veterans in their homes
during a global pandemic.
However, in the last few years, VA ended some of those
measures put in place during the COVID pandemic. That
termination has coincided with interest rate spikes, making
some of VA's traditional foreclosure mitigation measures less
impactful or, in some cases, not helpful at all.
I understand VA recently extended some of these measures
through May 31, 2024, possibly in response to a letter that
Chairman Van Orden and I sent to the agency last month. I
appreciate VA's efforts, but I remain concerned with the
partial claims program termination, which has forced veterans
in distress to choose between foreclosure or higher interest
rate loan modifications.
I think we all recognize that VA cannot prevent every
foreclosure on the loans it guarantees, but we expect the VA
loan guaranty office to exhaust every option so that
foreclosures rarely happen. That is why it is my goal to leave
this hearing with a comprehensive understanding of what
authorities VA has, what authorities VA needs, and what VA
needs financially to ensure foreclosures only occur in the most
extreme circumstances.
I have real concerns with the current refund modification
program and empathize with the veterans who are trying to
navigate it. In agreeing to a modification, veterans are unable
to keep the low interest rate they secured before or during the
COVID pandemic, resulting in dramatic increases to their
monthly mortgage payments. Is this truly an effective way to
mitigate foreclosures for veterans who already cannot afford
their monthly payments?
We are here today to ask the Department how we can ensure
we are providing a useful benefit that empowers veterans and
closes any opportunity gaps that exist with their peers who did
not serve. It is critical that this subcommittee examine
whether the Department has enough resources to adequately
support our veterans. It is so important that we get this
right, and there is absolutely a need to ensure VA has the
funding and the employees to efficiently deliver these
benefits.
I hope to learn more from you today on the VASP program. As
my friend the chairman said, we need answers on VASP today.
Looking forward also to hearing from our community
partners. I thank you all for being here today, and the
feedback from the people you all represent will help us review
the process as we focus on serving veterans and protecting
their earned benefits.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
I will now introduce the witness panel. Our witness for
this panel is Mr. John Bell, the executive director of
education services at the Department of Veterans Affairs. I ask
the witness on our first panel to please stand and raise your
right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Van Orden. Let the record reflect that the witness has
answered in the affirmative.
Mr. Bell, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Please have
your seat. There are some lights in front of you, and that
means 5 minutes, so please, Mr. Bell.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BELL

Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. Thank you. Good afternoon. Chairman Van
Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and other members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for this opportunity to speak with you
today about the Department of Veteran Affairs' VA home loan
program. It is been almost 80 years since those who defeated
tyranny at the Battle of the Bulge, the Battle of Midway, and
other strongholds of World War II returned home and embraced
the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944. Known as the GI
Bill, this legislation not only changed the lives of many of
those returning men and women, but it also changed the face of
America. Using the home loan program, veterans bought 20
percent of all new homes built after the war. Subsequent
generations of veterans, like you, Chairman Van Orden, and your
grandfather, Ranking Member Levin, and me, continue to have the
opportunity to access this earned benefit.
To meet the needs of every generation of the Nation's
veterans, VA has improved processes, technology, and the use of
data to create a competitive loan product. Data shows VA
purchased loans are closing in an average of 32 days, while
other industry programs are at 44. While in the past there have
been many perceptions that VA appraisals were too conservative,
94 percent of VA appraisals have met or exceeded the sales
price this Fiscal Year alone. Even though we are improving the
home loan program in many ways, one thing will always remain
the same: we are committed to helping veterans stay in their
home, as we are as helping them achieve homeownership.
Like other homeowners, veterans face life challenges, such
as job loss, divorce, and catastrophic illness, which can
derail their lives. When those unexpected challenges happen,
and veterans reach out for support, VA and loan servicers are
equipped to guide veteran homeowners through the steps that
they need to take to retain their homes. As an example, last
year a homeowner at risk of losing her home reached out to her
assigned VA loan technician, who helped her apply and secure
$20,000 in homeowner's assistance funds.
Even as we take pride in these strides and success stories,
I acknowledge many veterans were and continue to be affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, VA quickly leveraged
capabilities to build two temporary safety net programs: the
COVID-19 Veterans Assistance Partial Claim Payment program and
the COVID-19 Refund Modification program.
Even though the storm of the pandemic has passed, we are
preparing to launch the VA Servicing Purchase program, VASP,
which is anticipated to assist nearly 40,000 veterans who are
at risk of losing their homes. VASP will provide veterans with
an affordable scheduled monthly mortgage payment that reduces
debt owed over time at a rate much lower than the current
market interest rate.
Where the partial claim program provides short-term relief,
it may leave veterans with large balloon payments at the end of
their loan. Rather than mortgaging their futures for a short
term gain, VASP provides veterans long-term financial security
and does not burden them with a balloon payment. VASP also
ensures the government is better protected from certain
financial and legal risk, thus preserving this earned benefit
for future generations of veterans.
Mr. Chairman, I opened today's testimony talking about a
World War II veteran. It is fitting that in my closing remarks
I tell you about a 95-year-old World War II veteran who reached
out to us to wage his last battle, which was to retain his
home. This veteran fell behind on his mortgage payment and
contacted his assigned VA loan technician, who worked
diligently and explored every option to advocate for the
veteran. I am happy to report that the loan's current, allowing
this veteran the dignity to remain in his home.
All of our efforts by our extraordinary staff over the
years have transformed our reputation, making VA's home loan
program a product of choice instead of the loan of last resort.
This prime program truly honors veterans for their immense
sacrifices on behalf of this grateful Nation.
This concludes my testimony. I welcome any questions that
you or other members of the subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of John Bell Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Bell. The written statement
for Mr. Bell will be entered into the hearing record.
We are now to proceed to questionings, and I ask the
members to keep their questioning to 5 minutes. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bell, did you get a note from my committee staff saying
that I specifically wanted you to address VASP in your
testimony?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. I believe in my written testimony.
Mr. Van Orden. Well, you did in your written testimony. I
wanted to hear it. I wanted to hear you say that stuff out loud
because you buried the lead. The one contentious thing that we
have that is potentially a problem that we need to discuss
openly, you completely ignored. You buried it. You have to get
to the ninth page of your testimony before you even address the
thing that I am very concerned about.
This speaks to something. I have very little confidence in
the Veterans Administration's ability to effectively administer
this program that you failed to even mention. I am concerned
that you could potentially destroy the VA home loan program and
damage the larger housing market.
I understand that you are well-meaning in your intentions.
However, the road to hell is paved with good intentions, and I
am concerned that you do not have the authority statutorily, in
the governing statues for the home loan program and that you
are simply making this up.
I have concerns now, and I do not care who is in the White
House, because this affects our veterans and is not political.
Can you please provide us right now with specific authorities
outlined in statute that would authorize such a dramatic and
drastic change in operation of the home loan program?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir, 38 USC 3732, as an authorization for
VASP, as well as our current regulation at 38 CFR 4320.
Mr. Van Orden. You interpret these to allow you to
potentially make the American public responsible for billions
of dollars in debt. Is that what you thought?
Mr. Bell. Those are our thoughts, yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Well, we are going to talk about that
in detail later because you are wrong.
We understand that some express concerns that VASP will
target an interest rate of 2-1/2 percent. Most veteran
borrowers have an interest rate exceeding 3 percent, and many
more recently, because of inflation, are significantly higher.
Are you concerned that the borrowers will intentionally default
in order to receive a lower payment? If so, what is the VA's
plan to address this concern?
Mr. Bell. First and foremost, we were looking for a
solution to be able to help 40,000 borrowers stay off
foreclosure. With that, we did put in protocols in our policy
that we are trying to get released, and in that they would have
to make 6 months of mortgage payments when they did a
modification throughout our loss mitigation waterfall.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I am going to ask you this question
again, because it was very simple. Do you think if you are
going to allow--if someone has a 7 percent interest rate, for
instance, and they default on those payments and you are going
to give them a 2-1/2 percent interest rate, knocking off all
the rest of that stuff, do you think that maybe people would
have the propensity to do that?
Mr. Bell. Well, sir, I think it is relevant here that we
talk about our portfolio is not at a 7 percent rate. Our
portfolio is 90 percent right now at--almost 90 percent right
now at a 2-1/2 to 3 percent coupon rate.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I am going to ask you this question
one more time.
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Do you think if you could essentially
refinance a home loan for a lower interest rate for free and
stick the bill to somebody else, do you think people might do
that? That is a yes or no, because I have 1 minute left.
Mr. Bell. Well, speaking from a veteran myself who have
used this program for five different times, I find it, you
know, I find it hard to believe that a veteran would go through
something as major and substantial as a foreclosure on their
credit that is going to be there for 5 to----
Mr. Van Orden. Okay, Mr. Bell, no. You did not answer that
question and you are really starting to irritate me because
this program has the potential to destroy the entire program by
driving the Veterans Administration into the dirt, along with
other markets. If you can remove, arbitrarily, interest rates,
meaning capital, from a market because you thought you could
statutorily, and you are wrong, you are going to upset the
apple cart. I do not think you have thought this program
through.
With that, I yield back because my time has expired.
I now recognize my friend, Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Bell, I appreciate a recent response to our
letters on this issue. You indicated that VA is working to
publish guidance on the VA servicing program soon with an
anticipated program launch in spring 2024. Can you provide any
more specificity on the timeline for rolling the program out?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. We are working every day to try to get
an announcement out for the, one, what is VASP, the policy
documents out to the industry, so that they can understand and
they can start building their technology to match that policy,
as well as set a target date on implementation later in the
year. We are working diligently every day to try to get that
announcement out. The policy documents have been completed. We
are working as hard as we can to get those out.
Mr. Levin. Can you run through the options and the costs
under the program?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. The 2-1/2 percent rate that we talked
about before, we had two options at the industry that we talked
to the industry, including the panelists, the second panel. We
talked with each one of them over 10 times in this past year,
as well as numerous bodies, OMB, Ginnie Mae, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB). We had----
Mr. Levin. Right. I just want to know about the options and
the costs.
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. For the VASP program alone, what it
does is it takes the arrears that are owed on the loan. It then
puts a term of 30 or 40 years, depending upon what the monthly
payment reduction would be for the borrower. It places those
arrears inside of that balance so that they are paying one
mortgage over a period of time that is consistent. Whether or
not it is a 30-year or 40-year term, they are paying that same
payment over that time to pay back that debt.
It is not where we are, like the partial claim program,
where we took arrears and then we set it aside and we charge 0
percent interest rate for that money. Then at some point in
time, there is going to be a balloon payment for the veteran at
the 5-year mark, the 6-year mark, where if they go to sell that
home, surprisingly now they have got to pay $30,000 or $50,000
to pay off that debt that was secured by the government at the
0 percent interest rate?
Mr. Levin. Appreciate that. Running out of time, but wanted
to ask you about the Refund Modification program and
specifically ask why it allows for much higher monthly mortgage
payments when the entire purpose of the program is to avoid
foreclosure due to financial hardship and reduce the risk of
repeated default.
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. The Refund Modification program takes
into consideration what the market interest rate is today.
Because market interest rates have risen so rapidly over the
past 2 years, as well as taxes have increased and homeowner's
insurance have increased in those particular markets, their
payments are going up even if they do a refund modification.
The refund modification is, yes, to normally reduce their
payment and get them into a better situation. Unfortunately,
outside market influences of----
Mr. Levin. Gotcha. What are you going to do to make these
veterans whole? Obviously that program is not working as you
intended.
Mr. Bell. That is why we were, as another part of the loss
mitigation waterfall, we wanted to place VASP at the end, as it
was the last resort for them. We would go through the loss
mitigation options. We put out a circular and policy the other
day that said to the industry, if you are going forward through
the loss mitigation waterfall and the borrower gets to
foreclosure and you are trying to foreclose, you need to come
to VA before you can do that. Let us see what options are
available for the borrower to make sure that they have----
Mr. Levin. What if the veteran has already signed up for a
higher interest rate loan modification? What then?
Mr. Bell. VA has a broad--the Secretary has broad authority
in a default situation that we can refund a loan and take it on
our books. We have done this for 30 years.
Mr. Levin. Last question for you because I am running out
of time. If you have veterans who are upside down and, you
know, unfortunately, these programs are not working as
intended, they wind up with higher interest rates, they cannot
afford their situation. They wind up housing insecure, food
insecure, mental health challenges arise. How is your office
working proactively with the rest of the VA to help connect
these veterans to the services they need?
Mr. Bell. Again, every veteran's unique and every situation
is unique when it comes to servicing, which is why we need----
Mr. Levin. All right, so not enough.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. I now recognize my friend Mr. McGarvey for 5
minutes.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bell,
for being here today.
Obviously, you sense the nature of this panel is to help
our veterans, and we want to make sure that our veterans are
getting all of these benefits they deserve. I do want to tell
you off the bat, I share the concern of some of my colleagues,
particularly when we are talking about foreclosures. Even with
the VA taking action with VASP, we know that these foreclosures
are happening.
I am sure you know this as a veteran yourself, as working
in the industry, as long as you have, these foreclosures have
devastating effects on our veterans. They have devastating
effects on the families of our veterans. They harm the
neighborhoods and communities when they happen. These ripples
go out a long way for a long time. I really think we need to be
thinking about and putting the domino effects of inaction or
any slip-ups here as we roll out these new programs front and
center of what we are talking about.
I am especially concerned about the knowledge gap that
might exist as it relates to our veterans using these programs.
We bought our first home for the first time in 2007, which
seems like a long time ago now. I know as a first-time home
buyer, it is a scary process for anybody, much less whether you
are a veteran.
You talk about dealing with this process, then navigating
the process of buying a home, taking out a mortgage, and then
dealing with the shifting environment in the VA home loan
program on top of that, that has got to be pretty daunting for
some of our veterans. Let us talk a little bit about the
outreach program in particular.
Mr. Bell, what is the outreach strategy to our vets so that
they know about what is happening? They know about the current
pause in the forbearance repayments, the forthcoming VASP
program, what is going on and what does the outreach look like?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question. Outreach
is tremendously important to us, and here is what we have done.
We have at the 60-day mark, 120-day mark, and anytime an
action is taken, we are sending out letters. We are making
proactive outreach to veterans. We took this one step further,
and we own any loan that is 90 days-plus delinquent. We then
also sent out a new letter that basically gives them
information about not only VA, but other state programs that
might be available to them, such as homeowner's assistance
funds. We also have information about our veteran banking
program. They get free credit counseling, and again, they are
assigned loan technician in which they can call.
Then we, also, again, we send out the policy to our
servicers that if they take a negative action from a
foreclosure standpoint moving forward, they have to reach out
to us and give us an opportunity to make sure that the veteran
is given every option possible before a foreclosure happens.
Mr. McGarvey. I appreciate that. My fear, my worry, my
concern, that is not enough. We are talking about letters. We
are talking about letters that are happening at certain points
in time along the way. You know, I am concerned about what is
happening today in real time with our vets, like a hotline that
vets could call, a portal, any online strategies. Is there
anything like that in development today to help our vets with
this process so they do not just have the rug ripped out from
under them?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. We are one of the only agencies out
there that have our most experienced individuals answering
phone calls. They are answering 860,000 calls a year, or just
this past fiscal year. With that, those are our most
experienced loan technicians. They are not getting a call
center. They are getting directly into someone that can help
them because as you stated earlier, it is one of the most
trying times in their lives. We wanted not a warm handoff. We
wanted them to speak directly to our most experienced loan
technicians when they call.
We are also making those outbound calls. We have also put
information on our website where veterans can go to, and that
is in the letter as well, the links to those websites on how
they get more information about the VA.
Mr. McGarvey. I appreciate that and my time is running out,
so I just want to make this point that we need to be doing
everything we can. This outreach is so important in a variety
of different ways. I want to make sure you guys are also
working with the private mortgage industry and those lenders to
make sure they do not misunderstand their roles and are
screwing over our vets as well.
I am out of time, though, so I am going to yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from the state of Arizona, my
great friend, Mr. Juan Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bell,
for being here today, coming to testify for us.
As we all know, our Nation faces a housing affordability
crisis overall. With a shortage of new homes and the price of
existing homes skyrocketing, coupled with high interest rates
and inflation, families are finding it harder and harder to
find a place to call home. Even more of a concern is how these
conditions particularly impact our veterans and their families.
I have over 70,000 veterans in my district, and I will be
interested in hearing today how the VA is working to improve
the attractiveness of veterans as homebuyers, not only in urban
areas, like Tucson in my district, but also in rural parts of
my district, which is then, in terms of landmass, the majority
of my district, nearby Cochise County, Greenlee County for me,
and Graham County, as well Pinal, also.
Mr. Bell, are you concerned at all that with the level of
transparency that appears to be lacking within the VA home loan
program? Why is the VA so much less transparent when it comes
to home loan data when compared to similar programs
administered by Federal Housing Administration (FHA) or United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA)? When looking at a
program as large as VASP is proposed to be, how can Congress
perform its oversight role if we are not able to see this data?
A lot of questions in there, but the theme here is a
transparency piece. Access to data, you know, compared to other
programs, we would just not have that at the VA. Give me your
thoughts and potential solution to that, please.
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir. Data and data transparency is something
that is near and dear to my heart. I actually chair the
government agency Mortgage Industry Standards Maintenance
Organization (MISMO) Standards Board right now. What my goal
is, is for us collectively to share the same data and define
the data the same way. I think that is where you see some of
the biggest issues and concerns of the industry, is there is
not a data standard across origination all the way to servicing
that is universally accepted.
Right now, we are almost there with MISMO, working with
Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA), you know, to get that
finalized. It usually takes around 5 to 7 years to finalize one
of those features, like for origination or for appraisal, for
servicing. We have asked for that to be done in 18 months, and
we have raised our hand to work so that we can do that. Once we
do that, we can now tie in the data from performance on how a
loan performed with how it was originated. We can start seeing
key trends and get information on how to train better and give
more education to where we need to have the education.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, I am looking forward to seeing how
that works. I think this is key and important.
On the same kind of tone here or vein, are you aware if
home sellers are statistically less likely to sell to a
veteran, and what data exists on this?
Mr. Bell. Thank you for this question, sir. I testified
here in December 2021 on the veterans' issues in buying homes.
I testified with NAR, the National Association of Realtors.
From that hearing, the thing that is the primary theme here is
real estate agents are the primary guardian of the veteran
through that home loan process.
Mr. Ciscomani. I am sorry to jump in because I only have 1
more minute, but is there data on that, like specific data on
if sellers are less likely to sell to veterans?
Mr. Bell. What we are showing is it's misperception. Right?
Again, as I stated earlier, when 94 percent of your appraisals
are at or exceeding market price, sales price, that is a pretty
good indicator.
The other indicator is we lead the way in the market.
Eighty-six percent of veterans that start an application close,
which is----
Mr. Ciscomani. They are different pieces of data and they
are not one specific on that.
I have one more question. How does a shortage of VA home
loan appraisers impact rural veterans in particular? How can we
modernize this process?
Mr. Bell. We have nationally, since we had the 7735
legislation that came from Chairman Bost last year----
Mr. Van Orden. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentlelady from the great state of
Illinois, Mrs. Ramirez, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman.
If you have--it was one sentence to wrap up, you can do
that, but you just got 10 seconds.
Mr. Bell. Thank you so much. All I was going to say is we
have reduced appraisal timelines by 49 percent since last year,
and we are delivering appraisals in 6.7 days and, again,
closing loans in 32 days. The data shows the VA home loan
program should be the product of choice.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Thank you. Housing is one of the most
important issues for me, and actually one of the reasons why I
came to Congress. During the pandemic we saw the importance of
being able to provide resources, particularly to our veterans,
who, for one reason or the other, were seeing some of the
highest housing insecurity levels we had ever seen. I know we
like to say that the public health emergency ended on paper,
but the reality is our veterans at home are still feeling the
impacts of COVID-19.
You know, I think of my district and the city of Chicago,
and certainly we see it everywhere. People who have lived in
our neighborhoods, who are trying to keep their homes are
struggling, but veterans who want to purchase their homes are
also struggling finding affordable homeownership. This issue,
and particularly talking about loans today, is really important
to me.
I know that the VA implemented a COVID-19 Veterans
Assistance Partial Claim payment. Let me say it again. The
Veterans Assistance Partial Claim payment, PCP, and the COVID-
19 Refund Modification, loan modification. I understand that
both of those programs have been successful. As the VA
continues to work on programs to prevent veterans from
experiencing homelessness, Mr. Bell, I do have a few questions
to ask you.
Can the VA require loan services to accept ongoing monthly
payments if the veteran is behind or delinquent and in danger
of foreclosure? Let me restate that for you, just to make sure
that you understand the question. If I say it another way, can
the VA require servicers to accept payments that are less than
the full payment?
For example, we know that there are situations where a
veteran had a series of months in which they were not able to
make their payments, but now they are in a better position to
start making payments again. However, the veteran can only
afford to pay the monthly amount, not the rest of it that would
cover the cost associated with the months prior.
Can the VA require servicers to accept those monthly
payments even though it is not the total amount owed or
outstanding?
Mr. Bell. There are cases that we certainly can. There are
some limitations, and those limitations will be found at 38 CFR
36.4316. It is a regulation. 36.4316 is the regulation----
Ms. Ramirez. It is possible.
Mr. Bell [continuing]. that is the authority.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay.
Mr. Bell. There are some drawbacks that we have in that
regulation that monitor that. It is a case-by-case type
situation.
Ms. Ramirez. Let me ask you this follow-up question. Does
the VA have the authority to place a moratorium on
foreclosures?
Mr. Bell. We just placed a foreclosure moratorium as of
December or in December to May 31.
Ms. Ramirez. It is already using that authority?
Mr. Bell. Yes, sir--yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ramirez. Got it. Let me ask you another question.
Regarding the waterfall process, we understand there are
different stages in this process. I am trying to get a little
more sense on some specific numbers. Can you provide me the
number of veterans who are 60 days delinquent, 120 days, or
even in forbearance? Do you have those numbers?
Mr. Bell. I have--so, basically, we looked at the 90-day
and greater, which is 65,000 borrowers.
Ms. Ramirez. 65,000 borrowers are 90 days delinquent?
Mr. Bell. Ninety days or greater, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ramirez. Is there a way for you to follow up and try to
get me information who is in that between that 60 and 90?
Mr. Bell. Oh, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Thank you. I would like that.
Then let me just ask you my last question in my 41 seconds
left. Do you think that the banks and servicers have a duty to
mitigate potential loss by accepting partial payments?
Mr. Bell. Do they have the option to do that? Yes.
Ms. Ramirez. No, a duty.
Mr. Bell. A duty to that.
Ms. Ramirez. A duty to mitigate potential loss by accepting
partial payments.
Mr. Bell. When--I would say it is not industry practice.
What we have seen where you are accepting partial payments, is
it possible for them to accept them? Yes, it is a----
Ms. Ramirez. I am out of time.
Mr. Van Orden. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. We are going to move to a second round of
questioning. Do you have any or want me to get go right up?
Okay. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bell, in your testimony you said that the median home
price is $386,000. Using the number and multiplying it by the
number of loan potentially eligible for VASP, which is 27,000,
that means that the VA is going to be servicing over $15
billion in loans. Are you concerned that the long-term effects
of you putting $15 billion on your books may have a detrimental
effect on the Veterans Affairs Administration and, in
particular, the ability for us to exercise our GI benefits to
get a home loan?
Mr. Bell. Sir, that answer is unequivocally of course I am
concerned. Yes, sir, I am always concerned. I was concerned
when Partial Claim program certainly took us into a positive
subsidy for the first time in 30 years. It is--what I focused
on and what we focused on in developing this policy was saving
40,000 veterans from foreclosure.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay, I understand, Mr. Bell.
Mr. Bell. What was the best way to do that?
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Okay, Okay. I will do a third round of
questioning.
Mr. Bell. No, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. You know what? I will be here by myself with
you.
I googled who sets interest rates while we were sitting
here because I thought I maybe missed something. You can do it
here if you would like, too. The Veterans Affairs
Administration did not come up, like you are not here to set
these interest rates. How did you come up with 2-1/2 percent?
Mr. Bell. Sir, we can set interest rates when it is in our
own portfolio.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay.
Mr. Bell. When we are--when a loan is in default----
Mr. Van Orden. Right, but you are expanding into other
people's portfolio. That is my point.
You do not get to set mortgage interest rates. If this was
a veteran to you transaction, we would not be having this
conversation. This is a veterans to you, to some other people
that are going to be on the next panel here, you are entering
into another thing. You are going into unchartered waters that,
again, you do not have the statutory authority to do so.
How many full-time employees administer this program?
Mr. Bell. Full-time employees total for the loan guaranty
program, sir?
Mr. Van Orden. Yes.
Mr. Bell. A little over 900.
Mr. Van Orden. It is 1,062. How many of those people will
be focusing on VASP?
Mr. Bell. We have right now--we will have a team of 12
individuals that will be monitoring the contract of the work
that the subcontractor and the contractor do for servicing.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. In other words, you are going to have
12 full-time people watching contractors. How many contractors?
Mr. Bell. Sir, I do not know the exact number of them.
Mr. Van Orden. You do not. That is what I am talking about.
You have not thought this through.
Let us just say you did not have contractors. You would
have 12 employees servicing $15 billion worth of loans. I will
ask the people on the second panel, can you write that down,
how many people would normally, you know, watch after $15
billion worth of loans?
You know what, that is really all I have for now. I will
yield to Ms. Ramirez, my friend from the great state of
Illinois.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman.
I think it is just following up from the questions we were
asking a little earlier. I want to ask two more questions, Mr.
Bell. One is what has VA been instructing loan servicers on the
forbearance moratorium?
Mr. Bell. To make sure that before they get to foreclosure
that they are coming to VA, because VA might have other options
that we can exercise and we want to make sure that all of the
options that they have been exercised correctly.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Then let me ask you a follow up on that.
Has the VA heard of any situations where services are still
attempting--servicers are still attempting to force veterans
into loans at 7 percent?
Mr. Bell. That is through a modification program. The
modification program would--again, it goes off of current
market interest rate. If they are at, let us say, they are at 3
percent or 5 percent or 4 percent, you know, whatever they are
currently at, that modification would go at whatever the
current interest rate would be.
Again, that is part of the loss mitigation waterfall. If
that issue does not work--and to be honest with you, a veteran
should never and a servicer should never force a veteran into
any modification program that a veteran does not want to go
into at this point in time. That is why it is a loss mitigation
waterfall. It is what option will be best suited for that
individual, for that veteran at that particular time?
Ms. Ramirez. Got it. Mr. Bell, let me ask you then one last
follow up on this. Let us say, a veteran, for some reason, ends
up with one of these really high interest loans, are they
eligible to be able to apply for the VASP program so they can
reduce that interest rate?
Mr. Bell. They possibly could if they make the other
qualifications.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Let me just shift gears for my last
question, and this actually goes back to connecting the
veterans to services. You know, veterans who are foreclosed
upon or whose monthly payments increase under the Refund
Modification program often face significant challenges to their
housing security, certainly is connected to food security,
mental health, and more. Tell me a little bit more about how
your office is working proactively with the rest of the VA to
help connect these veterans to services that they may need.
Mr. Bell. It is a great question. We actually work with the
individual regional offices and healthcare centers that have
trained staff that are able to talk to the veteran in whatever
need that they have. If it is, you know, a fear of facing
homelessness, if it is--you know, we get them contacted with
homeless coordinators. If it is, you know, where they need help
in, you know, a specific need, we also contact that regional
office and we find out where we can help at that point in time.
We work together.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Well, thank you. These were my
questions.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you. Mrs. Ramirez.
I just want to wrap up this panel here, and if you have
something else you just want to comment on when we are done,
but it was clear from your written testimony, which I read in
detail and took a whole bunch of notes, and from your oral
testimony today, that the Veterans Affairs Administration has
not thought this program through. You have not. You are dealing
with $15 billion, which is a tremendous amount of money.
I also want to be crystal clear that the program that we
have that I have used with my family to get a home is awesome,
and I will do just about anything I can to protect that. You
said in your testimony that you understand that you are
accepting risk by doing this, and you are risking a hell of a
lot more than you think you are. I am not, I am not, going to
support anything that could potentially remove what I think is
the second best benefit for veterans, the first being the GI
bill.
I do not believe you have the statutory authority. If you
do, which we deep-dived and I do not think you do, but if you
can show me justified that you do, we need to remove that
because there is no way you are going to be able to take on $15
billion of potential loss because you think this is a good
idea.
I am going to tell you this right now, you are not doing
this program. You said you want to start this in spring of
2024. You are not doing this without my permission. That is not
a request. It does not matter who is sitting in this chair. If
Ranking Member Levin, if the Democrats take control of the
House, you are not going to do it without Mr. Levin's
permission. That is not a request. You are not going to be
legislating from your bureaucracy and that is what you are
doing, and that is unacceptable. Your excused, sir.
Mr. Bell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. If the second panel could please takes their
seats, we are going to take just a short break. If you want to
get some water or something, that would be great.
[Recess.]
Mr. Van Orden. On our second panel, we will hear from the
following witnesses: Mr. Ed DeMarco, president of the Housing
Policy Council; Mr. Mark Jones, chairman of the Mortgage
Bankers Association; and Mr. Sharpe, excuse me, senior attorney
at the National Consumer Law Center (NCLC). I would like to
welcome you here for the second panel.
I am going to tell you right now, take a deep breath. You
are fine. Okay. It is not going to go the same way as the other
one. Jeez Louise. Will you guys stand up and raise your right
hand, please?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you. Let the record reflect that the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
Mr. DeMarco, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD DEMARCO

Mr. DeMarco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
subcommittee. Thanks for the invitation to be here today.
It is past time that the issues facing the VA Loan Guaranty
program, especially those involving assistance to VA borrowers
facing hardship, receive this level of congressional attention.
The three organizations represented on this panel, the Housing
Policy Council, the Mortgage Bankers Association, and the
National Consumer Law Center, both together and individually
have been engaging with the team at VA for years, focusing on
options for assisting VA borrowers delinquent on their
mortgages.
At the end of my written statement, you will find a list of
HPC correspondence with VA the past several years. Many of
these letters were coauthored with MBA, NCLC, or both. We have
offered numerous recommendations to VA and, for myself, I am
disappointed with where we are today.
While my written statement touches on both origination and
servicing issues, I want to provide you here a few thoughts on
servicing. First, the team at VA has been and remains
approachable. We are grateful that they engage in meaningful
discussions, and we have no doubt that their intent is to
operate the program in the best interest of veterans.
Second, the VA program has grown enormously since the great
financial crisis and today represents roughly 10 percent of all
mortgage originations. No longer a niche product that can get
by with its own sets of rules and practices, the VA loan
guaranty is a meaningful option competing in a marketplace with
other mortgage products.
Third, Congress should provide VA with the resources and
authority the agency needs to ensure veterans have servicing
options at least equivalent to those available to borrowers
financed through FHA, USDA, Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac. Put
another way, to operate an effective homeownership benefit
program, the VA requires resources to maintain strong risk
management practices, to support its growing market share, to
operate soundly within the U.S. housing system, and to keep
pace with private sector innovation and best practices.
Fourth, the options VA makes available to mortgage
servicers in assisting VA borrowers behind on their mortgages
falls short of those available to similarly situated homeowners
whose loans are backed by FHA, USDA, Fannie Mae, or Freddie
Mac. This is not acceptable. Whatever the reason for it,
whether the VA lacks the legislative authority, lacks the
funding, lacks the human resources, or some other reason, this
cannot continue.
I would like to expand a bit more on this last point. While
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
in March 2020 gave VA borrowers the same opportunity as all
other homeowners to obtain mortgage forbearance at the outset
of the COVID-19 national emergency, the VA was slower than
other mortgage programs in setting up suitable off ramps at the
end of a borrower's forbearance period. In October 2020, HPC
and MBA jointly wrote the VA requesting they establish a
partial claim option as a way of dealing with forborne loan
amounts while allowing borrowers to resume making their
scheduled monthly payments. Simply put, the partial claim
defers the previously missed payments without interest till the
loan is paid off or the house is sold.
All the other federally related mortgage programs offer
this option, which is particularly suited to families that
recover from a temporary COVID hardship and can resume making
their mortgage payments. VA began offering this option in July
2021, but sunset the program in October 2022, despite there
being thousands of veterans remaining in COVID forbearance or
still needing a post forbearance resolution.
While we understood that VA intended for the VASP
alternative to be a replacement program, it has been 16 months
and we are still waiting on VASP.
HPC members remain committed to the success of the VA Loan
Guaranty program and to providing VA borrowers foreclosure
avoidance options at least as effective as those available to
borrowers in loans backed by FHA, USDA, Fannie Mae, and Freddie
Mac. I hope today's hearing helps push us forward to that end.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Edward DeMarco Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. DeMarco.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Jones for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK JONES

Mr. Jones. Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the Mortgage Bankers Association.
My name is Mark Jones and I am the president of Union Home
Mortgage, a national independent residential mortgage lender.
Union currently services $23 billion in residential mortgage
loans, which includes VA loans. Previously, I cofounded and ran
Amerifirst Home Mortgage, a privately held mortgage lender
headquartered in Kalamazoo, Michigan. I am here today in my
capacity as chairman of the Mortgage Bankers Association. As a
lender with deep personal knowledge originating, securitizing,
and servicing VA home loan program mortgages, I am honored to
be appearing before this subcommittee.
MBA appreciates the subcommittee's focus on the current
state of the VA Home Loan Guaranty program, including a review
of the agency's procedures/governing mortgages, appraisals,
refinancing foreclosures, and the Veterans Assistance Servicing
Purchase, or VASP, program, which is scheduled for release
later this year. MBA is pleased to offer recommendations
designed to help improve various home loan program elements and
ensure that our Nation's veterans receive a high-quality home
buying experience in a challenging, changing, and competitive
market environment.
At the outset of my statement, I want to underscore that
MBA and its many individual member firms who originate and
service VA loans have a positive and productive working
relationship with the agency, one forged over many years of
partnership. The VA Home Loan program is one of the most
significant benefits that our Nation's heroes earned through
their sacrifice and service. MBA recognizes the need to make
this important program more accessible and as competitive as
other mortgage loan options. Such an effort will involve
reaching a bipartisan consensus in Congress, dialog with the VA
and key market participants and advocates. MBA looks forward to
playing a constructive role.
We were pleased to see the enactment of the Improving
Access to the VA Home Loan Benefit Act during the 117th
Congress. This has resulted in positive reform, including the
expanded use of desktop appraisals as well as proposed
improvement to VA's minimum property requirements, which has
long been known to hold up transactions. However, housing
markets across the country are still supply constrained and
continue to favor sellers. There is more that must be done to
strengthen the home purchase offer backed by VA. I want to
emphasize three key ways MBA believes the VA home loan program
can be approved.
The first is to have VA roll out a permanent partial claim
option. A partial claim enables veterans to resume making their
regular payments while deferring their missed payments to the
back end of the loan. It is a crucial loss mitigation tool that
exists within every other governmental loan program, but is
missing from the VA arsenal. Mortgage servicers need this
option to deliver timely payment relief to distressed veteran
homeowners and preserve affordable homeownership.
Action by Congress is needed to make this essential option
a reality. Language authorizing a partial claim is contained
within S. 3728, recently introduced by Senators Tester and
Brown.
To be clear, the best and most durable loss mitigation
framework for VA loans would to be include both the partial
claim option and implementation of VASP.
Another recommendation is to tie the level of VA home loan
funding to the actual credit risk within the program. To do so
would make the cost of the program cheaper and allow more
veterans to be able to purchase a home in the midst of this
national housing affordability crisis.
A third opportunity is to delegate management of the VA
appraiser panels to lenders, the same way the process works for
every other loan program. VA's insistence on tightly managing
its own appraisal roster significantly slows things down,
making purchase offers backed by VA less competitive.
An additional recommendation is for the VA to adopt a
drafting table process and collect real-time input on new
initiatives from stakeholders similar to the one used by FHA.
In closing, MBA appreciates this opportunity to comment on
many of the critical issues that impact the VA home loan
program, including the need for potential legislation to
implement needed statutory changes. We look forward to working
with Congress to help provide the VA with the resources
necessary to implement these changes, and I look forward to
answering any questions that the committee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Mark Jones Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mr. Jones. I want to say that
both Mr. DeMarco and Mr. Jones's testimony will be entered into
the hearing record.
I now recognize Mr. Sharpe for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVE SHARPE

Mr. Sharpe. Thank you. Chairman Van Orden and members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
behalf of the low-income clients of the National Consumer Law
Center regarding the state of the VA Home Loan Guaranty
program. I am a senior attorney at NCLC, and this testimony is
focused on VA servicing issues. It is grounded in our advocacy
and our work with legal aid attorneys and housing counselors
across the country.
It is a bedrock principle of Federal housing policy that
borrowers who are facing financial hardship should have access
to workout options to avoid foreclosure. These home retention
policies provide stability for homeowners by giving a path to
recovery after financial hardships and provide stability for
neighborhoods that suffer when foreclosure hits. These policies
also help investors avoid losses, which supports the health of
the programs. These policies do not guarantee that all
borrowers who fall behind can avoid foreclosure, but they help
prevent unnecessary losses.
Unfortunately, since October 2022, homeowners with VA-
guaranteed mortgages facing hardship have had limited options
to retain their homes. This is the result of a recent dramatic
increase in mortgage interest rates and a decision by VA to
discontinue a program called the Partial Claim, which had
allowed homeowners who could resume their mortgage payments to
repay the missed payments at the end of their loans without an
increase in their interest rates.
The rise in mortgage interest rates has created significant
challenges for FHA, USDA, and the government-sponsored
enterprises, but they have all retained programs like the
Partial Claim. In contrast, VA no longer has such a program,
and we have seen VA's current loan modification program result
in increased monthly payments, which are generally not
affordable.
A series of stories from National Public Radio (NPR) shows
VA borrowers struggling to reach a foreclosure alternative that
is affordable and highlights borrowers who have faced dramatic
increases in their mortgage payments after a modification. NPR
shared the story of a veteran borrower receiving a modification
that increased his mortgage payment from 1,750 a month to
$2,400 a month, and we have seen similar in our work with legal
aid attorneys, borrowers shut out of affordable options and
struggling to keep up with higher payments.
These problems have broad significance. As of the end of
December 2023, we estimate that there were about 74,000 VA
borrowers who are either seriously behind on payments or in the
process of losing their home.
The mortgage relief options available for veteran borrowers
are less favorable than the options available to other
federally backed borrowers. The VA program is a benefit that
veterans have earned through service and sacrifice, and that is
meant to give them housing stability. There must be a system in
place to effectively assist veterans when they fall behind on
their loans. We recognize that VA may need to adopt criteria
that meet the specific aspects of its program, but that should
not result in VA borrowers having worse options than other
federally backed borrowers.
We applaud VA for recognizing the problems that its
borrowers are facing and for implementing a foreclosure pause
until May 31, 2024, to give borrowers a chance to access
programs that are in development. However, the pause is only
meaningful if VA puts options in place that veterans can access
before losing their homes.
We urge VA to take several key steps. VA should immediately
release the previously announced VA Servicing Purchase, or
VASP, program and ensure that the program is accessible,
includes criteria that account for the recent lack of options
that have led to growing arrearages, and provides targeted
payment relief. Because VASP will not be a one-size-fits-all
solution, VA needs to develop further options including the
reestablishment of a partial claim program that allows
borrowers to resume their payments without a change in interest
rates, so that its permanent system for helping borrowers
provides meaningful relief in all market conditions and secures
the financial health of the VA program.
In developing these alternatives, we urge VA to work with
elected officials, veteran service organizations, consumer
advocates, industry representatives, and others to identify the
resources it needs to implement these programs so that Congress
can ensure that funding constraints do not stand in the way of
enabling veterans to save their homes. VA should start
releasing timely and consistent data on its loan performance
using FHA's reporting system as a model. These steps are
necessary to provide veteran borrowers what they deserve, a
program that honors their service by providing housing
stability even in the face of financial hardships.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Steve Sharpe Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Van Orden. Thank you very much, Mr. Sharpe. Mr.
Sharpe's testimony will be entered into the record.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Let me ask you guys this question. A veteran stops paying
his mortgage and we want to pause the foreclosure, right, and
let us say there is 100 bucks on his mortgage, right? I was an
enlisted guy, so that is about as good as my math is going to
get. If there is a 100 bucks there, who is floating that $100?
Mr. Jones. Right now it is the servicing lender because the
lender--those loans generally end up in Ginnie Mae-backed
securities, and so the lender has to sweep that payment whether
they get it or not. The lender is forwarding that payment
along.
Mr. Van Orden. Did you want to say something, Mr. DeMarco?
Mr. DeMarco. Same answer.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. Let me get this straight. The veteran
stops paying for whatever reason, and then that money sits
here. If this program went through, the ill-thought out program
that we are talking about, where would that $100 go? Who would
float that $100 then?
Mr. Jones. We do not really know because we have not seen
the details of the program yet. We are waiting for those. The
details have not been shared with us yet to where we could
answer that question.
Mr. Van Orden. You are saying that this was not well
thought out. Okay. I know where it is going to go. That $100 is
going to go on the VA's books. It is good for lending
institutions because you got a poorly performing mortgage. You
get that off your books, that improves your bottom line, and it
goes to the American taxpayers and sits there. Correct? Where
else would it go, man?
Mr. Jones. Not quite. Because during the period of time,
the trial mod that the director talked about, the lender--if
the borrower fails on that trial mod, then the lender ends up
with that on their books.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. If they----
Mr. Jones. Because they purchased the loan out of the
Ginnie Mae security.
Mr. Van Orden. Yes, but if they have $15 billion worth of
stuff, they are managing those loans----
Mr. Jones. Oh, I agree.
Mr. Van Orden. All right. Now let me ask you a
philosophical question. I will start with you, Mr. DeMarco. Do
you believe in private property rights?
Mr. DeMarco. Yes, sir.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Jones?
Mr. Jones. Absolutely.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Sharpe?
Mr. Sharpe. Yes.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. If the VA is floating $15 billion
worth of mortgages and the veteran stops paying it, that means
that the government owns the private property, which means, by
definition, it is no longer private property, it is public
property. If you have private citizens living in public
property, because there is no way the VA is going to throw
these vets out, so you are going to have private citizens
living in public property in perpetuity. They tried that before
in the Soviet Union, and they destroyed their entire economy by
doing so.
I am not Nostradamus, but I can see the future here. Do you
guys see something different than me, Mr. DeMarco?
Mr. DeMarco. No, Mr. Chairman, the incentives that are
created by this program and the risk that it poses to taxpayers
are real. In fact, the three organizations sitting before you
together sent a letter to the VA in December of last year
outlining concerns with some of these program characteristics
of VASP that we were hearing about. We have not, as Mr. Jones
said, have not seen this yet, but from what we have been
hearing, it raises some real concerns, and we outlined that to
the VA secretary back in December.
Mr. Van Orden. Did you get any feedback?
Mr. DeMarco. No, sir. I do not believe we have heard back.
We have not.
Mr. Van Orden. Mr. Sharpe?
Mr. Sharpe. I do not believe there has been a response to
our December letter.
Mr. Van Orden. Okay. I mean, you gentlemen are obviously,
you know, smarter than the average bear. You come from, you
know, reputable organizations. How many people have you housed
between you? I mean, a gazillion. Right? You, the subject
matter experts, wrote the nonsubject matter expert a well-
meaning, well-intended, probably very informative, detailed
note saying that, oh, by the way, you know, you are essentially
creating socialism in the United States because that is where
it is going to wind up. They did not even bother to get back to
you? Okay. Guess what? That is an issue.
Do me a favor. Send us what you sent them, and I will email
that directly to Dennis McDonough. Okay?
Mr. Jones. We certainly will, Congressman. Thank you.
Mr. Van Orden. Appreciate that. Okay, I yield back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Illinois again, Mrs.
Ramirez.
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman. I also want to thank the
three witnesses that are here with us today. I mean, you heard
me say before, and certainly housing is a very critical issue
for members of this subcommittee.
You know, before I came to Congress, I was the executive
director of a homeless service agency, so I got to work with a
lot of veterans who were already experiencing homelessness. The
idea of purchasing a home was just unimaginable for them. That
is why in my time at the state legislature, I worked a lot to
ensure, particularly during the pandemic, that we would pass
legislation that kept people in their homes. In the state I
actually negotiated a foreclosure moratorium with banks at the
height of COVID-19 pandemic. We did a lot of negotiation till
about two in the morning to get there, but we did it.
I understand how important it is for the industry and
government to work together for the people. I want to say thank
you, all of you. I actually worked with Shriver at the state
level, so it is good to meet you, Mr. Sharpe.
That being said, I heard Mr. Sharpe say there are about
74,000 VA borrowers who are just a paycheck away and at risk
of--or actually even closer to that, at risk of losing their
home or already in the process. We know that with the COVID
forbearances, even with the resources that people had, there is
still at least 34,000 people at this moment who are already
delinquent.
I want to go to some of my questions I have here for you
all. This one is actually a question for all of you. This
question is to address, I want you to articulate the value of
having private industry in the loan guaranty programs. As a
follow-up, I guess my question specifically is, should the VA
have a greater role in lending and would that afford the VA
more flexibility in offering assistance to borrowers?
I will start with you, Mr. Sharpe.
Mr. Sharpe. Thank you. At this stage, with borrowers
lacking real alternatives to avoid foreclosure, we do think
that VA's involvement with VASP is necessary right now because
there are not other options available. We do think that there
should be options that come forward, the Partial Claim
specifically, because we do not think that VASP is a long-term
solution and that the VA's involvement with loss mitigation is
a long-term solution because of the issues of financial health
of the VA, also because VASP is going to involve servicing
transfers, taking people with a servicer they know and
transferring them to another servicer, to the government
servicer. We do not know what that is going to look like right
now.
We do think while VASP, because we have not had options for
the last 16 months, is necessary, we do not think that VA's
involvement in taking, you know, foreclosure alternatives on is
the right path for the permanent solution; that it could be a
part of it, but that we need to have other options available
and we need them as soon as possible.
Ms. Ramirez. Okay. Just to follow up, and actually this
question is for both you, Mr. Sharpe and Mr. DeMarco. You both
made the point in your testimony that the VA loan program has
less favorable loss mitigation tools than other federally
backed loans. Could you explain in the minute that I have the
differences in options available for those in financial
distress and why they exist? I will continue with you, Mr.
Sharpe, and then make sure that Mr. DeMarco gets in.
Mr. Sharpe. Thank you. It is because there is not a Partial
Claim program right now to simply allow borrowers to resume
their mortgage payments once they fall behind. VA does not have
that. FHA, USDA, and the government-sponsored enterprises have
a similar program, a partial claim type program. That is really
what is making such a big difference in this high interest rate
environment.
I can pass it over to Mr. DeMarco. Anything else?
Mr. DeMarco. I mean, that is certainly central to this.
Also the way Partial Claim is done by the VA versus done by
other entities is different. Then going beyond that, look, all
these mortgage programs are facing, how do I assist a borrower
whose note rate that they cannot pay is 3-1/2 percent, and now
we are in a 6-1/2 or 7 percent environment? The solutions that,
you know, this VASP solution, as best we understand it, could
use some improvement from what other programs are actually
doing to address that same issue.
Ms. Ramirez. Got it. Thank you, Mr. DeMarco, and all of
you.
I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, ma'am.
I just want to wrap up here. As the chairman of the
subcommittee, I am responsible for this program. You know what
I mean? I am responsible for trying to help get veterans in
homes. I am also responsible for homeless veterans. I want to
keep veterans over here, not over here. There are a whole lot
of I do not know what is going on here. Right? If you guys do
not know what is going on here, do you think the VA knows what
is going on? They did not even reply to your letter.
I have no confidence, none, zero, that they would be able
to administer and run a $15 billion book. Then we are going to
devolve into what I said, because the VA is not going to be
kicking people out of their homes, default or no default, then
the government owns the property. It is no longer private
property. It is public property. Private citizens living in
public property was tried in the Soviet Union. I will not be
signing up for that anytime soon.
With that, I yield back. I would like to recognize, Mrs.
Ramirez, if you have any closing comments.
Ms. Ramirez. I think just in closing, I think, to you and
the panel before, you hear the commitment we have here to our
veterans. We want to make sure that in the programs that we
have, that we are making it more accessible for our veterans to
purchase homes at the interest rates that are affordable to
them. Certainly that is why those lower interest rates are so
important.
I think the second piece of that is when we see with cost
of living going up and all the challenges, veterans are at risk
of really being able to keep their home, that we have the
resources in place to ensure that they are getting the adequate
resources.
I do look forward to working with you and certainly
continuing to work with the chairman and the rest of us to make
sure that we do everything possible so that our veterans, when
they are coming home after what they have gone through, have a
home, right, are not at risk of homelessness, but also that
they have the adequate resources and that you, particularly
those of you in the private industry, are working in
partnership with us to make that happen. I look forward to
that, and I thank the chairman for the opportunity to be part
of this hearing.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Van Orden. Thank you, Mrs. Ramirez, and thank you guys
for coming out again today. Thank you, Mr. Bell, for staying
around. I appreciate you listening to these cats.
I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous
material. Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of John Bell

Chairman Van Orden, Ranking Member Levin and other Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA or the Department)
home loan program.

Overview

The mission of VA's home loan program is to maximize opportunities
for Veterans (which includes certain Service members and survivors) to
obtain, retain, and adapt their homes by providing viable and fiscally
responsible benefits in recognition of their service to our Nation.
Reflecting on the 80th anniversary of the home loan benefit, VA has
guaranteed over 28 million loans, totaling over $3.7 trillion, since
the program's inception. This benefit has helped millions of Veterans
achieve the dream of home ownership and build wealth for themselves and
their families. Some of the reasons the VA home loan program has been
so advantageous to Veterans include the following: limited closing
costs, competitive interest rates, and no monthly private mortgage
insurance. Additionally, VA's home loan program allows for 100 percent
financing, which typically does not require a down payment. For
instance, a Veteran purchasing a home at the current median price of
$386,000 could avoid a 20 percent down payment of $77,000. VA's home
loan program experienced record growth in fiscal years (FY) 2020 and
2021 due, in large part, to historically low interest rates. While VA's
overall annual volume of new guaranteed loans has declined with rising
interest rates, mirroring the mortgage industry as a whole, VA-
guaranteed loans still comprise more than 10 percent of the mortgage
market, and the program continues to serve millions of Veterans
annually.
Current economic factors have heightened unique challenges for
Veterans and the program, amplifying common misconceptions about VA
home loan benefits. Certain hallmark features of VA's home loan program
that safeguard Veterans are often mischaracterized as unnecessary
burdens or disadvantages. For example, requiring an appraisal for
purchase and cash-out transactions, confirming minimum property
requirements, and utilizing monthly residual income to credit-qualify a
borrower help ensure that Veterans using their earned benefit are given
the best opportunity for an affordable mortgage while mitigating risk
to the Government and taxpayers. Yet, these are often portrayed as
burdensome. As VA continues improving the homebuying experience for the
Nation's Veterans, VA is mindful of retaining the features that led to
some of the lowest historical foreclosure rates in the mortgage
industry.
Further, VA recognizes that its mission does not end at the home
loan closing table. Over the past year, more than 145,000 Veterans and
their families have been able to retain their homes and avoid
foreclosure because of VA's assistance. Even in the dynamic housing
market of the last several years, the rates of foreclosures for VA-
backed mortgages are among the lowest in the country. And at the same
time, we know that there are still Veterans struggling to make their
payments. VA remains steadfast in its commitment to home retention and
is taking extraordinary steps to ensure those who go on to experience
financial difficulty post-closing have every opportunity to remain in
their homes, including standing up the new VA Servicing Purchase (VASP)
Program.

Ensuring a High-Quality Homebuying Experience

A little more than 2 years ago, on December 8, 2021, I addressed
this Subcommittee on the topics of competition in the homebuying
market, misconceptions surrounding VA's home loan program, and
appraisal timeliness. While there have been significant changes in the
mortgage and homebuying market since then, I am pleased to report that
VA continues to build on the success of this program to increase
homeownership among Veterans. Through the dedicated service of our
talented staff and by leveraging technology, VA has exceeded the
expectations of the fast-paced mortgage industry, and we continue to
make improvements to further enhance the value of the VA home loan
benefit for Veterans.

Improving the Veteran and Stakeholder Experience via Outreach and
Technology

VA continues expanding stakeholder outreach, education, and
engagement to help dispel myths about VA-guaranteed loans. In FY 2023,
VA convened the Loan Guaranty Service Conference in Kansas City,
Missouri where loan guaranty service subject matter experts provided 3
days of training and interactive panel discussions. For the first time
in the more than 20-year history of the conference, more than 700
stakeholders from across the mortgage industry were in attendance,
including lenders, servicers, and appraisers. I look forward to
continuing this training and engagement on an annual basis, as it
provides a unique opportunity for VA to engage with Federal and
industry partners on issues specific to the Veteran population.
In addition to hosting our own event, VA's public outreach and
engagement has more than doubled during the past 2 years with loan
guaranty service personnel, including senior leadership such as me,
participating in over 100 events in FY 2022, over 250 events in FY
2023, and over 80 events to date in FY 2024. These events, both virtual
and in-person, represent a diverse set of interests and stakeholders,
including large and small industry gatherings, top-tier media
interviews, Veteran and industry-centric podcasts, and Veterans'
service and advocacy organizations. One area where VA continues to
concentrate its engagement is with real estate professionals, who are
often the first person a homebuying Veteran will contact. Following the
December 2021 hearing, I collaborated with the National Association of
Realtors to produce a two-part educational video series on VA's home
loan program to help real estate professionals better serve Veterans in
using VA home loan benefits. The feedback received was overwhelmingly
positive, and VA is working to release an online toolkit to further
assist Veterans and real estate professionals in understanding the
benefit and to dispel common misconceptions about the program.
VA also continues to harness technology to better serve Veterans
and program stakeholders. In June 2023, VA implemented an online ticket
system, transitioning 39 corporate mailboxes that received
approximately 500,000 Veteran and stakeholder emails annually into a
single technology application - ServiceNow. This online ticket system
has resulted in an improved customer experience with faster triage and
response times (averaging less than 3 business days for loan-related
inquiries), along with improved transparency regarding assignment,
status, and escalation of inquiries. Further, data captured on inquiry
topics and volume are supporting data-driven decisions around
resourcing, communication and website updates, and training.
While the benefits of ServiceNow cannot be overstated, the Loan
Guaranty Service is proud to continue to support Veterans and other
stakeholders over the phone. Despite declining loan volume since FY
2021, the call volume to the Loan Guaranty Service has actually
increased with more than 860,000 phone calls answered in FY 2023
(versus 645,135 phone calls in FY 2022). In FY 2023, the average time
for callers to reach an experienced staff member with technical
expertise in the appropriate area (such as, underwriting, loan
servicing, appraising, or specially adapted housing) was 40 seconds.
VA also continues to improve its certificate of eligibility (COE)
process, which provides Veterans with evidence of their eligibility for
VA home loan benefits. The percentage of COEs issued instantaneously
through automated technology increased from 76.1 percent in FY 2021 to
78.21 percent in FY 2023. VA has also cut in half the average time it
takes for manually processing COEs, improving from 2 business days in
FY 2021 to less than 1 business day in FY 2024 to date.

New Shift in Market Presents New Challenges

When I testified before this Subcommittee in December 2021,
Veterans and other buyers using mortgage financing were struggling to
compete with investors using all-cash offers and other favorable terms,
such as very short closing periods or no appraisal or property
inspection. When interest rates began to rise in 2022, competition from
investors and cash buyers decreased and the housing inventory was
reduced because many homeowners were reluctant to sell a home with a
low mortgage rate. This reduction in inventory has, in certain markets,
increased prices and competition. However, affordability in this higher
interest rate environment remains a top concern, especially for first-
time homebuyers.
While VA is limited in its ability to affect market interest rates,
VA data continues to support improved homeownership opportunities for
Veterans. In that regard, interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate VA-
guaranteed loans are, on average, approximately 50 basis points (or
0.50 percent) lower than conventional and other federally backed
housing loans. As for recent declines in loan volume, data indicates
refinancing loans were impacted more than purchases. As a percentage of
VA's total loan volume, purchase loans have jumped from 32 percent in
2020 to 81 percent in 2023. Furthermore, VA's market share, especially
in the purchase market, has remained consistent since 2020, indicating
the decline in VA's guaranteed loan volume is commensurate with non-VA
mortgage loan products. Finally, in FY 2023, VA succeeded in improving
the average timeliness on VA purchase appraisals nationwide, averaging
a turnaround of an appraisal within 7 business days which is down from
9 business days in FY 2022.

Appraisals

Regarding appraisals, VA acknowledges that its improved numbers are
due, in some part, to the decline in volume. However, I want to assure
this Subcommittee of the significant work VA is doing to implement the
Improving Access to the VA Home Loan Benefit Act of 2022 (P.L. 117-308)
and to prepare for future competitive market cycles. The VA Home Loan
Benefit Act requires VA to examine and update regulations,
requirements, and guidance related to appraisals for housing loans
guaranteed by VA. Since the law's enactment in December 2022, VA has
accomplished the following:

In April 2023, VA submitted recommendations to Congress
for improving appraisal timeliness (which included a recommendation
that VA be named a member of the Appraisal Subcommittee of the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council).

On December 11, 2023, VA filed an Advance Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking requesting public comment on amending VA's minimum
property requirements.

VA updated the Loan Guaranty Service's publicly available
website to list those counties where additional appraisers are needed
to serve Veterans.

VA is updating internal operations to streamline the
designation process for VA appraisers to remove unnecessary barriers.

VA is drafting a proposed rulemaking that will consider
extending the use of VA's Assisted Appraisal Processing Program, which
allows VA fee panel appraisers to prepare an appraisal, relying on
information collected by certain authorized individuals. VA estimates
publication in FY 2025.

While VA believes these efforts, along with ongoing technology
improvements and interagency collaboration with the Property Appraisal
Valuation and Equity (PAVE) Task Force, will continue to improve the
homebuying experience for Veterans, there are ongoing geographic
challenges facing the appraisal industry as a whole that should be
noted. In rural areas especially, the issue is not whether there is a
VA fee panel appraiser but whether there is a real estate appraisal
professional. VA cannot solve this issue alone but looks forward to
continued collaboration with this Subcommittee, other Federal agencies,
and industry partners to find ways to increase the availability of
appraisers nationwide.

Loan Assumptions

One feature of the VA-guaranteed home loan benefit is that the loan
may be assumed by another qualified borrower. In an assumption, the
purchaser(s) steps into the Veteran's shoes and takes over the active
mortgage loan at the remaining term and interest rate. With most active
VA-guaranteed loans having a mortgage rate below 5 percent, an
assumption can mean a significant savings for a purchaser and a
marketing tool for Veterans looking to sell their home. Assumptions are
processed by the current loan holder, which means the Veteran cannot
``shop around'' for another institution to process the assumption. Loan
holders with authority may underwrite and approve assumption
applications without VA prior approval, and those without authority
must request VA-approval before closing an assumption.
As interest rates rose in 2022, the number of VA loan assumptions
also rose by more than 600 percent. More specifically, 308 VA loan
assumptions were processed in calendar year 2022 and 2,244 were
processed in calendar year 2023. In early FY 2023, VA heard from
Veterans about reporting delays and other impediments with holder
assumption processing. To ensure Veterans are not prevented from using
this unique feature of their VA-guaranteed loan, VA has taken the
following steps:

Held calls with several loan holders and industry
stakeholders throughout FY 2023 to resolve timeliness and processing
issues experienced by Veterans seeking to sell their homes through an
assumption.

Provided assumption training to lenders and servicers at
the FY 2023 Loan Guaranty Service Conference (May 2023).

Published VA Circular 26-23-10 on May 22, 2023, iterating
existing assumption regulations and procedures.

Published VA Circular 26-23-27 on December 20, 2023,
outlining how VA will use existing oversight authority to address
holders' failure to comply with assumption requirements.

VA also recognizes that industry and regulatory changes, including
the authorities under the purview of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, have changed the regulatory environment and increased costs for
assumption processing. Holders are now required to treat assumption
applications as applications for credit, which necessitates the
employment of licensed mortgage loan officers and other closing and
compliance personnel that were not factored into the $300 assumption
processing fee currently authorized at 38 C.F.R. Sec.  36.4313(d)(8).
As such, VA is exploring options for allowing additional cost offsets
for holders processing assumptions while balancing Veterans' interests
in keeping assumption costs low.
And while I speak to changes in the regulatory environment, I would
be remiss if I did not mention the need for oversight of all parties in
the mortgage process. Appraisers, lenders, and servicers are highly
regulated by multiple Federal agencies. However, real estate agents
remain largely free of Federal oversight but are, in certain ways, the
primary guardian of the Veteran during the homebuying process. Real
estate agents help the Veteran select a home and guide them toward
selecting a mortgage provider, inspector, and closing agent. Neglect or
even intentional disregard of a Veteran's interest in any activity
during this process can result in unfortunate outcomes for the Veteran.
Yet, VA's enforcement authority is extremely limited. VA looks forward
to working with Congress and other stakeholders to ensure that all
participants in the mortgage process give Veterans a fair shake.

Assisting Veterans Experiencing Financial Difficulty

As a Veteran who has used this program to purchase every home I
have owned, I need to express how disheartened I am by the hardships
some Veterans have experienced during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
VA has a long history of helping Veterans with retaining their homes or
otherwise avoiding foreclosure, including the more than 200,000
Veterans affected by the COVID-19 national emergency (more than 50,000
of whom were assisted through VA's temporary COVID-19 home retention
options). I am here today to reinforce VA's commitment to making best
use of its authority to continue to help Veterans avoid foreclosure,
and to address how the Department plans to assist thousands of Veterans
who remain seriously delinquent (greater than 90 days delinquent) on
their VA-guaranteed loans.

VA's Temporary COVID-19 Home Retention Programs

The COVID-19 national emergency posed the single largest threat to
the home loan guaranty program that VA has faced. VA knew, when facing
the COVID-19 national emergency, if the program was to continue and
Veterans were to avoid a foreclosure crisis, VA would have to find a
new way to respond.
To the lay observer, the most obvious response would have been to
establish a partial claim program like the U.S. Departments of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) or Agriculture (USDA). Unlike HUD and USDA,
however, VA does not have explicit authority to advance guaranty funds
as a loss mitigation option. In short, unlike HUD and USDA, VA cannot
offer a partial claim that pulls from the amount VA guaranteed.
Although VA does have broad powers to waive, pay, or compensate claims
or demands (38 U.S.C. Sec.  3720(a)(3)(4)), it has been VA's
longstanding and public position that Congress never authorized a
partial advance on the guaranty without termination of the loan. The
lack of authority may be because VA only carries 25 percent of the risk
of a default through its guaranty, where the other Federal programs
carry 90 percent or more of default risk. Furthermore, subtracting from
the guaranty can adversely affect the mortgage-backed securities that
often serve as the liquidity for lenders that participate in VA's
program. So, when VA established the COVID-19 Veterans Assistance
Partial Claim Payment (COVID-VAPCP) Program and the COVID-19 Refund
Modification Program, VA attempted to create a program as similar to
HUD and USDA's partial claim programs as possible while making it fit
within VA's existing authority. To do that, VA looked to the well-
established authority for the current loan refund program (38 U.S.C.
Sec.  3732(a)).
VA's actions to establish these temporary programs were
unprecedented; but again, neither VA nor the Nation had faced a threat
exactly like the COVID-19 national emergency before. The COVID-VAPCP
Program allowed VA to purchase past due payments from the servicer and
establish a loan payable to VA for the amount purchased at a 0 percent
interest rate while the Veteran resumed regular monthly mortgage
installments. Around the same time VA finalized its rulemaking for the
COVID-VAPCP Program, it became clear that many Veterans were unable to
afford their existing mortgage payments and required payment relief.
With historically low interest rates in effect, the COVID-19 refund
modification Program allowed for the purchase of past due payments and
additional principal amounts, if necessary, followed by a loan
modification of the remaining unpaid balance.
VA always intended both programs to be temporary home retention
options specifically designed to address the negative financial effects
the COVID-19 national emergency had on Veterans with guaranteed loans.
As such, the COVID-VAPCP Program expired on October 28, 2022, a date
that aligned with then-prevailing Federal guidance signaling that
COVID-19 forbearances would end by June 30, 2022. At the time, VA was
experiencing operational challenges implementing both temporary
programs using its existing, limited resources. In addition, the
budgetary effects of using VA's refund authority in this novel way were
becoming clearer. The program, which has historically operated without
a net cost to the government, began to incur a cost for each new
guaranteed loan commitment.
Nevertheless, to ensure servicers could continue offering home
retention options that provided payment relief to the most financially
distressed Veterans, VA extended use of the COVID-19 Refund
Modification Program beyond October 28, 2022. Unfortunately, by this
time, interest rates had begun to rise, making the COVID-19 Refund
Modification Program less effective. Other factors, such as rising home
insurance rates and property taxes, also threatened to dampen or
eclipse any savings offered by the program. The average price of home
insurance increased by 21 percent from May 2022 to May 2023, and
property taxes on single-family homes rose an average of 5.4 percent
nationwide in 2021 and another 4 percent in 2022. With these realities
in mind, in late 2022, VA began exploring new, permanent home retention
solutions to assist Veterans.

VA Servicing Purchase Program

Over the past year, VA has been developing a new home retention
program, the VA Servicing Purchase (VASP) Program with significant
input from stakeholders on potential operational impact. The VASP
Program is consistent with VA's longstanding authority under 38 U.S.C.
Sec.  3732(a) and current practice of purchasing Veterans' delinquent
guaranteed loans from holders to modify the interest and term of the
loan, in an effort to achieve an affordable payment for the Veteran.
However, the VASP Program will improve upon current practices by
providing a streamlined purchase, meaning Veterans will receive
assistance faster and servicers and VA will face less administrative
burden in the process. Under the VASP Program, VA will provide holders
with program criteria allowing them to identify the loans VA will
purchase, execute the modification prior to VA's purchase, and finally
transfer the modified loan to VA.
VA strongly believes the VASP Program represents VA's best course
of action for Veterans, especially when compared with VA's temporary
COVID-19 home retention options. For example, although the COVID-VAPCP
provided certain immediate benefits to the Veteran, including no change
to the current interest rate or terms of the guaranteed loan, it had
certain long-term drawbacks that will not be present in the VASP
Program. Specifically, under COVID-VAPCP the second loan payable to VA
represents, in essence, a balloon payment that must be repaid in full
if the guaranteed loan is paid off, refinanced, or assumed by another
person. Imagine planning to upgrade to a new home and discovering the
equity you are taking from the sale of your existing home is $50,000
less than you thought because you did not account for the partial claim
owed to VA. Or that you have made your final payment to your servicer
on your VA-guaranteed mortgage only to discover that you owe the
Government $50,000 for the partial claim you forgot you agreed to years
ago. These are not far-fetched scenarios and represent outcomes for
some Veterans who took advantage of VA's COVID-19 home retention
options. Thus, even though the temporary COVID-19 home retention
programs were vital, providing approximately $2 billion in emergency
assistance so Veterans could retain their homes, VA believes it can
more effectively help Veterans through the VASP Program.
The VASP Program loan provides Veterans an affordable, scheduled
monthly mortgage payment that reduces the debt owed over time at a rate
much lower than the current market interest rate, without the same
latent issues such as a balloon payment or potential uncertainty about
payoff. The VASP Program is simply a more sustainable option for
Veterans who cannot afford other available loss mitigation options such
as repayment plans, special forbearances, and traditional loan
modifications. In addition to the advantages for the Veteran, the VASP
Program ensures that the Government is better protected from certain
financial and legal risks that arise when VA holds a junior lien
position on a partial claim, especially in the approximately 20 states
and the District of Columbia with homeowner association super lien
protections. Additionally, the program can be implemented using
existing staff and resources. Finally, for loan holders and servicers,
the VASP Program is a streamlined, workable home retention option that
will help the stability of holders' and servicers' portfolios while
they assist Veterans in financial distress.
VA estimates the VASP Program will assist over 40,000 Veterans
currently in default. As for the direct assistance to the Veteran, VA
estimates the VASP Program loan, which will be modified at a 2.5
percent fixed interest rate with a 30 or 40-year loan term, will result
in an average payment reduction of 20 percent (principal and interest).
To ensure that Veterans who would experience a payment reduction of
less than 20 percent can participate in the VASP Program, VA will
require that servicers offer a 3-month trial payment plan with the new,
modified monthly mortgage payment that must be successfully completed
by the Veteran prior to VA's purchase to ensure the new mortgage
payment is an affordable option.
VA is on track to launch the VASP Program in the Spring of 2024. To
better understand the implications of certain program features and
ensure we avoid some of the operational challenges experienced with the
COVID-VAPCP and COVID-19 Refund Modification Programs, VA has spent
this past year collecting information from other Federal agencies,
Congress, industry stakeholders, and Veteran and consumer advocates. In
the interim, VA has worked to mitigate negative consequences for
Veterans by extending use of the COVID-19 Refund Modification Program
and loan deferment temporary home retention options until the VASP
Program is launched and by calling on mortgage servicers to pause
foreclosures of VA-guaranteed loans through May 31, 2024. This pause
will allow VA to proactively conduct outreach to educate Veterans on
available loss mitigation options, provide supplemental servicing in
cases where the servicer is not working with the Veteran, and conduct
oversight of ongoing loss mitigation efforts.
VA understands that many Veterans accepted loan modifications or
COVID-19 Refund Modifications Program at a higher interest rate than
they were paying before. VA shares in their discouragement, but the
reason for the increase in interest rates was outside VA's control.
Market rates industry-wide were at record lows immediately preceding
and during the first half of the COVID-19 national emergency. Then they
increased rapidly and dramatically. Market rate increases are
determined by external factors, and recently rising interest rates have
affected all borrowers, not just those with VA-guaranteed loans. VA's
home retention options, including traditional and temporary COVID-19
options, have always focused on finding a way to help bring the
Veteran's loan current with payments the Veteran can afford. While the
COVID-19 options may have required modifying the Veteran's loan using
the current market interest rate, the VASP Program will offer a rate
that VA will control, one that is not subject to the same market
volatility and that simply cannot be found elsewhere in the marketplace
at this time. Affordability remains key. Additionally, Veterans are not
precluded from refinancing their loan in the future should interest
rates decrease, nor are they precluded from participating in the VASP
Program should they be unable to make their new mortgage payments and
other home retention options are not feasible.

Additional Assistance for Veterans

In addition to the upcoming launch of the VASP Program, VA
continues to examine other ways to assist Veterans and their families.
This includes working with Congress, including this Subcommittee, to
understand if statutory authorities could optimize home retention
options, such as the VASP Program, for Veterans.
It also includes continuing to inform Veterans and their families
about other opportunities that may assist with affordable
homeownership. Loan Guaranty Service recently partnered with the
Veterans Benefits Banking Program to inform Veteran borrowers, with
delinquent VA loans, of free credit and financial counseling. VA's loan
technicians also serve an important role in communicating with Veterans
about their VA-guaranteed loans. VA has also updated the home loan
program's website and outreach materials to provide information about
the many states, territories, and tribes that have homeowner assistance
funds available to assist households who are behind on their mortgages
and other housing-related expenses (utilities, property taxes, partial
claims, and so on) due to the impacts of the COVID-19 national
emergency.
Although part of Loan Guaranty Service's mission is to assist
Veterans in home retention, this is not always possible given a
Veteran's financial position. Similarly, alternatives to foreclosure,
such as a short sale or deed-in-lieu, may not always be viable. These
situations include, but are not limited to, permanent income reduction,
death or divorce of the borrower(s), or property deterioration.
Additionally, in some cases Veterans hinder loss mitigation efforts if
they are unresponsive to outreach attempts by the servicer or VA. In
these cases, VA will continue working with the Veteran to find a soft
landing. For example, for properties that are acquired by VA after loan
termination, VA offers relocation assistance which financially
compensates occupants of VA-acquired properties for voluntarily
vacating the property by an agreed upon date; thereby, avoiding the
full legal eviction process and costs associated with the eviction.

Special Focus Areas

Native American Direct Loan Program

VA remains committed to making certain that Native American
Veterans who are ready and financially able to purchase a home can do
so, whether through the Native American Direct Loan (NADL) Program or
VA's Guaranteed Home Loan Program. As VA continues to address
recommendations from an April 2022 Government Accountability Office
report focused on staffing, data collection, performance measurement,
planning, and leveraging expertise to mitigate barriers to NADL Program
use, we have also taken steps to tackle the two major barriers to home
ownership for Native American Veterans on tribal lands which are
affordability and accessibility.
In March 2023, VA reduced the interest rate for NADL Program loans
from 6 percent to 2.5 percent for a 24-month period. This rate
reduction recognizes the unique economic circumstances faced by Native
American Veterans living on trust land and increases access by
significantly improving affordability. Since implementing this reduced
interest rate, VA has issued 43 loan commitments, including 29 interest
rate reduction refinancing loans of existing NADL Program loans.
To further improve accessibility of the program, VA continues to
conduct outreach to tribes and tribal organizations, including 59
events held in FY 2023 and 15 events held thus far in FY 2024. To
ensure VA's seven-person NADL team maximizes its efforts, this year's
outreach plans and goals include focused efforts on Tribes with large
Veteran populations and leveraging partnerships with Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA) public contact personnel and Veterans Health
Administration Veterans Integrated Service Networks. VA is also using
tribal engagements to better understand the most effective contact and
communication strategy with each Tribe. For example, parts of VA's FY
2024 outreach plan were tailored based on feedback from an August 2023
in-person site visit with the Navajo Nation and Hopi tribal leadership
to better engage with tribal housing authorities.

Specially Adapted Housing Grant Program

VA's Specially Adapted Housing (SAH) Grant Program offers housing
grants for Veterans with certain service-connected disabilities so they
can buy or change a home to meet their needs and live more
independently. In FY 2023, VA approved over 2,325 SAH grants to
Veterans. This reflects continued success of the program and a 19
percent increase over FY 2022. Currently, SAH agents are serving over
4,400 Veterans with an active SAH grant file, so VA anticipates another
record-breaking year for the SAH Program. Finally, the SAH Program
recently received the highest Veterans Signals trust scores across all
of VBA, demonstrating VA's commitment to delivering exceptional service
to the Nation's most severely disabled Veterans.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, I hope that my testimony today leads to the
conclusion that VA's home loan program is managing the changing
currents through responsible, effective and meaningful programs
centered on expanding homeownership opportunities and offering
affordable solutions when financial difficulties arise. This concludes
my testimony, and I welcome any questions that you or other Members of
the Subcommittee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Edward DeMarco
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Mark Jones
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Steve Sharpe
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
