- ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD

MODERNIZATION DEEP DIVE: CAN

THE ORACLE PHARMACY SOFTWARE

BE MADE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-51

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available via http://govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-185               WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
KEITH SELF, Texas                        Florida, Ranking Member
GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Matthew M. Rosendale, Sr., Chairman................     1
The Honorable Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick, Ranking Member.........     8

WITNESSES

Mr. Neil Evans, M.D., Acting Program Executive Director, EHRM
Integration Office, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs........     3

Accompanied by:

Mr. Thomas Emmendorfer, Pharm.D., Executive Director,
Pharmacy Benefits Management Services, Veterans Health
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Robert Silverman, Pharm.D., Chairman, EHRM Pharmacy
Council, Veterans Health Administration, U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs

Mr. David Case, Deputy Inspector General, Office of Inspector
General, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs...................     5

Mr. Mike Sicilia, Executive Vice President, Oracle Corporation...     7

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Neil Evans, M.D. Prepared Statement..........................    35
Mr. David Case Prepared Statement................................    39
Mr. Mike Sicilia Prepared Statement..............................    59

ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD MODERNIZATION DEEP DIVE: CAN

THE ORACLE PHARMACY SOFTWARE

BE MADE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE?

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology Modernization,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 8:03 a.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Matt Rosendale
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Rosendale, Self, and Cherfilus-
McCormick.
Also present: Representatives Schneider, and McMorris-
Rodgers.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Rosendale. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
Before we proceed, I would like to ask unanimous consent
that Representative McMorris-Rodgers and Representative
Schneider be permitted to participate in this hearing. Without
objection, so ordered.
I want to welcome our witnesses back to discuss VA's
continued struggles with the Oracle Cerner pharmacy software. I
want to thank Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick for proposing
that we return to this subject.
The situation we found in our previous hearing in May of
last year was dangerous and unsustainable, and it seems much
the same today. Simply put, the medical centers using the
Oracle Cerner Electronic Health Record (EHR) have been turned
upside down. They have had to increase their pharmacy staffing
by at least 20 percent to navigate all the bugs and
workarounds, just to process roughly the same volume of
prescriptions. The cost? Millions of dollars. These are just
five small-, medium-sized hospitals. VA projects that large,
complex medical centers will have to increase their pharmacy
staffing by as much as 60 percent to navigate the software's
problems.
If the EHR was implemented throughout the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA), those personnel costs would quickly run
into the hundreds of millions of dollars. That is money that
could otherwise fund veterans' healthcare, fight homelessness,
or renovate aging hospitals. It is all to prop up a system that
is clearly inferior to what the VA has today, which is Veterans
Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA).
On top of the added cost, it creates a dangerous situation.
Nearly 20 percent of the patient safety reports from the five
medical centers are related to the pharmacy. Office of
Inspector General (OIG) has come forward with alarming new
findings. Mr. Case's office discovered widespread errors in
VA's internal drug codes and the health data repository (HDR).
When veterans are treated at a facility using the Oracle
EHR and then treated at a facility using VistA, their
medication information may be incorrect. That means drug-to-
drug interaction checks and allergy checks may be based on
inaccurate information. According to the OIG, this problem may
affect at least 250,000 veterans, and it has been going on for
years.
In one incident that OIG documented, a veteran in a VA
residential treatment facility was repeatedly denied his
medication because it was showing inactive in the system. It
took 5 days for the veteran to convince the staff that he
needed the medication, but by then, he was in danger and had to
be transferred to the emergency room. That is just one. We have
got 250,000 veterans that have been having these problems with
the pharmacy.
An Oracle software update last April corrected some of the
system errors, but there is still no solution to many of the
others. However, VA still has not notified, has not notified,
any of the veterans who were impacted or are still being
impacted. Apparently, the VA has been hiding this problem.
According to the OIG, the Department took no action to go
back and correct the veterans' medication information in the
health data repository after the April software update resolved
the underlying error. Instead, the VA has been quietly waiting
for the prescriptions to expire and the inaccurate medication
information to fall out of the backend of this data base. VA
seems to have been concealing the errors that are still
ongoing. This is a breach of trust and it is absolutely
unacceptable.
I question what other dangerous pharmacy problems have not
even been uncovered yet. What we do know is that the results of
the VA and Oracle strategy to improve the EHR have been one
step forward and one step backward. We are not gaining on this.
Two and a half years ago, the pharmacists in the field
created a list of 79 problems with the pharmacy software. VA
prioritized 7, 7 of the 79, and Oracle rolled out fixes over a
series of software updates. The most recent, called Block 10,
happened a few days ago.
The most important fix aimed to eliminate the confusing,
error-prone double-entry process in the core EHR pharmacy
software and medication manager retail, which is used for the
mail, outpatient pharmacies, and community care. This
originally went live in April 2023, software update, but the VA
had to immediately roll it back because it caused yet another
problem with dosage instructions getting lost. The fix was
supposed to happen again a few days ago, but it was postponed
due to testing problems.
This particular item demonstrates the larger issue. These
are piecemeal, painfully slow improvements to software that
seem to be fundamentally inferior to VistA. Is anybody starting
to hear this reoccurring theme?
They involve VA paying Oracle most of the cost to overhaul
the system that the VA already bought. This is the complaint
that I have had from the very beginning. This is a firm, this
is a corporation that continues to get enriched by trying to
develop a program at the taxpayers' and the veterans' expense.
They are being used as guinea pigs, and everyone else on this
committee recognizes it.
Even worse, many of the changes introduce new
complications, unexpected errors, and safety risks that the
pharmacists have to manage with yet more workarounds. The VA
pharmacists are telling us very clearly that they are fed up
and they cannot do this forever.
We are way past piecemeal solutions, and we are not going
to tolerate the VA sweeping any more dangerous errors under the
rug. The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over
and over again while expecting a different outcome, a different
result. I have come to believe that this continuing effort to
transform the Oracle Cerner pharmacy software into something
completely different is insanity.
With that, I conclude my remarks.
Mr. Rosendale. Representative Cherfilus-McCormick, are you
prepared to----
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Can you defer and start with the
witnesses?
Mr. Rosendale. Sure, sure, sure. Okay. We are going to jump
in with the witnesses.
Okay. I will now introduce the witnesses on our first and
only panel today. First, from the Department of Veterans
Affairs, we have Dr. Neil Evans, the acting executive director
of the Electronic Health Record Modernization Integration
Office (EHRM-IO). We also have Dr. Thomas Emmendorfer, the
executive director of Pharmacy Benefits Management Services;
and Dr. Robert Silverman, the chairman of the Electronic Health
Record Modernization (EHRM) Pharmacy Council. Next, from the VA
Office of Inspector General, we have Deputy Inspector General
David Case. Finally, from Oracle, we have Mr. Mike Sicilia,
executive vice president for Global Industries.
Gentlemen, if you would please stand. I ask the witnesses
to stand and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. Let the record reflect that all
witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
Dr. Evans, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver
your opening statement on behalf of the VA.

STATEMENT OF NEIL EVANS

Dr. Evans. Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for this opportunity to testify in support of VA's
initiative to modernize its electronic health record system.
As has been mentioned, I am accompanied by Dr. Thomas
Emmendorfer, our executive director for Pharmacy Benefits
Management, and Dr. Rob Silverman, our Pharmacy Council co-
chair for the Electronic Health Record Modernization effort.
Before I speak to pharmacy directly, the focus area for
this hearing, I would like to take a moment to reflect on the
EHR modernization program more broadly. Specifically, the
program reset that we announced in April 2023.
As you know, having listened to veterans, VA staff, and
Congress, including this subcommittee, VA stopped work on
future deployments of the Federal EHR, except for the upcoming
deployment at the James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center
(FHCC). VA did this to prioritize improvements in support of
more than 10,000 users at 5 medical centers, 22 clinics, and 52
remote sites using the new system, and to optimize VA's
enterprise readiness to successfully resume deployments at a
pace conducive to a complete and successful rollout.
As we have said before, we are committed to getting this
right. Even beyond the benefits of a shared record with our
Federal partners, within VA itself transitioning to a single
instance enterprise-wide electronic health record will provide
significant value, allowing easier visibility of a veteran's
complete health record regardless of where they receive care,
allowing standardization of clinical and business processes
across the VA enterprise, reducing variation and increasing the
consistency of care delivery, and allowing for better sharing
of clinical resources and expertise across VA's regional and
national networks.
The Lovell Federal Health Care Center in North Chicago,
Illinois, a jointly run VA and Department of Defense (DOD)
facility, has been another priority for us during the current
program reset. This is the final deployment of the Federal EHR
at a DOD site and will also be the first VA deployment at a
larger and more complex VA healthcare facility. We are still on
track to go live at FHCC in early March.
Let us transition now to the focus of this hearing, the
pharmacy software capabilities being implemented as part of the
Federal EHR. Improving pharmacy functionality includes
addressing the needs of three key stakeholders in both the
inpatient and the outpatient settings: VA clinicians who are
prescribing pharmaceuticals and counseling veterans about how
those medications fit in their overall care; VA pharmacists and
the pharmacy staff who fulfill those prescriptions, manage
pharmacy inventory, backend pharmacy processes, while also
providing valuable counsel to veterans; and, of course, the
veterans themselves as they access their prescriptions,
refills, and more.
The scale of VA's pharmacy operations is also worth noting.
On the outpatient side alone, VA pharmacists and staff manage
upwards of 146 million prescriptions each year, and VA's mail
fulfillment services reach more than 350,000 veterans every
day.
Unlike many other healthcare systems, VA pharmacists and
pharmacy staff are fully integrated into patient care teams,
both inpatient and outpatient. The division that exists between
the health system and retail pharmacies in the private sector
simply does not exist in VA.
In part because of the uniqueness of VA's pharmacy care
delivery model and in part based on lessons learned since our
initial implementation of the Oracle Health Record at the Mann-
Grandstaff VA Medical Center in Spokane, we have been working
to continuously improve the Oracle Health software solutions
and VA pharmacy operations as they leverage the new software.
Over a year ago, the EHRM Pharmacy Council, along with
Oracle Health, helped identify critical early items to be
sequentially addressed through code upgrades, which are
delivered through joint VA-DOD block releases. Improvements
have been delivered in each of the last three block upgrades,
blocks 8, 9, and 10, in February and August 2023, and finally,
as has been mentioned this past weekend.
Where are we? We have made incremental but steady progress.
The most significant improvements have been realized in system
performance and in the clinician ordering experience. There
have also been several enhancements delivered to improve the
pharmacy fulfillment process, but this is an area where further
work remains to enable increased efficiency for pharmacy staff.
As of today, all but one of the initially identified
priority enhancements have been delivered. The final feature,
which will automate the synchronization of prescription
information between the Oracle provider and pharmacy
applications, has been installed but is not yet enabled.
Both Oracle and VA recognize that we are not yet done. As I
already mentioned, an area of considerable focus will be
increasing how efficiently pharmacists and pharmacy techs can
complete necessary tasks within the software suite, among other
improvements.
In conclusion, VA pharmacists, providers, and veterans
alike deserve a system, including ongoing enhancements, that
performs as promised and continues to keep pace with their
unique demands. My expectation is that this will continue to be
a shared priority for both VA and Oracle, and that Oracle will
remain committed to their promises, including those made in
front of the subcommittee, to prioritize and accelerate the
work on pharmacy matters.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.

[The Prepared Statement Of Neil Evans Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Dr. Evans. The written statement
of Dr. Evans will be entered into the hearing record.
Mr. Case, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to deliver
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID CASE

Mr. Case. Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick, and subcommittee members, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the OIG's oversight of the new EHR's
pharmacy functions.
Since April 2020, we have published 16 reports on EHRM, 9
of them related to significant patient safety concerns, such as
issues with medication management, pharmacy software, and
patient care coordination. I will discuss three upcoming draft
reports that are currently under review at VA, consistent with
our report process. While we do not usually discuss reports
before publication, due to this hearing's timing, I will
generally describe our findings.
First, an OIG team reviewed pharmacy-related patient safety
issues facing every VHA provider. VA has corrected one of a
series of issues related to the transmission of inaccurate
medication information into a data base called the HDR, which
stores clinical information about every patient's medications
and allergies. However, we are concerned about unresolved and
insufficiently communicated pharmacy-related patient safety
issues.
Legacy EHR sites may have inaccurate medication information
for patients treated at both legacy and new EHR sites. We
believe EHRM-IO and Oracle did not test for medication and
allergy data accuracy after that information was transmitted to
the HDR from new EHR sites. Thus, patients seen at both new and
legacy EHR sites may be prescribed contraindicated medications,
and legacy EHR providers may be making clinical decisions based
on inaccurate data.
My written statement discusses a veteran who had a delay in
receiving critical medication due to this issue. As of
September 2023, there have been approximately 250,000 veterans
who either received medication orders and/or had medication
allergies documented in the new EHR. They may be unaware of the
potential risk for a medication or allergy related event if
they visit a legacy EHR site.
While VA is taking efforts to reduce this potential, we
remain concerned that patients have not been informed of their
individual risk, essentially being excluded as full
participants in their care. Nor have we seen evidence that VA
has sufficiently notified legacy EHR providers about this issue
and the mitigations to safely care for these new EHR site
patients. While legacy site leaders were told to have providers
perform manual medication safety checks to replace the
automated checks for new EHR patients, these manual safety
checks are complex and rely on the vigilance of pharmacists and
frontline staff.
At Columbus, we found a prescription backlog required a
permanent 62 percent increase in clinical pharmacists, pharmacy
leaders had to create their own workarounds and education
materials, and pharmacy staff were burned out and had low
morale. These findings are troubling given the mitigations for
pharmacy failures rely on staff vigilance.
Although unrelated to pharmacy, I wanted to alert you to
two other upcoming OIG reports on scheduling, which also
address issues requiring high levels of staff vigilance and
inadequate mitigations. The first addresses problems with the
displaced appointment queue that can cause staff to not handle
appointments needing to be rescheduled when a provider's
schedule changes. Schedulers report appointments do not always
route to the queue and may disappear from it. EHRM-IO told us
that February and April updates would address these defects.
Further, the new EHR still cannot switch an appointment
time between in-person, VA Video Connect, or telehealth without
the scheduler canceling the appointment and the provider
ordering a new appointment, creating a burden on both.
The last report found VHA is allowing mental health staff
at new EHR sites to make two fewer attempts to contact no-show
patients compared to legacy sites. This procedure creates a
different standard of care, a disparity among veterans at new
and legacy sites. VHA should address administrative barriers
created by software deficiencies without compromising patient
care and engagement standards.
In conclusion, EHRM's success is dependent on VA's
transparency, careful planning, and the recognition and
remediation of patient safety issues. Additionally, trust in VA
is contingent on patients and providers being fully and quickly
advised when issues are identified.
Chairman Rosendale, this concludes my statement. I would be
happy to answer any questions you or other members may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of David Case Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Case. The written
statement of Mr. Case will be entered into the hearing record.
Mr. Sicilia, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
deliver your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MIKE SICILIA

Mr. Sicilia. Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me here today.
At the five live VA medical centers and their associated
facilities, veterans are receiving their outpatient
prescriptions at the pharmacy window in an average of 25
minutes for January 2024, which is below VA's 30-minute key
performance metric. On average, more than 215,000 outpatient
prescriptions are being filled each month. The current live
sites do not have a backlog in filling prescriptions.
Since the first appointment in October 2020, 4.3 million
prescriptions have been filled through VA's mail pharmacy. This
number of prescriptions is in line with historic prescription
fill volumes. Veterans are receiving their medication in a
timely manner.
We know that VA has increased pharmacy staffing, and we
continue to partner with VA to find efficiency opportunities
while maintaining the benefits of the new capabilities. Some
tasks, like reviewing the warning information on an allergy or
drug interaction and marking it as reviewed, may take a little
longer, but also provide enhanced safety protocols.
We are also aware that VA is considering additional
enhancements that may further adapt the system to VA's unique
pharmacy needs. We have already delivered seven enhancements,
six of which are live today, that adapt the pharmacy system to
a more bidirectional system between providers and pharmacists.
As you are aware, the VA pharmacy processes are different
from most of the commercial sector. We remain confident that
our work to update the entire EHR system, including pharmacy,
to a modern, stateless web application, along with moving the
EHR system to the cloud, will provide a basis for a much more
user friendly interface and experience. New stateless web
technology is already in the hands of our commercial customers
in beta format, with general availability planned for later
this year.
Finally, we know that the work being done now with VA to
standardize and simplify workflows and procedures will pay
dividends in improving the overall pharmacy and EHRM
experience.
We acknowledge that for these early sites, pharmacy has
been challenging. Shortly after the acquisition in June 22,
when I came to the Hill and met with congressional stakeholders
on EHRM, improving pharmacy was one of the top complaints I
heard. We listened, received the required changes on contract
from VA, and delivered them in an expedited fashion.
When the Lovell Federal Health Care Clinic in North Chicago
goes live next month, the providers and pharmacists there will
start using the system with the current enhancements. They will
also start with much improved training. During a visit last
week by VA and the Oracle team to Lovell, feedback from
pharmacists was positive about the training and readiness for
using the new pharmacy system. We are anxious to evaluate the
deployment and get feedback from the pharmacist at Lovell. It
will provide valuable insight along with the continued review
of the feedback from other live sites for other enhancements
that may be required as we seek to continually improve the
system.
Oracle looks forward to continuing to provide VA with a
pharmacy module in the new EHR that enables veterans to receive
their medication when they need it and safely. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Mike Sicilia Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Mr. Sicilia, for your comments.
The written statement of Mr. Sicilia will be entered into the
hearing record.
I will now recognize Representative Cherfilus-McCormick for
opening statements.

OPENING STATEMENT OF SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, RANKING MEMBER

Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the witnesses for being here today to discuss what
progress has been made to fix the issues with Oracle Cerner's
pharmacy application.
It has now been over three years since Cerner Millennium
was deployed at Mann-Grandstaff Virginia Medical Center. In
that time, we have continually heard from VA providers, the
Inspector General (IG) and the Government Accountability Office
about issues with the system that have put veterans at risk and
made VA employees' jobs unbearable. The new EHR has required a
herculean effort to ensure that veterans receive safe
healthcare, which has had a dramatically negative effect on
employee satisfaction.
Late April, VA finally listened to those concerns and to
the concerns raised by the committee and undertook a reset of
that program. I applaud that reset during our pharmacy hearing
last May, and I still applaud it. However, I am extremely
concerned about the fact that VA and DOD plan to deploy the
system at the Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care
Center next month before the objectives of the reset have been
met.
In December, committee staff traveled to Lovell to meet
with leadership and frontline staff. It was clear then that the
VA providers were not convinced that the software was ready. In
fact, Lovell's pharmacy leadership indicated that they did not
feel like anything had changed.
While I understand that the DOD is motivated to finish its
deployment, that cannot come at the expense of our veterans or
VA providers. I hope the VA's decision-makers are being
incredibly deliberative in deciding whether or not to go live
should be allowed to happen as scheduled.
In an effort to address some of these issues plaguing the
system, Oracle Cerner and VA deployed the much awaited Block 10
upgrade this past weekend. I understand that there were some
major pharmaceutical enhancements expected to be delivered with
it, but not all of them were working correctly and some of them
deployed without even being turned on. I hope to hear about VA
and Oracle's plan to fix the issues and their timeline for
turning them on.
As for the rest of the upgrade, it is probably too early to
know for sure, but I hope to hear how it went and how VA is
going to measure the impact of those changes. VA providers have
been struggling far too long under the weight of the mitigation
efforts.
I am still optimistic that there is a path to success for
this project, but not without major changes to the way the VA
has been managing it. That is why I, along with Chairman Bost,
cosponsored Ranking Member Takano's EHR Program Reset Act last
Congress and am still working with my colleagues across the
aisle to ensure that we put adequate rail guards around VA's
work.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, and I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative
Cherfilus-McCormick.
We are now going to proceed to questioning and I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Case, your office uncovered a multitude of pharmacy
problems. Will you please explain how the errors involving the
health data repository and the medication identifiers work and
how they can cause veterans' drug-to-drug interaction and drug
allergy checks to be inaccurate?
Mr. Case. Yes, sir. I will start with how the HDR stores
clinical information for all VHA patients, including a unique
identifier referred to as a ``VUID'' for any medication. For a
veteran getting a prescription at a new EHR site, after the
prescription is filled, the system sends the prescription data,
including the VUID, to the HDR. If that veteran goes to a
legacy or VistA site and receives a new prescription, another
program in VistA accesses the HDR to perform a safety check and
make sure the medications prescribed at the legacy site are
compatible with the prescriptions from the new EHR site.
It was discovered that when the legacy system goes to
access information from the HDR, there are times that the
medication information in the HDR from the new EHR would not be
accurate, or could be duplicative, or simply be missing. The
result is that when this check occurs, when a veteran has gone
to a new EHR site and is now at the old EHR site getting a
prescription, it could be based on inaccurate information.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Case, what happens when a drug
interaction check or drug allergy check is based on the wrong
medication?
Mr. Case. When a medication check is based on wrong
information, or a provider could prescribe a medication that is
contraindicated, meaning there may be side effects, or there
may be less efficacy to one or more medications.
Mr. Rosendale. When we hear Mr. Sicilia talking about all
of the medications that are going out and being delivered, if
they are not the proper medications or there could be
interaction problems between the medications that are being
delivered to the veteran, have we really accomplished anything?
Mr. Case. Right. As I understand the data referred to
earlier, he is talking about prescriptions at the new EHR
sites, and that information will be accurate when you compare
information from the new EHR for prescription one to
prescription two. The risk occurs when there is a prescription
at the new EHR and veterans, snowbirds, people travel, they get
their healthcare at old sites as well as new EHR sites, so when
they travel and go to an old site and a new prescription is
done, that is when the risk occurs.
Mr. Rosendale. Exactly. Again, is it more important to have
the number of prescriptions being delivered or make sure that
the number of prescriptions is accurate?
Mr. Case. The most important thing, in our mind, is patient
safety.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. Mr. Case, how did you determine
the two patient populations that may be impacted, and how did
you come up with that total of 250,000 unique veterans?
Mr. Case. Yes. That number was provided to us by VHA, and
those populations are of unique patients at new EHR sites who
had prescribed medication and or documented allergies. That 250
is the ones that are risk if they go to a legacy EHR.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Case, those numbers are based on
information the VA gave you in September 2023, correct?
Mr. Case. That is correct.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Do you have any idea how many veterans
may be impacted today?
Mr. Case. We do not know how that number has been modified.
We are not aware of what actions have been taken by VA since
our report, so VA is in the best position to update that
number.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. We still could have many more than the
250,000.
Mr. Sicilia, according to the OIG, Oracle built the
interface to the health data repository that contained the
coding error, and Oracle corrected one of the group of errors
in April 2023. The other group of errors has not been fixed and
continues as we speak. Is any part of that inaccurate?
Mr. Sicilia. My understanding is that we have delivered 10
fixes, 10 data files to HDR to correct the data base between
May 2023 and November 2023, which corrects the drug interaction
and potential duplication checks within the VA.
Mr. Rosendale. Why do I hear about the system that was just
introduced 3 days ago that was actually pulled right back off
again to help address this problem if a problem has already
been addressed?
Mr. Sicilia. There was a final testing check that did not
pass.
Mr. Rosendale. In other words, we are still working on the
same problem that you are trying to tell me that was resolved
last year?
Mr. Sicilia. There was another issue that surfaced in the
testing of one of the seven enhancements that was fixed again
last night. The testing begins today. In the interest of
patient safety, we decided, of course, not to roll out anything
that did not pass all final safety checks
Mr. Rosendale. Sure. Mr. Case, please help me to understand
this, because Mr. Sicilia seems to think that the fixes that
they rolled out last year resolved this problem, and yet the
one that he is trying to roll out here within the last 3 days
is to address the same problem. I am confused. Could you
clarify?
Mr. Case. Right. The Block 10 addresses a set of issues
that they have identified, among others, in pharmacy. What we
have identified in our report has been ongoing, and to our
understanding, there is no fix. That is the risk when a patient
gets prescriptions at a new EHR site, and then goes to a legacy
EHR site. The fact that there may be inaccurate information in
the HDR from the new EHR is still extant, unless it is been
fixed since September when we got our data.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize Representative Cherfilus-McCormick for
5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sicilia, during our last hearing on the pharmacy
issues, we discussed the corrupted data going into the health
data repository and how it was impacting VA's ability to
prevent dangerous drug interactions and allergies. Why was not
this issue caught in testing before the interface was turned
on?
Mr. Sicilia. Thank you very much for the question. It is a
good question.
The testing around this process is very manual. It is very
rigorous. You know, when we become aware of these issues and
things like this happen, we did fix these issues immediately
and stop any deployment of anything until this was fixed.
Why it actually was not caught, I am not exactly sure. I am
happy to reply back in writing as to what corrective actions
have been taken. That combination of testing involves Oracle,
it involves the VA, it involves the pharmacy councils, and I am
not exactly sure on that particular issue where the breakdown
was. Once it was discovered, once it was discovered, we did fix
it, and we did offer fixes to the VA immediately.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Do you believe that there is an
issue with fixing the testing process?
Mr. Sicilia. I do not believe that there is a core issue
with the testing process. I think the issue is that there are a
lot of manual checks, meaning that human beings have to be
involved in testing. Typically, you want to try to automate as
much of that testing, particularly for interfaces, as you
possibly can. I think we continue to work together with VA to
make that process more efficient.
I think the fact that what we saw happen in these last
couple days where we did not deploy something because it did
not pass a test is a testament to a much better testing
process. You obviously do not want to deploy something and then
find an issue after it is deployed. Much rather, in the
interest of patient safety, not deploy something that does not
pass a particular safety check. That is exactly what happened.
We got the feedback, we redeployed that.
Again, as I said, that has now been addressed last night.
Testing will continue for the next 2 weeks.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Are you making any accommodations
or alterations to ensure that future issues are caught before
they are deployed?
Mr. Sicilia. We are, and I think that, again, not to be
repetitive, but this issue is exactly a result of the enhanced
testing processes that we put in place. It is possible that
prior to the enhanced testing processes that we put in place,
together with VA VHA, that there could have been a miss and
somebody may have missed something that should not have been
rolled out.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mr. Case, what should VA and
Oracle do to improve its testing before deploying the new EHRM
functions?
Mr. Case. Yes, I mean, clearly it has to be an end-to-end
testing from start to finish or whatever the process is. It has
to be as comprehensive as Oracle Cerner working with VA can
make it, and it is that comprehensive nature of the test where
attention has to be paid so all features are tested in it.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. During our last hearing in May,
Dr. Ellzy indicated that Oracle had already fixed the issue
going forward, but that Oracle was still working with VA to do
the retroactive work that needs to be done for things that were
already transmitted. We heard last week that the Pharmacy
Council finally gave up on expecting Oracle to fix the
corrupted data in November, 7 months after the issue was
identified, because most of those prescriptions will be
expiring by April of this year.
Are you concerned about the message that this sends to VA
providers that serious high-risk issues are not going to be
resolved in a timely manner?
Mr. Case. We are always concerned about the fact that
providers must be clearly informed of what is happening, and
the risks, and what they should be doing to mitigate against
those risks. Yes, we are concerned. The fact that it was
allowed to stay in place, and up until April 7, that data is
still in there.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mr. Sicilia, we were told that
part why this data was not fixed is because it would have been
costly. Do you think that the VA should be expected to pay to
fix things that Oracle broke?
Mr. Sicilia. I am not sure that we broke anything here.
This is a very complex process, and it is a byproduct of having
multiple systems involved, multiple versions of VistA, multiple
EHRs, and lots of interfaces in between.
We are, of course, responsible and have taken
responsibility for fixing all defects in the system as
designed, as scoped, and on contract at our cost and have done
so. I do not believe that extraordinary circumstances for
system interfaces that we do not have direct control over are
necessarily things that we are billing the government for that
we should not be, that are not part of the scope of the
existing system. I am very confident that we have maintained
all of our warranties and fixed things that we are responsible
for fix at no cost to the government.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Are you saying that who should
bear this cost?
Mr. Sicilia. I do not have all of the details on this
particular issue since it goes back a very long time and we
have been making lots of fixes to the system. I am happy to
respond in writing with the details on this one.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Representative Cherfilus-
McCormick.
I now recognize Representative Self for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Evans, a question for you. I think we try to take human
error out of everything. I am not sure it has been taken out in
this case. How many veterans have actually been harmed, do you
have any idea, from these drug interactions?
The reason I ask is because I have seen returning veterans
come into the civilian community taking 20 pills a day, 25
pills a day. That seems to me, I do not even know, you would
probably need a supercomputer to figure out the interactions
for that. Do you have any idea how many veterans have been
harmed by this issue we are discussing?
Dr. Evans. We have not found an instance of harm, though we
are vigilant and looking and interested, if--we will look to
find one, if we can. We have not found an instance of harm
specifically related to the drug-drug interaction issue from
this HDR challenge.
Mr. Self. Okay. The next question is you are going to roll
out Lovell when? The Federal Health Center, when?
Dr. Evans. Scheduled to go live is March 9.
Mr. Self. March the 9th. That is a couple of weeks from
now. Why in heaven's name are you going to roll out a more
complex system, which is not only VistA, which is not only EHR,
but it also includes DOD? Is that not more complex? We are
trying to fix the complexity just in the VA.
Dr. Evans. As you alluded, the medical center at the James
A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center is a unique medical
center. It is a fully joint DOD and VA facility. There are deep
interdependencies there between the DOD healthcare system and
the VA healthcare system.
One of the advantages that we anticipate in going live at
the James A. Lovell is that we have a partner in DOD who has
been able to successfully deploy the record across the rest of
their enterprise healthcare system.
I would say a couple reasons that I feel confident about
moving forward. Number one, part of the goal of the reset, one
of the three primary goals of the reset was to put our focus on
FHCC. We have not had other--we have been working to improve
the system and do the enterprise work that we need to be able
to successfully move forward with this program. We have also
been able to put a significant amount of attention on FHCC, and
we will benefit from the DOD's experience in support of all of
our users there.
Mr. Self. Is their system exactly the same one that Oracle
is doing for you?
Dr. Evans. The DOD system?
Mr. Self. Yes.
Dr. Evans. It is the same system, yes. There are some
differences in workflows. For example, at the James A. Lovell
Federal Health Care Center, nearly 40,000 Naval recruits come
through every year. Some of the healthcare they receive on what
is referred to as the ``east campus'' is a little bit different
in preparing Naval recruits.
The software system that will support clinicians, whether
those be VA or DOD clinicians, is the same.
Mr. Self. Well, then all of these patches that Oracle has
been doing have been done in the DOD system?
Dr. Evans. Yes.
Mr. Self. I mean, because if they are doing this for you,
why is it not--if they have already done it for DOD, why is it
not the same? You said the systems are basically the same. Why
are we having this problem in VA?
Dr. Evans. The fixes and improvements that are delivered.
We heard referenced earlier, the Block 10 upgrade.
Mr. Self. Right.
Dr. Evans. Our block upgrades occur every 6 months. They
are major software uplifts.
Mr. Self. These are already into DOD?
Dr. Evans. They are.
Mr. Self. They work in DOD. Why do they not work in VA?
Dr. Evans. Well, which specific ones? I mean, for example,
in the Block 10, all of the upgrades that we put through in
Block 10 are to the benefit of both VA and DOD. There are some
that are specific to maybe a connected set of technologies that
we own in VA that connects to the electronic health record,
that DOD has a different set of technologies, so there is some
difference, but the core system is the same.
Mr. Self. Okay. For Mr. Case, I want to get into the
displaced appointment queue. Why are they falling through the
cracks, the appointment system? Why?
Mr. Case. Right. We do not have a root cause for the
displaced appointment queue not capturing every displaced
appointment, which is simply shorthand for a provider who has
to cancel a set of appointments and they have to be
rescheduled. We know that there is been workarounds put in
place. Schedulers are supposed to take actions now, and the
displaced appointment queue has been described to the providers
and us as a safety net. Well, it is not a very effective safety
net if not all canceled appointments are going there or they
disappear once they are there.
We understand that VA has fixes that they are going to put
into place to address the displaced appointment queue. As it
exists right now, it is still there and is not an effective
safety net.
Mr. Self. The software cannot handle it and the human error
is introduced?
Mr. Case. Right. Because of the software not being
comprehensively accurate, workarounds always introduce the
possibility of human error. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Self. Thank you. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative Self.
Dr. Emmendorfer, we just listened to Dr. Evans say that
there is nothing to see here. Everything is going to be fine.
We have got all the fixes in. Seems to think that the folks at
James Lovell are going to be A-OK we roll this thing out in
March. It is a much larger, much more complex facility.
What is your feedback from James A. Lovell and the folks
there that are going to have to implement this system? What
kind of feedback are you getting?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes. Thank you, Congressman, for the
question.
In VA Pharmacy, as Dr. Evans testified to, we really have a
culture of safety and quality and continuous process
improvement, and not only from our Lovell sites, but from our
other Oracle health sites. They have done an amazing job of
providing the feedback, identifying the manual workarounds that
are needed and what is needed to improve the efficiency of the
system.
One of the major enhancements that we need is the
bidirectional data synchronization, the one that we have heard
that has been deployed but not enabled. The VA Pharmacy
community, this has been their highest ranked feature that they
want to see be put in place in the Oracle health system.
Mr. Rosendale. How long has that request been out there to
try and get this resolved?
Dr. Emmendorfer. I am going to ask Dr. Silverman or Dr.
Evans for the exact date.
Dr. Silverman. Good morning, Congressman Rosendale.
Mr. Rosendale. Good morning.
Dr. Silverman. The request for the synchronization, which
has been referred to now as enhancements 3B and 3C, was
initially targeted for Block 8, would have been February 23,
was not ready at that time. As you have heard----
Mr. Rosendale. February 2023?
Dr. Silverman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay, thank you. That is all. Thank you very
much.
Dr. Silverman, according to Mr. Case's testimony, this is
on page 4, the VHA Pharmacy Council that you chair withdrew a
request for Oracle to correct the medication data in the health
data repository. That predated the April 2023 software update.
The errors go all the way back to October 2020, when Spokane
went live with Cerner. This decision was based on the
expectation that all the prescriptions would expire by April
2024 and the inaccurate data would eventually fall out of the
veterans records, which is what I had referred to in my opening
statement.
Dr. Silverman, were you a party to this decision, and did
you make this decision?
Dr. Silverman. I was part of the Council's recommendation
for that decision, yes. The options for correcting the existing
data included, when we began evaluating it in April 2023, a
process to resend data from the Millennium Health Record to the
HDR or for HDR to correct the data. Neither of those processes
existed or exist. If you take estimates that it would have been
about a 6-month software delivery by the time we reached
November, if that software project had been started, it would
have been cost, expense, and attention taken away from other
efforts, such as the ones we are talking about with data----
Mr. Rosendale. Again, Dr. Silverman, what we are talking
about is time and money, Okay? The taxpayers are continuously
providing both of those. The veterans are the ones that are at
risk for all of this. This very time and money that the
taxpayers are absorbing the burden of, Oracle continues to get
the benefit for producing a product that is simply not
delivering as promised or close to it.
Because of this decision your Council made, there are still
holes today in the medication records of veterans all over the
country that feed into automated safety checks. Unless every
single one of those veterans' healthcare providers have
received and understood the warning and exercised vigilance
every day, those veterans are being put at risk.
Dr. Silverman, do you regret this decision? How will you
direct Oracle to immediately correct the remaining errors?
Dr. Silverman. Thank you for the follow up on that. The
decision to withdraw a request for a software change was
accompanied by actions that have been taken. Those actions
include a weekly task being operated by VA's HDR team to
inactivate the older records that are in the HDR, removing all
of them from the order checks, leaving the portion described up
through April 2024 to be addressed.
Mr. Rosendale. These are the exact holes that I was just
referencing. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize Representative Cherfilus-McCormick.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This question is for Dr. Emmendorfer. In our last hearing
on the pharmacy issue, you indicated that it took three times
as long to process a prescription filled in Cerner as it does
in VistA. Have you seen any improvements in that time? Does it
still take three times as long?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Thank you, Congresswoman. Yes, it still is
taking approximately three times as long for our VA Oracle
health sites to process prescriptions.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Do you expect the upgrades in
Block 10 are going to make a major impact or improvement?
Dr. Emmendorfer. We are going to have to wait for more time
to go by so we can evaluate. The data synchronization piece is
one that we will be paying close attention to, because that is
a scenario where our pharmacists now need to do dual entry,
basically in the Medication Manager Retail (MMR) and the
provider application to keep the data in sync.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Given most of your mitigations for
known pharmacy issues calls on more labor-intensive manual
workarounds, which require great vigilance by staff, what are
you doing to attract and retain pharmacy staff?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes, so, you know, our pharmacy workforce,
I just want to take this opportunity because we have a very
highly trained, professionally trained workforce. Really we are
leading the industry and the profession. We have just under
12,000 pharmacists in our system, right around 6,000 pharmacy
technicians. In our residency program we have around 660
pharmacy residents every year that go through our training, and
we are able to retain about 90 percent of them. They go on to
become VA pharmacists.
We are really operating at the top of our license inside of
VA. I believe that helps us attract top quality pharmacists
into our healthcare system.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. How are you coordinating with VHA
to make sure you can add so many pharmacist staff at the next
deployment sites?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Before this hearing, just, was it last
week or the week before, I was out at Lovell and spent time
actually sitting through some of the training sessions to see
how those worked as well and spending time with our pharmacy
staff. And so really VA's journey to a high reliability
organization, I saw very good communication between our
pharmacy leadership and the facility leadership. This is a very
big undertaking, and there is a realization of everyone
involved at Lovell that additional pharmacy staff will be
needed.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. How long do you expect to need
large pharmacy staffing?
Dr. Emmendorfer. I do not have a good answer to that
question, just to be honest. That, I think, is part of our
reset process is through our reset process, being able to
listen to our end users obtain their feedback.
For the testing of the 3B, 3C that has been referenced, for
example, it is been really important that in our Pharmacy
Council. We are also including field representatives into that
testing. Making some of those changes, but time will tell.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. My next question is for Mr.
Sicilia. Does it make sense to you that Modern Solution takes
three times longer to use than the predecessor, even with
additional or new safeguards?
Mr. Sicilia. No, it certainly does not make sense and it is
not the aspirational goal program, nor should it be. As the
doctor said, we look forward to the go live at Lovell, and I
think at that point, we will--Lovell will be the first site to
go live with all of the new enhancements that we put into the
system since we acquired Cerner in the last 18 months. I think
that will be a very good baseline and the feedback that we
should get, and that feedback should come very quickly from
Pharmacy in all aspects to get to a much better process.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. In your testimony, you indicated
that productivity in Oracle cannot be compared to productivity
in VistA because the new EHR included additional safeguards
that ensure patient safety and improved health outcomes for
veterans. Given the topic of today's hearing, does that
assertion ring hollow?
Mr. Sicilia. I am sorry, I missed the last point.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Does that assertion ring hollow?
Mr. Sicilia. No, I do not believe it does. Look, I do not
think that--there are different processes between the systems.
Certainly we are not here to say that it should take three
times as long. That is obviously not what we are saying.
I am not a pharmacist, I am not a patient safety expert.
What should the baseline be and how do those protocols impact
staffing? That is why we continue to work together with VA and
with the Pharmacy Councils to determine the best practice.
Again, I do believe Lovell is the best baseline that we
will have given that this will not be incremental fixes to
existing go live sites. This will be a brand new go live, where
all of the features will be recognized and consumed at once.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. This question is for all the VA
witnesses. OIG's testimony also explains how in June 2023, the
VHA got a clinical episode review team together and it
recommended notifying all the potentially impacted veterans.
They recommended notifying all the impacted veterans. This went
all the way up to Undersecretary for Health Dr. Elnahal.
On August 7, the team sent a communications plan throughout
the whole VHA organization, including the Veterans Integrated
Services Networks (VISN)s that include the facilities using the
Oracle Cerner EHR. No one at VA ever sent the notification to
any of the veterans.
Dr. Evans, Dr. Emmendorfer, Dr. Silverman, how do you
explain this? How do you explain this? Do you commit to
notifying the veterans as soon as possible when you leave this
hearing room today so that they are aware that they may be
exposed to some kind of safety and health problem, potentially
because of interactions?
Dr. Evans. I will start with the second part of your
question. We agree wholeheartedly with both you and with the IG
that it is important that veterans are full participants in
their healthcare. They are the most important part of the
healthcare team. Informing them and making sure that we are
optimizing the care that is delivered in the exam room when our
VA healthcare providers are sitting with veterans, writing
prescriptions, making sure that we are optimizing the awareness
of those folks about how to deliver the best and highest
quality safe care is very important. We agree.
We are working on communication and will communicate with
the affected veterans around, frankly, many of the actions that
can enhance the care delivery in the context of this EHR
transformation. One of the recommendations----
Mr. Rosendale. Dr. Evans, this is not a really complex
question.
Dr. Evans. Yes.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. It is really not. All of these words
that you are filling the air with right now, all I want to hear
is that Mr. Case says that there is 250,000 veterans that very
well may have problems with drug interactions. Very well. I
cannot think of another business or industry that would be
allowed to perpetuate such an issue without disclosing it to
their customers that there could be a problem. I am asking, can
I get the commitment?
Look, I have worked with Dr. Elnahal very closely, and he
has been so, so very responsive to everything that I have asked
him to do when it comes to patient care. He really has. I need
the three of you to tell me that we are going to----
Dr. Evans. Yes.
Mr. Rosendale [continuing]. make sure that we get this
information out to these exposed veterans, 250,000.
Mr. Case, we do not even know what the number is
potentially right now.
Dr. Evans. Mr. Rosendale, so I did use too many words. I
will make it a little bit simpler. Yes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. Dr. Emmendorfer, Dr. Silverman,
can we all work together to make sure that we get this
disclosure sent out to these exposed veterans?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes.
Mr. Rosendale. According to OIG, you notified the VA staff
to be alert to the danger, but you did not notify the veterans.
How can you possibly, possibly justify this when you are
telling me that you are focused on making sure that we have the
best care delivered to our veterans?
Dr. Evans. First, I think with regard to how can we
justify--can you repeat the question for me?
Mr. Rosendale. How can you justify not notifying the
veterans of these possible drug interaction problems after you
notified the VA staff you have been notified? How is it that
you can justify not notifying the veterans of this information?
Dr. Evans. Yes, I would--well, so I think most important,
in my mind, the most important part is notifying the staff.
When I am in clinic at the D.C. VA seeing patients, I am aware
of--and by the way, there is a clinical reminder in the
electronic health record and Computerized Patient Record System
(CPRS) VistA for me that would warn me if a patient has
received care at one of our new sites--and so the most
important person to be aware is the prescribing provider,
because it is the prescribing provider who is going to have to
take the action to make sure that they are verifying the
medication list and that they are then making sure that there
are no drug-drug interactions for that particular patient.
I agree, as I just said, that notifying the patients is
important and is something we will do. It is also very
important that the providers are aware of the need for the
extra vigilance in this circumstance.
Mr. Rosendale. Representative Cherfilus-McCormick, I yield
back. You are welcome for your next 5 minutes questioning.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Evans, of the 79 business requirements originally
identified, how many did VA adjudicate as warranting change
requests?
Dr. Evans. Of the 79. We started with, as I mentioned in my
opening statement, we started with the highest priority, early
changes that were necessary. There are further change requests
that are in process for delivery, and we will be working
through all 79 items and, frankly, new items that we discover
that are needed for improvement.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Do you have a specific number of
how many have been completed and how many are still awaiting
action?
Dr. Evans. I would have to take that for the record, unless
Dr. Silverman----
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Would you know how many business
requirements or solutions in this weekend's Block 10 upgrade?
Dr. Evans. In this weekend's Block 10 upgrade, there were
three major improvements. There were also some minor fixes as
part of the platform upgrades, but three major improvements.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. How are you measuring improvements
driven by Block 10 and what is the specific criteria? Is
employee satisfaction a part of that criteria?
Dr. Evans. For Block 10, yes, absolutely. Employee
satisfaction is part of that criteria. I think we have spoken
at prior hearings about the Kent Gale, Leonard Black, Adam
Gale, and Scott Holbrook (KLAS) survey, which is a user
satisfaction or user confidence survey that we were doing once
yearly. We have committed to surveying our users of the Federal
EHR more frequently, and the next survey is being timed
specifically to make sure that we are delivering that survey
after Block 10 so we can assess in a robust way the
satisfaction of our end users for the Block 10 improvements.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. What is your timeline for these
measures?
Dr. Evans. For the user satisfaction survey I can certainly
get you the official timeline. I think we were going to wait at
least a month after Block 10 to make sure that folks had had
the full experience with Block 10 before they were asked to
comment on their satisfaction with it.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mr. Case, the OIG has been
watching this program closely from the beginning. Have your
people observed any improvements in the program management?
What are their biggest issues that the VA needs to address to
improve its management of this program?
Mr. Case. Yes, we have seen an improvement in the sense
that the senior leadership, some of which is right here, we
find to be receptive to issues that arise, either from us or
other areas, and are committed to resolving them. Think that
going forward, there needs to be enhanced project management to
get VA through the reset and out of the reset, including
accurate measurements as to whether the reset is successful and
achieved its goals. Then once that is done, the real work of
project management occurs in large scale to try to assess how
to go forward once you are out of the reset.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Repeatedly, OIG and others have
found that the scheduling and pharmacy staff in particular have
found themselves overwhelmed when using the system. In part,
this appears to be due to insufficient or inadequate training
focused on day-to-day usage of the system. VA has modified
training plans previously, but it is clear that these efforts
need to be stepped up. How did you train staff differently at
Lovell, and how are you measuring training success?
Mr. Case. If that question is for me, I am not implementing
the training program at Lovell. I understand they will be
measuring the success of that program.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. That was for Dr. Evans.
Dr. Evans. Okay, I thought so. Yes, first of all, at
Lovell, we have introduced several new--we have changed
training. You know, as you mentioned, right, it is important
through training to learn how the software works. What we have
heard consistently from our end users is that understanding how
the software works is not sufficient. It is really to deeply
understand how the software will work in their day-to-day work.
Understanding how can I configure this software for optimal
use, saving favorites to make things more efficient for me when
I am seeing a patient in my type of clinical medicine, what are
the best practices?
In support of that, we have added some new, I will call
them adoption activities at FHCC. I think sometimes when we
think about training, that is oftentimes an online training
class or sitting with an instructor in a classroom. Most of us
as learners, we learn--yes, we learn in a classroom. Yes, we
learn online, but we really learn by doing and trying. One of
the new events that we have gotten great feedback from at the
FHCC site is what we call our learning labs, where we allow
users to really practice their full work in our sandbox
environment.
We also are going to be able to bring even more what we
call pay it forward peer support at the time of go live to
improve our ability to sort of stand at the side of each of our
end users in helping them adopt a new solution.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative.
Pay it forward. Pay it forward? Is that what you just said?
We have been paying this forward for 5 years now to the tune of
$9 billion. Nine billion dollars. Quite frankly, Dr. Evans, I
find it disingenuous to blame this on training when the users--
okay, you are saying they have to be more comfortable with the
software. It is disingenuous to try and blame this on training
and the users when they cannot even rely upon the data and the
information that they are receiving from this software program.
I will--Representative McMorris-Rodgers, are you ready or
do you want me to give you a dive in? Thank you so much for
joining us.
I now recognize Representative McMorris-Rodgers for 5
minutes questioning. Thank you.
Ms. McMorris-Rodgers. Thank you, Chairman Rosendale. I
really appreciate you hosting this important hearing today and
giving me the opportunity to address this committee.
The Oracle Cerner electronic healthcare system has been a
disaster for the veterans it was designed to serve. We are
familiar with the devastating problems the EHR has created for
veterans, especially in eastern Washington, where it was first
launched. Problems were clear from the beginning. Prescription
orders and referrals disappearing into unknown queries, long
outages making the system useless, dropped appointments and
other errors directly harming nearly 150 veterans. Things have
gotten so bad that some veterans have been told to work around
the system altogether, to call their local pharmacy rather than
use the EHR to do something as basic as filling a prescription.
It is hard to fathom that the system was so broken that our VA
pharmacies cannot serve their sole purpose. That is exactly
what happened, and our veterans are paying the price,
accumulating hundreds and sometimes thousands of dollars in
debt after being forced to pay out of pocket for treatment.
At Mann-Grandstaff, pharmacy employees continue to work
under extreme pressure, relying on memory to recognize
dangerous drug combinations and other problems the system is
failing to catch. Burnout and low morale have become the new
normal, adding pharmacists to the list of providers and support
staff that simply cannot take it anymore. Their leaving is
making bad staff shortages worse, creating longer wait times,
and making it more difficult for veterans to get the care that
they need. It is unsustainable, and the EHR is to blame.
Let me be clear. The time for inaction is over. We owe it
to our Nation's heroes to get this right. I believe that starts
with pulling the plug on this deeply broken system and going
back to one that works. That is the only way to restore broken
trust and help our veterans who have nowhere else to turn.
Our witnesses here today will play a vital role in
achieving that goal. I would like to ask a few questions.
Dr. Emmendorfer, you represent the pharmacist, and they
have reached out. They have really reached a breaking point in
Spokane and other medical centers that are using the Oracle
Cerner EHR. I would like to ask, what are they telling you?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes, this last September, we had a
pharmacy leadership meeting. During this reset period,
Congresswoman, one of the things we are trying to do is just
ensure that we are hearing the voice of our end users and of
our pharmacists. Our chief of pharmacies is from there, and
Sonny, who is our chief in Spokane, it is really because of his
leadership that he has--it requires more staff. It takes three
times as long to process prescriptions in the Oracle health
system, and it is really their dedication to the mission of
caring for the veterans to ensure that we are still able to get
the prescriptions to the veterans that they need. It does
require more staff.
There are manual workarounds that the staff do have to use,
like you referenced. We are aware of those. During this reset
period, it is important that we get as many of those issues
addressed for our pharmacy staff.
Ms. McMorris-Rodgers. Thank you for that. I guess from your
perspective, what needs to happen with the pharmacy software in
order to avoid a breaking point?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes. Earlier we were talking, and VA
Pharmacy has this culture of quality and safety and continuous
process improvement, and those will continue to be our traits
in VA pharmacy. First of all, it is our healthcare providers
delivering the care that provides that high quality and the
electronic health record, regardless of what it is, needs to
support that delivery of care. On that journey, one of the
things that we do also need to do is get back closer to a
baseline productivity.
Ms. McMorris-Rodgers. Okay. Mr. Sicilia, the men and women
who work in our VA pharmacies are at the end of their rope, and
I would like to read to you what one of the pharmacists in my
district had to say about the Oracle Cerner system.
``I cannot do this anymore, the stress of this system,
added workload to make it function. I cannot care for my
patients and have stopped being able to care for my own well
being.''
What am I supposed to say to someone who has been destroyed
by the system?
Mr. Sicilia. Well, I certainly acknowledge that there have
been issues in the pharmacy system and in the system in
general. Since we took ownership of this contract, I do believe
that we have made improvements, and I will speak in two phases
there.
The first is the system, as you mentioned, when we took it
over, was unstable, was unacceptable. There were five Service
Level Agreements (SLA)s. We signed up for 23 in the new
contract, and we have largely met them and paid financial
penalties when we did not meet them, and we will continue to do
so in the future.
Pharmacy has been--in the Federal enclave, the one thing
that is different between the VA and all the other tenants is
pharmacy. It is a unique process, and it has been the most
difficult and the most challenging to get it right. I do
believe with what we are about to roll out at the Captain James
A. Lovell Federal Health Center in north Chicago, we will see
the benefits of all of the focus that we had to improving
pharmacy.
I still do not believe, and I am not here to say that that
equals success and that equals a baseline or a productivity
goal, that we want to say that is all we can do, and we will
move on. I do believe, though, that the move toward standards,
the move toward better testing and better, you know, better
reliability, will yield better results for pharmacists. I think
the evidence of that is in a function for pharmacy, the 3B, 3C,
that we did not roll out this week, not that we did. Even
though it was scheduled to be rolled out. We did not roll it
out because it did not pass all of the safety protocol tests.
That is a difference between what may have happened in the past
versus now.
Now, it has been fixed and it has been addressed, and now
it is in testing, but we caught it. We caught it. That is, I
think, a big difference between the way program used to work
and is working now. I do believe that there are better
protocols and better functional testing in place to make sure
that we do not make pharmacists lives more difficult.
Ms. McMorris-Rodgers. Okay, I appreciate that. However, the
veterans in eastern Washington feel like they have been left
behind in the midst of all of this. This health record was--the
first new record was rolled out in October 2020, and I have yet
to hear the plan for how we are going to make it work and make
sure that our veterans get the care that they need.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much. Forgive me if I do not
celebrate because we should commend you for not rolling out yet
another failed update.
Representative Schneider, I recognize you for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. First, I am grateful for you
allowing me to be a part of this hearing. I represent the 10th
District of Illinois. Lovell Health Care Center is not just in
my district, it is central to my district. It is critical to
the veterans in the 10th District of Illinois as well around
the region.
I will start with you, Dr. Evans. I am not sure of the
right one, but Lovell is--we are the first, and so far the
only, joint DOD-VA hospital which makes the March 9 rollout a
little bit interesting because it is the first time we are
trying to do it over this bridge. Can you talk about what steps
have been taken to make sure that it is going to be rolled out
effectively without a discontinuity or breakdown?
Dr. Evans. Sure, I would be happy to.
First of all, I have had the privilege of traveling
relatively frequently to North Chicago, Illinois, and to the
James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center, and I have to say
that it is a really special facility.
Mr. Schneider. I agree.
Dr. Evans. It's mission is really compelling. On top of
that, the staff at the James A. Lovell Federal Health Care
Center are committed to delivering outstanding care to service
members, beneficiaries, veterans. It is the one VA medical
center you go to with a pediatrics clinic. It is a pretty
interesting place.
Mr. Schneider. It is a special place.
Dr. Evans. Because of that, we have needed a significant
level of focus on FHCC, including some of the complexities that
you are well aware of that are introduced by trying to run a
joint DOD-VA facility.
There are a lot of eyes on James A. Lovell from the Federal
Electronic Health Record Modernization Office, which is leading
the deployment, to the two program offices in both DOD and VA,
who are really putting a tremendous amount of resources, to
Oracle Health and the Leidos partnership for Defense Health, as
well as the Defense Health Administration, VHA. When it comes
down to it, we are all there to support the staff on the ground
at FHCC.
Success at FHCC is our commitment to those 3,200 staff who
come to work every day to care for those who are served by that
facility. That has really been where we have anchored our
attention.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. Let me turn to Mr. Sicilia.
Listening to the testimony here, I am getting, I guess, the
technological equivalent of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD). Forty years ago, I worked in systems development. It
was not the team I worked on, but one of our office practices
in New Jersey installed a new system to the Department of Motor
Vehicle (DMV). When it went live, there was a 4-second delay
between every keystroke. It worked well in testing; it did not
work well in implementation.
You have talked about some of the challenges of a system
that you acquired, inherited, and trying to make those fixes.
There are fixes that are dealing with efficiency, and we have
heard some of that today, the concerns about efficiency and
just making the job better. There are concerns that relate to
patient safety.
One of the things that impressed me in Dr. Evan's testimony
is the idea that the pharmacists are an integrated part of the
care team. I think that is something that we owe all of our
veterans, is the best and not just the most professional care,
but the safe care that delivers on their needs.
What confidence, as we go to this live rollout in Lovell
next month, can you give us that we are going to support the
teams on the ground? They are going to be able to continue to
deliver the level of care they historically have, if not
improved, and that the bugs that have been harming the care of
the system in the past will not be there in the next round.
Mr. Sicilia. Sure. I think your characterization is
correct. There are two buckets: there is system reliability and
availability and then usability, being able to use the system.
As you mentioned, when we acquired the system, it was not
reliable. It was not at a functional level that I think we
could warrant that it was an acceptable experience for end
users. We have largely addressed those system reliability
issues, those issues that sort of keep the plane in the air. I
mean, if you cannot do that, then the rest of it really is not
going to function well.
Now we have turned, as Dr. Evans said, our full attention
during the reset period to making Lovell the best rollout and
the best experience that it could be. I do believe that Lovell
will benefit from all of the learnings we have had in both of
those buckets, both the system reliability standpoint, the
networking standpoint, things like printing, and all those
things which are very important inside a system, as well as the
functional enhancements. There are lots of functional
enhancements that have also been made beyond pharmacy, over and
above pharmacy, that Lovell will be the first site to absorb
everything at once. Well, they will get the best of the new
system at one time.
The other five live sites have had to take these functional
enhancements of piecemeal because they were already live and
they were already, you know, functioning on a system that,
admittedly, when we took it over, was not stable and was not
acceptable. I think their experience has been very different
than the experience that Lovell will have as a result.
Mr. Schneider. Well, thank you. We will be watching. We are
counting on it. Sticking with your airplane analogy, it is not
just getting the flight airborne, it is getting us to our
destination safely, but it helps to be on time and without
bumps and bruises.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative
Schneider.
Dr. Evans, the big ticket item in last weekend's software
update was supposed to involve automated coordination of
prescription information between PowerChart and MMR, but you
postponed it because it had too many errors in testing. What
were the testing errors? What problems would they have caused?
When do these errors have to be corrected in order to avoid
causing problems at Lovell?
What were the problems? What issues would it have caused
for our veterans? How can we make sure that we do not have this
problem--introduce a virus at Lovell?
Dr. Evans. Right. Let me just describe quickly what the
capability was to do. When a physician or a licensed
independent provider writes a prescription, that prescription
is then sent to the pharmacist, who is going to process that in
a different application called Med Manager Retail. That
pharmacist, as part of the normal practice of pharmacy, is
going to adjust that prescription if there is a need to adjust
it. Maybe a certain strength of the tablet is not in stock at
the pharmacy and so instead of issuing a 20-milligram pill, we
have to issue two 10-milligram pills. Maybe the provider
spelled something wrong and the pharmacist is a better speller
and can correct that on behalf of the pharmacist. The
pharmacist will adjust the prescription. That information then
should be in a normal--in a commercial healthcare system, the
pharmacist may fix that at a commercial pharmacy, and it does
not synchronize back to the electronic health record that the
provider is using.
In the VA, our expectation is that those changes the
pharmacist made are now visible to the provider, so that the
provider knows exactly what the patient was given and so that
when the provider, a year later, renews that prescription
again, they are now renewing the appropriate prescription,
which means the pharmacist does not have to redo the work of
fixing the prescription that would have been renewed if it was
the erroneous initial one.
That is what the software is supposed to do. It worked for
all of the normal circumstances. A single pill that was two
pills, correcting the spelling mistake. There were some places
in testing where a nontraditional insulin regimen or an
inhaler, where the strength of the inhaler was a unique
strength of the inhaler, you know it was not--most of the
cases, well over 95 percent of the cases, I do not know the
exact number, but it was a high percentage, were just working
fine. There were these subcases where we recognized we needed
to address those issues.
Our expectation is that it will be delivered as, Mr.----
Mr. Rosendale. This small number of cases, is this 250,000
that we are talking about?
Dr. Evans. No. Entirely separate issue.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay.
Dr. Evans. Entirely separate issue. Our expectation is the
fix has been put into testing. It is now being tested as of
today, and our expectation is that we will deliver prior to the
FHCC go live.
Mr. Rosendale. Dr. Evans, this is closely related to the
update that Oracle launched and then you quickly turned off
last April. Why has this particular issue been so difficult to
resolve?
Dr. Evans. I think in part because of, you know, we are
dealing with--this is one consolidated set of technologies, but
ultimately two different information systems that we are asking
to coordinate with each other. There are some technical
complexities there.
Also, some work to identify what the--I mean, the issue
before was that we realized that there was one field that was
not synchronizing, that needed to be better synchronized.
I will let Dr. Silverman can probably comment to that more
accurately.
Dr. Silverman. Thank you, Dr. Evans.
Chairman Rosendale, as you have asked during this hearing,
the initial plan on enhancement 3B was scheduled for Block 8,
February 2023. Oracle Health identified an issue and made the
decision not to deploy there and moved it to that April cube in
2023, which was right before our previous hearing.
Mr. Rosendale. Why is this particular issue being so hard
to address?
Dr. Silverman. I do not know that I know the answer to
that, other than when the Oracle----
Mr. Rosendale. Okay, if you do not know, that is fine.
Dr. Emmendorfer, for the five medical centers using the
Oracle Cerner EHR have had to increase their staffing by at
least 20 percent, we have been discussing that, manage all
workarounds. I understand that your office estimates that a
large, complex medical center would have to increase its
pharmacy staffing by as much as 60 percent. Give me a rough
estimate of how many staff have been added so far and how much
this costs annually, if you could.
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes. Right now at our smaller sites, the
complexity, 2 and 3. On average, it has been about a 20 percent
increase in staffing. I do not have the exact Full-time
Equivalent (FTE), the staff numbers, but that would equate to
as far as cost. I do not have an exact number, but it would add
millions to our staff and to our salaries.
Mr. Rosendale. Okay. Thank you so much.
I defer--to I yield back. And----
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to go back to our questioning on education and
training. My question is going back to Dr. Evans, where we left
off. How are veterans and caregivers being educated on
mitigating the issues the OIG identified with inadequate
medications and allergy checks at legacy sites?
Dr. Evans. First, I think it is important in Joint Legacy
Viewer (JLV), which is the application where most--well, it is
the application where VA providers would go to look to see a
consolidated medication list, that is, medications that were
prescribed at the facility where they are seeing patients, as
well as medications at any other VA facility, as well as
medications prescribed by the DOD, including in the Federal
EHR, which is in use at the five sites that we have mentioned.
In JLV the medication list is an accurate medication list.
Also--so the first thing is that it is important we
emphasize with all patients in any of our visits the importance
of what we call medication reconciliation. This is an important
part of healthcare in general. It is making sure that we have
an accurate medication list. Is the veteran taking any
medications that we do not even know about in the VA because
they were prescribed by a commercial provider and fulfilled at
a commercial pharmacy? It is through that process of medication
reconciliation that then that foundational medication list can
serve as the guide for now, as I am going to prescribe or add a
new medication to that list or change a medication, that I
understand whether there is any interactions there.
The primary thing that we have been emphasizing with
patients is the importance of bring your medications to your
visit, make sure that we are spending--together we spend the
time getting an accurate assessment of what you are taking,
including over-the-counter medications, herbal medications,
supplements, et cetera.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. That medication reconciliation,
that is part of normal healthcare practices throughout the
industry.
Dr. Evans. Yes.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Now with this increased level of
inaccuracy, are you taking any other steps, further steps to
make sure that they are aware caregivers and the veterans are
aware of, or are you still doing the regular medication?
Dr. Evans. Yes, I think what I was trying to get at is
medication, to your point, medication reconciliation is
fundamental to good health care. As Mr. Rosendale asked, are we
going to notify veterans and communicate with veterans?
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Yes, precisely.
Dr. Evans. We responded to that in the affirmative.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Are there any extra steps you are
taking? That is what I am really asking in line with these
inaccuracies.
Dr. Evans. Right. The issue for the subset of individuals,
which is an increasingly shrinking number of individuals who
might have this challenge where the automated drug-drug
interaction checking is potentially inaccurate, or it could be
inaccurate. There are other ways for a provider to be able to
check for drug-drug interactions.
As an example, in clinic, whenever I am concerned, we have
a national contract with a web-based solution that can help
providers get access to trusted clinical information, and it
has a very, very good drug-drug interaction checker in it. I
enter the medicines that the patient is receiving in that drug-
drug interaction checker and actually get, frankly, more
valuable information from that on the specific interactions
when I am making those decisions.
Providers having to do that manual step, actually, frankly,
many providers would do that anyway.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. That is not a required manual
step, correct?
Dr. Evans. That is correct.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. That is not a system that is in
place, correct?
Dr. Evans. That is what?
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. It is not a system that is in
place throughout the entire----
Dr. Evans. There is a national contract for that drug-drug
data base.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Okay. My next question is, how are
you ensuring legacy site providers and pharmacists know that
these issues exist with respect to inaccurate, duplicative, or
missing information?
Dr. Evans. VA providers and pharmacists?
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Mm-hmm.
Dr. Evans. A notification was sent to facilities about the
issue. In addition, as I mentioned, some facilities have
implemented what is called a clinical reminder to provide real-
time clinical decision support to providers when they are
prescribing medications.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Dr. Evans, Oracle use of queues
has come up again and again. Has VA done a evaluation of all
the queues to identify any other issues?
Dr. Evans. This is, I think, referring to the displaced
appointment queue that was mentioned in the IG testimony. With
regard to that specific issue, in December, the fix was entered
into production to make sure that we can support the number of
contact attempts that VHA policy dictates after certain no show
appointments, particularly for mental health appointments.
As for management of queues, I think, you know, inherent in
the delivery of healthcare and delivery of healthcare to large
populations are making sure that we are managing the list of
individuals who are waiting for any given service. Yes, we have
spent a considerable amount of time making sure that we
understand any queue that needs to be managed in support of
veteran healthcare.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much for your
testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you so much, Representative Cherfilus-
McCormick.
Dr. Emmendorfer, I want to go back to the additional
staffing that is going to be required by the pharmacists to
accommodate this system. Right now, the total spend on
pharmacists, my understanding is that it is $2.7 billion. That
is annually, correct, $2.7 billion annually? If we have a 10
percent increase, a 10 percent increase in that spend, that is
$270 million. If we have a 20 percent increase in that spend,
that is $540 million. That is nearly half a billion dollars.
Dr. Emmendorfer, your office is developing a pharmacy
staffing model for future medical centers to use to figure out
how many positions they will need to add based on all this.
This is based on an assumption, and I think it is an absolutely
correct assumption, that the Oracle Cerner pharmacy software
will continue posing these difficulties and the medical centers
will need extra staffing for the foreseeable future. How does
that staffing model work? Who is going to pay for all the extra
pharmacy staff?
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes, I can speak to what we are doing with
the staffing model because we do need to develop a resource.
When our Oracle Health sites first went live, there was not
enough data points to develop a reliable model. Maybe a month
and a half ago or so, we convened a work group that includes
representatives from every level in the enterprise, including
staff that are using the Oracle Health system to help us try to
define some of those parameters. Right now, because of the
number of manual workarounds, the processes vary because of the
manual workarounds, and we are still working on, and we still
have a goal of trying to develop the model, but we do need to
see some standardization to develop that staffing model.
Some of the areas that are kind of new inputs for our
staffing model that we need to consider is there are multiple
queues now in Oracle Health Cerner, and I do not have the--I
think there is like five or so, and each of those queues could
range anywhere from an extra 5 to 20 or 40 hours of different
staff time per week. It is a process, and outpatient controlled
substance for one step of that process, like an additional
minute could occur.
Then with our controlled substance inventory system, that
is something we need to maintain for Drug Enforcement
Administration to have those counts. One of the manual
workarounds that our staff has is that they have to stop the
production while those manual--or while counts are done because
of the way that the system decrements the inventory, so that
causes a slowdown.
Once some of these things start stabilizing, we definitely
have a goal of developing that resource and finalizing it for
the future.
Mr. Rosendale. What we are talking about, though, just to
make sure I understand completely, is not that it is a lack of
training on the pharmacist behalf. It is the fact that the
system itself requires additional steps which we call
workarounds. I hear you reference workarounds. Many times it is
additional steps in order to get to the same place which is
consuming this additional time and requiring all the extra
work.
Dr. Emmendorfer. Yes, we have a highly trained VA pharmacy
workforce, so we know how to act and perform in the profession
of pharmacy.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you so much.
Mr. Case, I want to go back to one detail in your
testimony. We did not recognize the enormity of this until your
office briefed the committee staff. Previously, VHA staff were
required to make four attempts to contact veterans for mental
health appointments. This is very, very serious because we all
hear about and want to reduce the number of veteran suicides
that are taking place, the 22 per day, because the consequences
of not getting this care can be so damaging. When the Oracle
Cerner EHR was implemented, that was reduced to attempts
because of the burden of documenting these calls or letters in
the system.
Who made this decision, and how could an Information
Technology (IT) system drive a policy decision that can have
life or death consequences?
I have here in my hand the VA policy that says that, it is,
let me see here, Directive 1232(1), and number 4 on page 2
says, ``For mental health appointment the minimal scheduling
effort for scheduling, rescheduling totals of four attempts.''
Then it describes how those four attempts are to be made.
Could you tell me how and who made the decision about
reducing that to two attempts and by what authority did they do
so?
Mr. Case. Yes, we believe it is a combination of things.
First of all, the decision was done by the Office of Integrated
Veteran Care to do the reduction. You combine that with the
directive that where the new EHR is in place, then the rules
for the new EHR predominate, so to speak. The staff followed
the rules in the one instance in our report and made two
notifications, but they did not take the extra step because two
more notifications were not made.
You know, our view is that this is a problem, first of all,
the lesser number of notifications. Second, you really are
setting up a system where there are two different approaches to
the same issue. There are different healthcare efforts in
whether it is in the new----
Mr. Rosendale. Did you find any place where the rule and
the policy had actually been changed or is this just a decision
that was handed down? I have not found it.
Mr. Case. Yes, this is what happened. Once our report is
published, we will describe the exact details, how it was done,
but this is what happened. This came up in an incident in
Columbus, Ohio.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. Thank you so much.
I will now recognize Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This question is for anyone who would like to answer it.
How would you measure the success of Lovell FHCC go live? Are
you confident that it will be successful?
Mr. Sicilia. Thank you. Thank you for the question. It is
obviously the key focus of what we are all working on here
together.
I think we have lots of benchmarks and lots of
inefficiencies and things that have been measured in all of the
other go lives, most of which are not favorable, most of which
experience difficulties with staff engagement, with training,
with retention of the training, not being repetitive and not
being available on demand, as well as general overall system
performance. If we compare Lovell to the go lives at the other
site, we should see a marked improvement in satisfaction, we
should see a marked improvement in system reliability.
We should also, I think, be in a position, as the Pharmacy
Council has testified, to figure out how much extra staff is
required for the long term. What is unusual--it is not unusual
that when you have a major go live for a very complicated
system, that extra staff are required. This happens in
commercial markets. This happens all the time. What is unusual
is that you have to sustain that staff for a long period of
time.
I believe that the metrics and feedback that we will get
very quickly after the go live at Lovell will put us all in a
much better position to determine that issue for the future as
well. I am confident that the go live will be successful to
directly answer your question as well.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you.
Dr. Evans. I can answer that question as well, I think.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Yes.
Dr. Evans. It is important to remember that there have been
challenges with regard to health IT at the James A. Lovell
Federal Health Care Center. They have been running two
different electronic health records, including maintaining
custom software to try to keep those two electronic health
records talking to each other while trying to run a single
joint facility with a fully integrated staff. Those challenges
have been long documented. I remember traveling to FHCC, I
think, in 2019, and they were very, very eager to move to
having a single integrated electronic health record.
One measure of success is that some of the challenges that
they have had in running two electronic health records are
improved in running a single integrated electronic health
record. There are still going to be issues because there are
different workflows unique to the DOD versus the VA. Pharmacy
benefits are different in VA versus DOD, but having a single
record will be important.
The other area where I would measure as success is whether
the 3,200 approximate users there feel better supported than
prior users have in this transition. Are we committing to
supporting those users as they navigate the journey to use the
new software, not just in a couple weeks after go live, but in
the months to follow and, frankly, years to follow.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I wanted to go back to
Mr. Sicilia. I want to pick up from where you left off when we
were talking about the success. Far with the go lives, what do
you feel have been the biggest causes of it not being
successful? What could the VA do to support Oracle?
Mr. Sicilia. Well, in the initial set of go lives, I think
there were system reliability issues that made it very
difficult for end users to feel comfortable using the system,
that it was not going to have an outage or something like that,
and that was not good. As Dr. Evans said, I do think that the
human element, I think the standing shoulder-to-shoulder and
making sure that we have that support for a much longer period
of time than we had at the initial go live. The lesson learned
is that we need to be there longer, we need to be onsite
longer, we need to be next to the providers longer, and we need
to be rolling out fixes for feedback far more quickly than we
have. I believe that those things are in place. I believe that
we have absorbed the lessons and we have been listening very
closely to all the providers, to all of the councils.
I do believe that prior to previous go lives, which were
largely handled, frankly, before most of us were involved with
them, that the collaboration between Oracle and the VA and the
VHA, as I have testified before, is the best that it has ever
been. I am very optimistic in our collaboration. I am very
optimistic in our daily and somewhat daily meetings for
specific issues, like pharmacy happening right now, as well as
our continued sync with the Deputy Secretary (DEPSEC) and
others to make this happen.
I do believe that the team all in together is better than
it has ever been, and I do believe that we will see results of
that. In the level of go live.
Ms. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Representative
Cherfilus-McCormick. I want to thank everyone for participating
today.
I just want to close by saying that we are $9 billion and 5
years into this system and we still do not have a functioning
system. We do not have a fully functioning system.
Here is a nice list. Here is a list of contributions that
Oracle Cerner has made to people that are serving in this body.
I wish that you invested as much time, effort, and money into
getting that system straight as you have in trying to buy votes
on Capitol Hill.
With that, I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5
legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include
extraneous material.
Without objection, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 9:47 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Neil Evans

Good morning, Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-
McCormick, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today about VA's initiative to modernize its
electronic health record (EHR) system. I am accompanied by VA's senior
leaders critical to this initiative, Dr. Thomas Emmendorfer, Executive
Director, Pharmacy Benefits Management Operations; and Dr. Robert
Silverman, Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Pharmacy Council Co-
chairman for the Electronic Health Record Modernization (EHRM) Program.
I want to begin by thanking Congress and this Committee for your
shared commitment to Veterans, and for your continued support of VA's
EHRM efforts. For VA, the successful deployment of the Federal EHR
further honors that shared commitment by facilitating seamless health
care transitions for Service members and Veterans among Federal care
settings. The new system will provide an accurate lifetime health
record for Veterans among partners using the Federal EHR. For the
newest members of the military, this EHR will serve them from the day
they begin their military service, providing a seamless health care
experience as they transition from active service to Veteran status.
VA remains committed to successfully implementing the Federal EHR
across its enterprise. The suite of technologies that make up a modern
EHR are part of a larger ecosystem of orchestrated technologies needed
by VA to enhance the quality and safety of health care delivery,
empower clinical teams with effective decision support, enhance
clinical trial implementation, and advance Veteran engagement. In
furtherance of these goals, the new Federal EHR system integrates with
other health information technologies, ultimately simplifies the
experience for Veterans and VA staff, enhances standardization across
the VA enterprise, and will improve VA and the Department of Defense
(DoD) interoperability with the rest of the United States. health care
system.
Moreover, the adoption of a product used by both VA and DoD will
help to simplify health care delivery by providers in both Departments,
which benefits patients who receive care in both systems or those
transitioning from DoD to VA for care. Among the program's notable
goals is to deliver and optimize unified, seamless, and trusted
information flow between VA, DoD, the United States. Coast Guard, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), and community
providers.
As part of an EHRM Program reset (Reset) announced in April 2023,
VA halted all work on future deployments of the Federal EHR system--
except our planned joint VA and DoD deployment at the Captain James A.
Lovell Federal Health Care Center (FHCC)--while the Department
prioritizes improvements at the five sites that currently use the
Federal EHR system. The purposes of the Reset are to: optimize the
current state of the Federal EHR; to closely examine and address the
issues that clinicians and other end users are experiencing; and to
position VA for future deployment success.
During this Reset, VA is addressing issues with the Federal EHR
system and redirecting resources from deployment activities to further
optimize the new system at the sites where it is currently in use.
Staff productivity levels, revenue cycle management, technical systems
performance, and other areas require dedicated attention and resolution
before deployments resume.
VA has an obligation to Veterans and taxpayers to get this right.
We understand the concerns of this Committee regarding the Federal EHR
system and its impact on Veterans, VA staff, trainees, and researchers
who rely on it. We are committed to full transparency, and we
appreciate your oversight. We look forward to further engagement with
you and your staff to ensure that this modernization effort, and
related health information technology modernization efforts, are
successful.

Program Update

The EHRM Program Reset continues to move forward. VA is seeing
incremental progress as it addresses the issues that clinicians and
other end users are experiencing and optimizes the current state of the
EHR system to ensure the enterprise-wide foundation is in place for
success when deployments resume.
The initial priority activities of the Reset or workstreams focused
on the following: (a) an effort to improve the Federal EHR system
baseline through configuration changes and user adoption support; (b)
workforce development for informatics staff both at the enterprise and
field levels; (c) work to improve end-user support with a focus on help
desk functions and incident management; (d) a technical ``Get Well''
plan to improve system reliability and performance; (e) work to enhance
transparent communications for all stakeholders; and (f) preparation
for the Lovell FHCC deployment.
These six workstreams continue, with requisite projects identified
and initiated within those workstreams. The following four new
workstreams have subsequently been added: (a) pre-work to enable the
creation of a new deployment schedule; (b) the capture and reporting of
metrics for the Reset and program overall; (c) post-deployment plans to
transitionsites to normal operations; and (d) analysis of VA workflows
against the best practice models.
Beyond the work being managed within these workstreams, there is
considerable effort focused on additional improvement areas during this
period of Reset (for example enhancing pharmacy capabilities,
identifying and repairing gaps in research workflows, integrating
health professions trainees, identifying improvements for referral
management functionality within the system, tracking investigational
medications, and more).
The rate of progress during the EHRM Program Reset, while modest,
has been steadily accelerating. We have increased engagement with the
live sites to ensure their voices are heard, and they have let us know
that they are seeing improvements. While our current progress is
reassuring, we still have important work ahead. We are working hard to
standardize and simplify the system, further improve system reliability
and responsiveness, communicate more effectively with end-users, and
improve training. Those associated with this effort across VA, feel a
sense of urgency to complete the work of the Reset, continue optimizing
the EHR system or our current users, and move to restart and complete
deployments across the rest of the enterprise.

Improving the Pharmacy Experience

As mentioned, VA is advancing a number of priority areas in
parallel with its Reset-related workstreams. One of these priorities is
continuing to enhance pharmacy functionality within the Federal EHR
system and across the enterprise. Since our last deep dive hearing into
this area in May 2023, VA has made incremental and steady progress.
As of the date of this hearing, all but one of the original seven
priority pharmacy enhancements have now been delivered through the
twice-yearly ``Block upgrades'' (standard, biannual plans for enhancing
the existing capabilities of the Federal EHR system). In February 2023,
three were installed as part of the Block 8 upgrade. These enhancements
improved providers' visibility of current prescriptions and supplies of
available medications, optimized system options for maintenance
medications, and expanded details on prescription expiration dates,
along with other enhancements.
Updates in the Block 9 release in August 2023 included three more
priority enhancements that improved pharmacists' ability to discontinue
duplicate orders and increase their efficiency, review related orders
and better understand patients' comprehensive medications, and more
quickly and effectively refill orders, among other improvements to the
Federal EHR's capabilities. Notably, additional updates in Block 9
resulted in a 24 percent decrease in user interruptions and a 24
percent reduction in application freezes for all users.
The Block 10 release, which occurred just days ago, includes
pharmacy capability features that improve the automated coordination of
prescription information between ordering clinicians and the pharmacy
team; enable ordering clinicians to more easily request prescription
refills for the Veterans they serve; and enhance how addresses are
verified when pharmacy staff process mail prescriptions for patients. A
feature to improve the automated coordination of prescription
information between ordering clinicians and the pharmacy team has been
installed to the system but not enabled.
In addition to impacting pharmacy and all other parts of the
Federal EHR system, Block 10 also introduced the newest versions of the
Millennium, MPages, Clairvia, and Rhapsody software that will allow the
Federal EHR system to scale solutions for increased user capacity,
improve stability, and lay the groundwork for future capabilities.
These software upgrades also included corrections for numerous defects,
again incrementally improving user experience. The semi-annual cube
releases in April and November 2023 also enhanced existing interfaces
and capabilities and introduced nearly two dozen improvements and
upgrades.
Beyond the block updates, specific to pharmacy, work was completed
to improve the efficiency of the pending prescription queue used by
pharmacy staff to process incoming prescriptions. Additional work was
completed to increase the frequency of initiating receipt of new drug
products into the data base from monthly to weekly. Two more projects
to enhance the functionality of a mobile handheld device used by
pharmacy staff and to enhance the EHR system's library of known
medication images are also forthcoming. Several enhancements around
refilling procedures are also planned.
Ultimately, the desired end State of VA's pharmacy enhancement
efforts is reduced time and steps required by pharmacists during
verification and dispensing workflows, and reduced time and steps
required by providers during prescription ordering and renewal. More
work is being done beyond the block updates to address longer-term
considerations, including inpatient controlled substance ordering;
provider provenance for renewal of controlled substance prescriptions;
digital signature; and support resources needed for perpetual inventory
implementation, among others. VA's pharmacy programs have achieved
success by cultivating a culture of safety and continuous process
improvement. I want to acknowledge and thank our pharmacy community for
using this same approach to identify the improvements that are needed
in the Federal EHR pharmacy system.
To that end, VA has always said the EHR system will not go live at
any site that is not ready. We also remain firm in our resolve to
continue deployments of the modernized EHR system when it is ready. It
is important to take the time now to get things right and to provide a
strong foundation for an executable deployment schedule as the project
proceeds. The continuous focus will be on assessing and remediating any
identified issues at live sites and designing for safety and efficiency
at future deployment sites.

Upcoming Deployment to Lovell FHCC

As previously announced, the only exception regarding the pause on
deployment activities is the planned deployment at the Lovell FHCC in
March 2024--now, less than a month away. Lovell FHCC is the most
integrated, jointly run VA and DoD health care facility. This will be
the final deployment of the Federal EHR at a DoD-affiliated site. The
joint VA/DoD deployment is on track to go ahead as planned, allowing
all patients who visit the facility to be cared for using one EHR
system. Lovell will also be the first instance of the Federal EHR
system to have research studies live in the EHR in fulfillment of VA's
third statutory mission. It is also the first VA site to have a
significant complement of Health Professions Trainees contributing to
Veteran care.
On February 6, 2024, VA, DoD, and the Federal EHRM (FEHRM) Office
leadership convened at Lovell FHCC to confirm overall readiness to
deploy the new system. As we approach cutover, conversations will
continue to be held daily with the Veterans Integrated Service Network,
the director of the facility, and VHA to ensure the necessary criteria
are being met for a successful go-live. Furthermore, VA is working
cross-functionally with teams at the FEHRM Office, DoD, and the
leadership at Lovell FHCC on a daily basis. We expect that the facility
will be ready to go live next month with no disruption to clinical
care, medical education, or research activities.

Path to Restart

VA remains committed to taking the time necessary during this
Program Reset to get this right for Veterans, VA clinicians, trainees,
and researchers alike.
To this end, VA is developing a Reset Results Scorecard (previously
referred to as ``success criteria'') focused on providing VA leadership
and stakeholders metrics and thresholds that are clear, measurable, and
actionable. The goal of the Reset Results Scorecard is to assist
decision-makers in determining when to exit the Reset and restart
deployment activities beyond Lovell FHCC. This scorecard establishes
objectives and key results demonstrated within the following four
primary areas: Improved User and Veteran experience or how the new EHR
system affects VA users and Veterans; improved health system operations
or how effectively the new EHR is supporting VA's business and clinical
operations; mature product or how well the technical solutions
themselves are functioning and how that is affecting the user and
health system experience; and finally, mature program processes or how
the implementation of best practices and trained staff improve program
processes.
When our goals have been met, and the Reset concludes, VA will
release a new deployment schedule and resume deployment activities with
greater confidence in the readiness of both the Federal EHR system and
the VA health care system to successfully navigate this important
change.

Conclusion: Federal EHR System Imperative

VA is continuing to move forward with a modern, commercial EHR
solution in close coordination with our Federal partners, including DoD
and the FEHRM Office. This new Federal EHR system will allow VA to
standardize workflows, training, and technology management across VA
using a single enterprise system and will support better coordination
with DoD, other Federal partners, and private health providers.
Veterans remain the center of everything we do. They deserve high-
quality health care that is safe, timely, Veteran-centric, equitable,
evidence-based, and efficient. They also deserve access to high quality
clinical trials. As improvements continue to be made through the
duration of this Reset, VA will continually evaluate readiness of sites
and the Federal EHR system to ensure success and patient safety. With
the activities and improvements that are now underway, VA leaders are
optimistic about the eventual success of the current Reset and
subsequent full implementation of the Federal EHR throughout VA.
I again extend my gratitude to Congress for your commitment to
serving Veterans with excellence. We look forward to responding to any
questions that you may have.

Prepared Statement of David Case

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Prepared Statement of Mike Sicilia

Introduction:

Chairman Rosendale, Ranking Member Cherfilus-McCormick, and members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
again today about Oracle's work with the Department of Veterans
Affairs' (VA) Electronic Health Record Modernization (EHRM) program,
specifically the pharmacy capability of the Electronic Health Record
(EHR).
Oracle is pleased to provide VA with a new EHR that includes a
pharmacy capability which enables veterans to receive their medications
in a timely manner.
When VA announced it would adopt the Cerner Millennium EHR, it made
the decision to move from its legacy VistA EHR to a commercial off-the-
shelf system. Utilizing a commercial system offers many benefits, chief
among them that the Department of Defense (DoD) had made the decision
to move to Millennium and this would enable service members and
veterans to have a seamless health record from the beginning of their
service through lifelong care at VA.
As a commercially developed system, Millennium did not account for
every unique way that DoD or VA may provide care, so some adaptations
necessarily have been required, though the goal is of course to limit
customizations whenever possible. Pharmacy operations at VA is an
example of an area where customizations have been required because
unlike the commercial sector, VA operates as both the prescription
ordering party and the dispensing party.
After the initial deployments, it became clear that the pharmacy
system needed to be enhanced to better meet VA's needs. To that end, in
August 2022, shortly after Oracle completed its acquisition of Cerner,
VA contracted with us for seven enhancements that overall would adapt
the pharmacy system to a more bidirectional system between VA providers
placing prescription orders and VA pharmacists fulfilling and
dispensing them. This month, we delivered the final of the seven
enhancements, and they are all live for VA providers and pharmacists to
use now, except for one that is undergoing additional testing and
should be live soon (more information below). Oracle delivered these
enhancements much faster than the delivery timeline anticipated by
Cerner pre-acquisition.
We believe the enhanced pharmacy system Oracle has provided to VA
presently is both safe and effective, having been built to VA's
specifications and requirements. As with any healthcare technology
system, there is a need for continuous improvements but that does not
mean the system is not safe and effective in its current State. Oracle
is committed to working with VA to address their unique needs. We
intend to do that by continuing our work with VA on any new or
additional enhancement requirements, by eventually updating the entire
EHR, including pharmacy, to a modern stateless web application, by
moving the EHR system to Oracle Cloud Infrastructure with VA's
permission, and by continuing to work with VA throughout the reset
period to identify workflows and other items that can be simplified or
streamlined to improve the overall user and pharmacy experience.

Pharmacy Toplines:

Utilizing the new EHR at the five live VA Medical Centers (VAMC)
and their associated facilities, veterans are receiving their
outpatient prescriptions at the pharmacy window in an average of 25
minutes for Jan. 2024, which is below VA's 30-minute key performance
metric.
On average more than 215,000 outpatient prescriptions are being
filled each month. The current live sites do not have a backlog in
filling prescriptions. Recent data from this month show that three of
the five live sites have zero prescriptions waiting to be processed
that are older than seven days. The two other live sites have an
average of two prescriptions older than seven days.
We recognize that VA increased pharmacy staffing, and we continue
to partner with VA to find efficiency opportunities while maintaining
the benefits of the new capabilities. However, it also needs to be
recognized that a comparison to productivity in pharmacy operations
under VistA is not an apples-to-apples comparison because the new EHR
includes additional safeguards that ensure patient safety and improved
health outcomes for veterans. One example is clinical decision support
that requires pharmacist intervention. Pharmacists need to stop, review
the warning information on an allergy or drug interaction and mark as
reviewed. Additional items that increase safety but also take
pharmacist time are discussed below.
Prescriptions may also be filled by mail order, as directed by
providers and pharmacists when making the order in the EHR. Since the
first deployment in Oct. 2020, 4.3 million prescriptions have been
filled through VA's Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP). This
number of prescriptions is in line with historic prescription fill
volumes.
VA has initiated a significant effort to standardize pharmacy and
other workflows during the reset period, and we are engaged with VA as
advisors in that effort. Standardization ensures that all VA facilities
adhere to best practices and evidence-based guidelines. This
consistency in care delivery leads to improved patient outcomes and
satisfaction. Oracle's pharmacy team works across all levels of VA
pharmacy - national, VISN, and local - to support VA's mission in
providing safe, effective, and timely medications to veterans. We view
this as an ongoing partnership to standardize and optimize into a
single EHR instance to improve quality of care.
As it relates to pharmacy, both standardizing workflows and
ensuring training and communications to pharmacists about the latest
updates will discourage use of workarounds and help with improving
morale and satisfaction with the system. During a visit last week by VA
and the Oracle team to the Lovell Federal Health Care Center in North
Chicago, feedback from pharmacists was positive about the training and
readiness for using the new pharmacy system.

Pharmacy Patient Safety Features:

The EHR module for entering pharmacy orders and managing drug
therapy for a patient is referred to as Medication Manager Retail
(MMR). MMR assists with basic tasks, such as identifying a patient,
selecting drugs or other pharmacy products, and entering, reviewing,
and modifying orders. MMR allows pharmacists to access a dynamic store
of clinical, demographic, and therapeutic information about each
patient without having to exit and go into a separate application. A
provider or pharmacist can check a patient's health status and then
implement an individualized drug therapy.
Relevant data sources for a patient are integrated into a single
provider view in MMR. Pharmacists view VA and community care
prescriptions in one queue rather than having to go to separate queues
for each, as in VistA. Pharmacists see relevant clinical information
and lab values - including renal function - face up during the entirety
of medication evaluation and processing, a capability that informs
proper prescription dosing that is not present in VistA without leaving
the order to go to another screen, which is less efficient.
The new EHR has medication clinical decision support functions that
require pharmacist intervention for drug-drug interaction concerns.
Additionally, it sends alerts to notify and prompt pharmacists for
missing relevant information such as whether the veteran is missing a
drug allergy assessment. From that alert, the pharmacist can complete
the relevant documentation.
The results tab embedded within MMR provides a more comprehensive
view of the lab results flowsheet. This means, for example, that a
prescription for insulin for a veteran would be accompanied by the
veteran's latest glucose and A1C lab readings directly in the results
tab of the order.
An outpatient VA pharmacist has visibility, through the new EHR, of
medications that were administered during a veteran's inpatient visit.
The pharmacist can leverage this during the discharge process to ensure
there are no medication gaps as the veteran transitions from inpatient
to the next level of care.
Additionally, the new EHR allows for improved communication between
VA pharmacists and CMOP pharmacists checking prescriptions. VistA does
not have this capability which can lead to prescriptions being sent
back to the local VAMC for clarification. This may lead to delay in the
fulfillment of the prescription and additional workload for the VAMC
pharmacist. This enhanced capability in the new EHR has been used more
than 108,000 times since Oct. 2020.
The new EHR also includes enhanced decision support with the Opioid
Advisor tool, which allows clinicians to simultaneously check data from
47 State Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMP) and DoD
facilities to prevent improper prescribing of controlled substances.
Previously clinicians had to leave a patient's record and access PDMP
data through each state's website with different passwords for each
site. The Opioid Advisor tool has guided more than 27,000 modifications
to opioid prescriptions since Oct. 2020. In these instances, the
provider made a different and beneficial clinical decision based on the
information the system provides. This information includes previous
overdose attempts and any history of suicidal ideation. This is a net
new capability that supports safer care of veterans.
Finally, the new EHR allows VA pharmacists to communicate
electronically with community care providers when requesting
prescription renewals. This is another net new capability, and it has
been used by VA pharmacists more than 7,000 times. This represents
7,000 phone calls not made to community care providers by VA
pharmacists. This enhances continuity of veteran care with prescription
medications and encourages prescriptions staying inside of VA even when
authored via community care.

Pharmacy Updates and Enhancements:

VA has issued two primary Task Orders - Number 31 and Number 52 -
for updates and enhancements to the pharmacy capability. In addition,
Oracle regularly provides EHR system updates including for the pharmacy
capability in the February and August scheduled Code Block upgrades.
Since the Subcommittee's last pharmacy-focused hearing in May 2023,
Code Block 9 was performed over the weekend of Aug. 26, 2023, and Code
Block 10 upgrade was performed over the weekend of Feb. 10, 2024.
Oracle has instituted enhanced testing of updates to the system,
including for pharmacy updates. For example, in addition to executing
planned test scripts based on documented requirements, Oracle now
partners with VA end users at the live sites to conduct exploratory
testing, a method that is especially useful for uncovering edge cases
and usability issues. This form of user-centric testing allows us to
focus on how users will interact with the software and helps inform any
required changes. Updates are not included in a Code Block upgrade
until testing is satisfactory to both Oracle and VA (and DoD when
applicable).

Significant updates and enhancements are described below according
to Task Order.

Task Order 31: E-Rx Monitoring Filling (Block 8 - Feb. 2023)
This enhancement improves the E-Rx Monitor filter. Electronic
prescriptions are processed from VA and non-VA providers in the E-Rx
Monitor. Filtering the monitor allows for pharmacists to segregate
their labor pool daily and have a pharmacist focus on singular aspects
of workflow, for example community care prescriptions from a non-VA
provider.

Task Order 31: Weekly Multum Release (Live Dec. 2022)
This enhancement increases the release cadence for Multum content
to move from monthly releases to weekly releases, allowing for
increased delivery of drug content as it is updated.

Task Order 31: Three Drug Image (Block 11 - Aug. 2024)
This enhancement will provide drug metadata (round, scored, color,
drug ID, imprint) in outpatient pharmacy workflows so that a pharmacy
user can accurately identify medications. Recent modifications to VA's
requirements have extended the timeline for this enhancement.

Task Order 31: Mobile Inventory Scanning (Block 9 - Aug. 2023)
This enhancement helps monitor and control real-time inventory and
reordering processes by assisting with inventory and reorder level
updates through mobile scan-driven workflows during a single adjustment
step.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 1--Toggle Prescription Synonym
Visibility (Block 8 - Feb. 2023)
This enhancement guides providers to order prescriptions or
supplies based on what is formulary and fillable through VA outpatient
or CMOP. The intent is to reduce re-work efforts needed by pharmacists
and providers to adjust prescriptions after the initial order entry,
which will mean less re-work if a local VA site cannot fill a
prescription. This streamlined the number of prescriptions a provider
sees by almost 30 percent to better provider and pharmacy experience in
addition to increasing productivity.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 2--Optional Order Stop Date in
MMR (Block 8 - Feb. 2023)
This enhancement allows ongoing medications for a patient to stay
on the patient's active medication list even after the legal date has
been met and regardless of whether a veteran's prescription was
originally ordered within the EHR or from a community care provider.
This ensures providers and pharmacists continue to have better
visibility to a veteran's medications even when a new prescription is
needed.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 3a--Display Legal Rx Expiration
Date in Orders (Block 8 - Feb. 2023)
This enhancement gives visibility for providers when a prescription
is no longer fillable because it is past the legal expiration date,
which helps identify when a new prescription is needed and allows for
more timely prescription renewals. It is not uncommon for a veteran to
be taking multiple prescriptions and often double-digit prescriptions
to meet their medical needs. During a provider visit with a veteran,
the provider will conduct prescription management to re-order/refill
all a veteran's medications to allow them to continue to receive supply
from VA. Therefore, a legal expiration date of a prescription was
needed as this information comes from VA pharmacy.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 3b/3c--Display Rx Dispensing
Details in Power Orders (Block 10 - Feb. 2024, but functionality go-
live date is pending)
This enhancement will update the provider's view when a
prescription is ordered to reflect how prescriptions are dispensed by
the pharmacy to the patient. This change will bring more visibility to
situations when a pharmacy is using a different tablet size, for
example, to fill a prescription (e.g., Lisinopril 20 mg tablet x 1 tab
prescription filled with Lisinopril 10 mg tablet, x 2 tabs).

This enhancement was included in the recent Code Block 10 update;
however, due to rigorous testing performed in the lead-up to the
update, issues were discovered by VA and Oracle that have led to a
decision not to make the functionality of the enhancement live yet.
This decision is an example of the benefits of Oracle's more rigorous
testing than what was done before, and it enables a solution that puts
patient safety first so that issues are fixed before the functionality
goes live to users. We are working with VA to resolve the remaining
issues quickly so that the functionality may be enabled soon.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 4--Support mCDS Discontinue in
MMR (Block 9--Aug. 2023)
This enhancement reduces the steps or number of clicks pharmacy
staff need to take to discontinue duplicate prescriptions within the
drug interaction checking (mCDS) alerts window.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 5--Enable Power Orders Renewal
Action on MMR Prescriptions (Block 9 - Aug. 2023)
This enhancement allows providers to easily renew and take other
actions on outpatient pharmacy generated prescriptions for consistency
with provider entered prescriptions.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 6--Optional Pharmacist
Verification for Pharmacy Technicians Refills (Block 9 - Aug. 2023)
This enhancement saves time for pharmacists by removing pharmacist
verification requirements for refills initiated by pharmacy
technicians.

Task Order 52: Enhancement Number 7--Request Refills from Power
Chart to Outpatient Pharmacy (Block 10 - Feb. 2024)
This enhancement allows providers to perform a ``right click''
refill action in Power Chart and transmit a refill to the pharmacy for
processing.

Task Order 52: Modification Number 6--Addresses (Block 10 - Feb.
2024)
This enhancement allows pharmacists to override the address
validation status for an address that fails the United States Postal
Service (USPS) validation.

Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center:

The Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center in North
Chicago, Illinois, is an integrated federal health care facility
operated by DoD and VA, combining medical care for both veterans and
active-duty military personnel. It is scheduled to deploy the new EHR
on March 9, 2024. Significant work has taken place throughout 2023 and
into the present to prepare Lovell FHCC for this deployment of the new
EHR.
Specifically, for pharmacy, Lovell FHCC will benefit by being the
first site to deploy with the various updates and enhancements
mentioned above. In addition, Oracle has spent considerable time
understanding clinical operations at FHCC and working closely with VA,
DoD, and FEHRM counterparts to work toward a successful deployment.
A team of Oracle pharmacists with previous VA and DoD experience
executed the first pharmacist led pharmacy knowledge transfer series
that covered the general utility of the new EHR and an in-person
demonstration of inpatient and outpatient workflows ranging from basic
order entry to adept queue management.
Weeklong sessions were conducted in November 2023 with the entire
FHCC pharmacy operations staff to include pharmacists and pharmacy
technicians. This approach extended beyond the usual super user
engagement and separate end user engagement to ensure more staff gained
clinical exposure in which the pharmacists leveraged their expertise to
address situational based inquiries from the local staff.
Feedback from the local staff rated the presentations favorably.
The local staff provided a 9.82/10 rating when encouraging future sites
to have the opportunity to participate in similar sessions, and across
the board, FHCC pharmacy operations staff reported feeling more
comfortable with the EHR after the knowledge transfer series.

Forthcoming Report from the Office of the Inspector General:

We understand the VA's Office of Inspector General (IG) will be
issuing a report focused on pharmacy operations in the near future.
Oracle has not been (i) briefed by the IG on its report, (ii) provided
the opportunity by the IG to comment on the report, or (iii) provided
the opportunity to review the IG's testimony for this hearing prior to
the due date of this written testimony.
Oracle's position has been and continues to be that if there is an
issue with the EHR, we want to know about it immediately so that we can
provide an update to alleviate it. If the IG identifies issues that
have not already been addressed, we will be prepared to quickly address
them.

Closing:

Oracle looks forward to continuing to provide VA with a pharmacy
module in the new EHR that enables veterans to receive their medication
when they need it and safely. Thank you.
