- LOST IN TRANSLATION: HOW VA'S DISABILITY CLAIMS AND APPEALS LETTERS SHOULD BE SIMPLIFIED

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LOST IN TRANSLATION:

HOW VA'S DISABILITY CLAIMS AND

APPEALS LETTERS SHOULD BE SIMPLIFIED

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available via http://govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-437          WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MIKE BOST, Illinois, Chairman

AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
American Samoa, Vice-Chairwoman      Member
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           MIKE LEVIN, California
MATTHEW M. ROSENDALE, SR., Montana   CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire
MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa       FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina    SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida               Florida
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas                   Pennsylvania
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona              MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois

Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas, Chairman

C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida           CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire,
JUAN CISCOMANI, Arizona                  Ranking Member
ELIJAH CRANE, Arizona                CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
KEITH SELF, Texas                        Pennsylvania
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
DELIA C. RAMIREZ, Illinois

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 2024

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Morgan Luttrell, Chairman..........................     1
The Honorable Chris Pappas, Ranking Member.......................     2

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Ms. Beth Murphy, Executive Director, Compensation Service, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................     3

Accompanied by:

Ms. Caroline Fleming, Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans'
Appeals, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Ms. Denise Kitts, Executive Director, Enterprise Measurement
and Design, Veterans Experience Office, U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Brian Griffin, Deputy Chief Counsel, Benefits Law Group,
Office of General Counsel, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Panel 2

Mr. Shane Liermann, Deputy National Legislative Director,
Disabled American Veterans (DAV)...............................    13

Ms. Diane Boyd Rauber, Executive Director, National Organization
of Veterans' Advocates, Inc. (NOVA)............................    15

Mr. Michael S. Figlioli, Director, National Veterans Service,
Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States (VFW)............    17

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Ms. Beth Murphy Prepared Statement...............................    27
Mr. Shane Liermann Prepared Statement............................    30
Ms. Diane Boyd Rauber Prepared Statement.........................    37
Mr. Michael S. Figlioli Prepared Statement.......................    47

Statements For The Record

Exhibits Submitted by Disabled American Veterans (DAV)...........    51
Exhibits Submitted by National Organization of Veterans'
Advocates, Inc. (NOVA).........................................   121

LOST IN TRANSLATION:

HOW VA'S DISABILITY CLAIMS AND

APPEALS LETTERS SHOULD BE SIMPLIFIED

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Disability Assistance & Memorial
Affairs,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1 p.m., in
room 360, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Morgan Luttrell
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Luttrell, Crane, Self, Pappas,
Deluzio, and Ramirez.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MORGAN LUTTRELL, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Luttrell. The subcommittee will come to order. Thank
you to all our witnesses for being here today. Today we are
here to take a closer look at the notice letters that the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) sends to veterans who file
claims for VA benefits.
The VA disability claims and appeals process is extremely
complex. VA's notice letters are supposed to be easy to
understand but the directions and the letters themselves are
more or less like walking through a maze from what we hear from
our veterans. VA's notice letters have been unnecessarily
lengthy, complicated, and filled with legal terminology. Some
letters provide conflicting or unclear instructions, others do
not provide enough information.
The VA claims system is supposed to be veteran-friendly and
our veterans deserve better than to be confused or misdirected
in any given time. It is time for us to simplify VA notice
letters and ensure every veteran can easily navigate the VA
disability claims process.
The Veterans Benefits Administration's (VBA) Language
Change Control Board has attempted to improve those letters,
including because of feedback from Veterans Service
Organizations (VSO). VBA's efforts to make notice letters more
comprehensive have led to longer, more disorganized, and more
complex letters, not clarity.
Even though we consistently hear complaints from our
veterans, the VA's letters are still, to date, too confusing.
Instead of providing clear directions to navigate the
disability claims and appeals process, it seems the VA notice
letters have become puzzles that only lawyers and experienced
VSOs can read.
Some of our veterans and survivors feel overwhelmed by the
complexity of these letters and abandon their claims
altogether. Many experience anxiety, depressions, and panic
when they receive these letters. I understand that firsthand
being a veteran who had to go through these letters.
Congress has passed legislation to verify notice letters,
but there is still more to be done. We must ensure that our
veterans can easily understand how to pursue their claims
without having to encode lengthy letters at every step of the
claims process. We owe our veterans a clear and concise
communication.
Today we will be hearing from VA disability, we will be
hearing from VA Disability, American Veterans, Veterans of
Foreign Wars (VFW) and the National Organizations of Veterans
Advocates (NOVA) to learn more about how we can improve and
simplify VA notice letters.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member Pappas for his
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHRIS PAPPAS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing on disability claim and decision appeal
letters. As of this February, the average time for a veteran to
receive a decision on their claim is 158 days, and that is
assuming they do not need an appeal. Throughout those 158 days
the veteran's primary touchpoint is to track the status of
their claim through notification and decision letters. These
letters communicate claim decisions, the rights and options to
appeal, how to contact the VA, compensation rates, hearing
dates, and so much more.
Notification letters are critical to the veteran's ability
to navigate their benefits claim, yet despite the importance,
the information presented in the letters is often ambiguous,
convoluted, buried in legal jargon, or outright wrong. In my
own district, veterans have contacted our office expressing
concerns about letters they have received indicating an
immediate response was needed to complete their claim when in
reality their claim was already decided or required no further
evidence.
We owe it to veterans to provide them with clear, concise,
and correct information so they can access the benefits that
they have earned.
The letters have been an area of concern, as the chairman
said, for over 20 years. Congress enacted the Veterans Claim
Assistance Act in the year 2000 to increase transparency and
provide support to the veteran throughout their claim. Since
then, Government Accountability Office (GAO) has reported
documented issues in letter clarity in 2011, 2015, and 2017,
which eventually led to the Veterans Appeals Improvement and
Modernization Act of 2017.
While significant progress and improvements have been made,
more needs to be done here in terms of the clarity of these
letters. Now with the implementation of the The Sergeant First
Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address
Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act there is growing concern as to
whether the clarity and quality of these letters will be
affected by VA's work as VA's workforce adjusts to the growing
volume of benefit claims. Understandably the same statutes that
have increased transparency and support also put limitations on
VA's ability to adapt to present day claim processing
challenges.
Today I am interested in hearing from our witnesses about
the challenges that veterans experience with these letters,
obstacles that stand in the way, to solutions, and especially
how Congress can increase the quality and clarity of VA's
communication to our veterans. Our shared commitment to
veterans demands proactive and collaborative approaches to
address these challenges. We must leave here today with a
better understanding of the source of some of these
communication issues and along the way I appreciate the efforts
that VA has made throughout the years to increase transparency
and support through the claims process. It is clear that more
needs to be done to support the veterans and their families who
expect me and everyone up here not only to help them navigate
through the red tape, but to cut it down where necessary.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ranking Member. Our lead witness
from VA is Ms. Beth Murphy, the Executive Director of
Compensation Services. Ms. Murphy is joined by Judge Caroline
Fleming, a Veteran Law Judge at the Board of Veterans' Appeals
Ms. Denise Kitts, Executive Director of Enterprise Measurement
and Design at the Veterans Experience Office (VEO);, and Mr.
Brian Griffin, Deputy Chief Counsel of the Benefits Law Group
at the Office of General Counsel (OGC).
I ask the witnesses on the first panel to please stand and
raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you and let the record show that the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
Thank you all for being here today. Ms. Murphy, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes to deliver your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BETH MURPHY

Ms. Murphy. Good afternoon, Chairman Luttrell, Ranking
Member Pappas, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
Department of Veterans Affairs disability claims and appeals
letters. Thank you for acknowledging my colleagues today, Ms.
Kitts from Veterans Experience Office, Mr. Griffin from Office
of General Counsel, Judge Fleming from the Board of Veterans'
Appeals.
I would like to acknowledge up front that we recognize the
importance of sending letters that are easy for those we serve
to understand. For many veterans and family members VA can feel
big and confusing. Each letter we send is an opportunity to
build and maintain a relationship with those we serve.
The more compassionate and comprehensible we can make our
letters, the more trust they will have in our ability to
provide benefits. We have taken many steps to improve and are
continuing these efforts. The VA seeks to strike a balance
between ensuring clarity and readability of letters and
complying with statutory and regulatory requirements regarding
what our communications must include.
Over the years, VA has implemented several statutes aimed
to strengthen and improve protections and transparency. VA is
bound by statutory and regulatory requirements governing our
duties with obtaining and relaying evidence needed to
substantiate a claim.
Many current letter requirements include VA's statutory
duty to notify and duty to assist requirements as part of the
Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000. Additionally, as part
of Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017,
VA revised letters to include information on VA's appeals
process and requirements for the notification letter when a
decision is issued on the claim.
More recently, laws related to claims based on military
sexual trauma (MST) have impacted VA letters. For example, in
2022, the Dignity for MST Survivors Act required VA to audit
denial letters for claims related to MST. A joint Veterans
Benefits Administration-Veterans Health Administration (VBA-
VHA) workgroup incorporated trauma-informed language in the
denial letters, and we went further than that. We even looked
at the grant letters, development letters, and the text of the
rating decision.
VA held meetings with our Veterans Service Organization
partners seeking first their input and then their feedback on
the updated products.
In the appeals space, the Board of Veterans' Appeals
currently uses about 150 different letters to share information
with or seek clarity from veterans and appellants. All Board
form letters have undergone multiple levels of review. The
Board reviews and updates letters annually, and letters
originating-from the legal division of the Office of the Clerk
of the Board were reviewed for clarity and legal accuracy
within the past 6 months.
Though much of the content of VA letters is governed by law
and statute, VA has initiated multiple improvements to our
correspondence to simplify letters and make them more
understandable for veterans. For example, VBA partnered with
the Veterans Experience Office to learn more about the
experience of veterans in the claims process using human-
centered design methods.
In April 2023, VBA launched a new Veterans Signals
(VSignals) survey specific to the disability compensation
program, which was sent initially--surveys initially were sent
to first-time claim filers, and we expanded to other
compensation claim types just recently in January 2024.
VBA reaches out directly to veterans for specific feedback
after we get the surveys back which we will use to inform
future letter changes.
Additionally, in 2013, VBA instituted a governance process
for review and update of compensation and pension-related
letters called the Language Change Control Board or LCCB, which
include members from several business lines and offices. The
LCCB reviews and approves all disability compensation and
pension-related language change requests for letters and other
external facing communications. This group also ensures
language changes are tracked, reviewed for accuracy, and sent
for implementation.
From Fiscal Year 2022 through February 2024, the LCCB
completed 57 disability compensation and pension-related
language change requests, ensuring enhanced readability of
claims letters. Going forward, we remain committed to
continuous improvement in letters. VBA is in the process of
assessing the universe of letters in use and prioritizing a
review plan to ensure we are giving proper attention to this
area.
Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, in closing, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss this important topic. My
colleagues and I are happy to respond to your questions, and we
would welcome opportunity to meet your staff on specific letter
changes if necessary. Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Beth Murphy Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Murphy. The written statement
of Ms. Murphy will be entered into the hearing record. We will
now move to questioning and I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
There is kind of a lot to unpack here, but so I spent the
all of last night reading this binder full of letters from
veterans and that came into our office. I can appreciate the
VA's position to protect itself when it engages with the
veteran community. I mean, I am sure over the decades and
decades and decades when letters have been going out to the
veterans on their claims along the way we were, like, hey, we
need to add this. We need to take this away, and this is where
we are today.
I got to tell you, one time I was on a nuclear submarine,
and I was talking to the nuclear engineer, and he was going to
teach me how to track the bubble through the reactor on a
nuclear submarine. I think after a week, which is saying
something, I was, like, hey, how do you make this thing go? He
goes push the red button. I was, like, you mean you spent an
entire week trying to tell me how the nuclear reactor works,
and you could have said just push the red button? I was, like,
we could have saved ourselves a whole lot of time.
After reading these letters it seems like the VA has gotten
too big for itself when it is corresponding with the veteran
community because the letters are just--I was even speaking
with lawyers that cannot even understand what is written in it.
There has got to be a sweet spot in there somewhere that we
have to find.
The number one issue I hear from veterans, I should not say
number one, one of them, a very substantial issue I hear when I
was speaking with my veterans is I have no idea what to do
because I cannot read this letter and I cannot pay for someone
to read this to me because my district is way out in the
country, right? These guys or gals it is them checking the
mailbox.
My question is, and I have a laundry list of--I mean, this
is single spaced. I cannot even read the print it is so small
of ways to course correct this problem. They seem very simple.
My first question, is you said that the letters that are coming
back are the responses from the surveys come back to the VA.
Ms. Murphy, I caught that. Who is that individual or
individuals that receive those letters? Then once they have
read them where does that go?
Ms. Murphy. Chairman, we have a survey mechanism. The
letters go out. We send a lot of survey invites out. We get a
certain percentage back. So far, I think the response rate has
been around 18 percent in the last year that we have been
sending out the disability compensation survey letters.
Then we look at the feedback. We look at the distribution
of the data. We also make what we call service recovery calls,
so we will make phone calls and try to attempt to reach
veterans. We call folks who have given us high scores and folks
who have given us low scores to see what the reason was for
their response.
Then we take that feedback, and we work closely with the
Veterans Experience Office since they own the survey mechanism,
and then we start to incorporate that----
Mr. Luttrell. Those responses that are read go directly to
Judge Fleming's office. Am I tracking that correctly? It just
seems like it dies on the vine somewhere, and I do not want
that to sound abrasive given everything that you have to do.
Ms. Murphy. There are multiple surveys, sir. The Board will
have their survey. We have multiple surveys within VBA by
different product type.
Mr. Luttrell. You said there are 150 letters, different--I
am assuming different types of letters that go out to our
veterans. You said 150 different ones?
Ms. Murphy. From the Board of Veterans Appeals (BVA), sir.
Mr. Luttrell. One hundred and fifty different letters to go
out to a veteran. That seems like a lot.
Ms. Fleming. Yes, sir. I certainly understand that, and I
can give you a breakdown of the different types of letters. We
have docketing letters so for contested claims. We have letters
we would send to a claimant. Letters we would send to the
contesting party, initial letters, final letters, and so each
one of those would count as a different letter. You are right,
sir, that there are--it is a lot of letters because there is a
lot of information that we are trying to convey to our veterans
and to our other appellants and we want to make sure that we
are as thorough as possible.
We have tried to tailor the letters as much as possible to
the different situations where we might need to send letters or
correspond with the veteran or another appellant.
Mr. Luttrell. I think we need to step in and refine that
number down to a lower number. It seems too excessive to me
because in my military experience the Keep It Simple Stupid
(KISS) method is the best way to pass information back and
forth between two parties. Again, I think the VA has kind of
out punted its coverage here. My time has expired. We will
review it on my second round. I will pass it off.
I will yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Pappas. Okay, thanks very much for the testimony. You
had mentioned that the Signal survey which has been in place
for about a year, am I correct? You talked a little bit about
the feedback that you have received, positive and negative,
from that and some of the improvements you have sought to make
as a result. Do you feel like you need to make changes to the
survey? Are you getting the feedback in the way you desire to
help inform your process moving forward or are there changes
that need to be made to that tool?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, we are getting--excuse me--we are getting
initial good feedback that is actionable. Beginning later this
Fiscal Year we are going to turn on a function working with the
Veterans Experience Office to allow free text from the
respondents themselves. In addition to the phone calls where we
talk through what the feedback was, individuals will have a
chance to type their thoughts to us.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. You had also mentioned the Language
Change Control Board in your testimony, and you reference an
example where the Board added a paragraph to the what should
you do if you disagree with our decision section of the
notification letter. From what I am hearing from veterans and
from VSOs, the clarity of the letters generally decreases the
longer the letter is. Some of these things can be well in
excess of 10 pages if I am remembering correctly from some of
my discussions.
To your knowledge, has the Board ever eliminated text and
letters? If so, can you cite some specific examples?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, Ranking Member Pappas. The Change Control
Board they are a governance body to make sure that there is
consistency. They enhance clarity, the tracking. They are not
the subject matter experts that are creating the letters
themselves so they will ingest these requests. Hey, we have a
letter we would like to change it. Can the Board take a look at
it?
There are subject matter experts from across different VBA
offices and so it is a body that aims to improve clarity,
consistency and make sure letters are changed.
Off the top of my head, I really cannot give any example of
some of their technical or tactical work, but I could get that
for you.
Mr. Pappas. When we think about veterans and VSOs
specifically, how does their feedback get to the Language
Change Control Board? Do you feel like that is happening in a
way that can actually make a difference in terms of the
product?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, it is making a difference. I would like to
include Ms. Kitts from----
Mr. Pappas. Sure.
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. Veterans Experience Office, but
before I turn to her, I would like to say very specifically
some of the last targeted efforts that we have had on letters
we have had sit-down meetings with our VSO partners in
particular to get their feedback ahead of time, to show them
the products to make sure that, you know, it meets the mail, so
to speak. We have had great, great partnership with our VSOs.
Ms. Kitts.
Ms. Kitts. Thank you, Ms. Murphy. We are from the Veterans
Experience Office and our job is to advocate for the veterans
inside VA; and so when we partner with program offices we use a
process called human-centered design which essentially means in
a nutshell keep KISS--keep it easy. It is we codesign with our
veterans, so one example of that is recently we partnered with
VBA, and we did a redesign of the other than honorable letters.
In that process, you know, not only did we incorporate--you
strike that balance in terms of easy to read, tone, empathy,
but we also tested it with veterans. That is at the--so we
deploy human-centered design methodology which basically means
codesign with our customers, tests with our customers. That is
an example of how that voice of the veteran gets entered back
into the product.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. One question about quality assurance,
that topic has been a focus of this subcommittee because as we
think about today when VA letters contain avoidable errors they
can add to frustration and confusion, and it can also increase
the time that it takes for a veteran to receive their benefits.
I am wondering how VA attributes the source of errors like
that? Is it training, automation, quality assurance? How should
we think about that?
Ms. Murphy. That is a great question. We have front-end. We
have, when you become a new claims processor, we have months of
training where you practice on the job. You have a mentor. Your
work is reviewed. We have over a dozen different training
modules that are specifically addressing letters--excuse me--
and we also have quality review mechanisms in place. Local
quality review teams look at the products along the way as the
claim is being processed to give feedback to claims processors.
We also have national quality review, our star program, and
if we find errors that duty to assist has not been met, things
like that, we will call an error. Or sometimes if the letter is
just not up to snuff, I would say, could have been better, we
can give a comment back to the regional office.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Thanks for helping me understand that. I
yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Pappas.
Mr. Self, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is the legislative
branch. I have already shared my thoughts with the chairman
that we are discussing letters that the VA is sending out. I
find that should be an administrative function in VA, not a
congressional function, but we always talk about inputs up
here. I make this comment every time we have a VA panel. We
talk a lot about inputs. What we hear are the outputs. The
veterans that cannot understand their letters, cannot read
their letters, whatever.
I filed a bill, Judge Fleming. I filed a bill to add two
judges to the Court of Appeals above the Board. Now, what I am
told is that--which I do not like--because the Board is taking
so long that is causing the backup at the Court of Appeals. I
understand that veterans, you are informing veterans that your
review docket takes 365 days and yet the board has informed us
that the average is actually 613 days. Is that about right?
That there are some that are over 1,500 days. This to me seems
a problem.
Again, I do not like putting more judges on the Board--on
the Court of Appeals because the Board is so backed up, how are
we going to make this run faster and how are we going to do
that through these letters, because this is the vehicle, the
first vehicle that I understand that they get? How are we going
to do that?
This is below Congress level, I believe, but please share
with me.
Ms. Fleming. Thank you for that question, Congressman. You
know, I do not have a great answer for why it is taking so
long. I know the number of claims that are filed by veterans
and other claimants grows every year, and we have expanded and
attempted to deal with that.
Part of the goal of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) was
to speed up the decision-making process at the Board of
Veterans' Appeals, and I believe we are doing that. You are
certainly correct that we are not yet at the point where we
want to be, although we are working as hard as we can to get
there, sir.
Mr. Self. Do you have a process by which you take the 1,500
days to get them done?
Ms. Fleming. Yes, sir. We decide claims in docket order
which means that----
Mr. Self. Well, I find that--I am not sure that is right
because if you had--the average cannot be 613 days if your
oldest ones are 1,500 days. That is not possible. You have got
some outliers at 1,500?
Ms. Fleming. Yes, sir, that is correct. Those are from the
legacy system which part of the AMA's goal was to----
Mr. Self. Ah-ha.
Ms. Fleming [continuing]. was to shorten appeals, shorten
the time that appeals were taking to be processed. The legacy
appeals, we are working hard to draw down our legacy pending
inventory. and we have made a lot of progress in that. I
believe we have reduced our pending legacy inventory by over 60
percent in the past fiscal year, and we are continuing to work
as hard as we can to complete those oldest claims because you
are right. They have been waiting years in some cases and we
certainly do not----
Mr. Self. That only makes sense to me to do that.
Ms. Fleming. Yes, sir.
Mr. Self. This is another indication of the VA complexity.
I ask you to simplify VA. I asked my own Veterans Integrated
Services Network (VISN). We have got the second largest VISN
close to my district, not in it but close, and I asked the
director at one point we talked about phone numbers coming in.
They have 15, at least 15. Why is VA so complex?
These letters are another indication. I mean, to discuss
letters, and I know mine is not as thick as the chairman's, but
to discuss letters I have at least an inch-thick book here to
discuss letters. I just ask you find a way to simplify this,
because if veterans cannot understand the letter and they
cannot hire somebody to understand the letter, this ought to be
a mission order that Congress gives you. Find a way to simplify
your letters so that you have the inputs that are more correct
and faster and the outputs we hear are a better VA. Outputs are
what I am concerned about. How do we help our veterans not how
we build a bigger bureaucracy, add judges to the Appeals Court
or whatever. How do we simplify this animal?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Self.
Mr. McGarvey, you are recognized 5 minutes.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all very
much for being here. I share the concern of some of my
colleagues, and I think the reason is because we really do care
about how our veterans are getting information, how they are
able to understand that information, and ultimately get the
care service benefits they have earned.
This gives us an opportunity to dig into these details a
little bit on the claims notification process, especially as
the VA expands the use of automated decision reports. I am not
a Luddite, but I do want to make sure that we have the proper
guardrails in place as we incorporate these technologies into
helping our veterans.
The claims processing and related communications with
veteran survivor beneficiaries, let us just be honest about it.
It has been an ongoing challenge since 1995. While the VA has
been working toward improving efficiency and communication,
there have been several, several GAO reports and VSO statements
that suggests these are still major issues.
In reading through the testimony today, I am deeply
concerned about the way these notifications are handled and the
confusing communication veterans and survivors are receiving
from both the Veterans Benefits Administration and the Board of
Veterans' Appeals. We also want to ensure accuracy in
decisions.
Ms. Murphy, starting with you, how is the VA ensuring that
the use of automated decision support technology is helping to
improve accuracy and efficiency instead of contributing to
errors and staff time correcting those errors?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you for the question. The focus so far
for the automation support has been to tee up a lot of--and
pull out and use that automation support to pull out the
relevant information that the decision-maker needs. Rather
than, when I used to rate claims. I would spend hours combing
through paper files for service treatment records, various
treatment records from private and VHA. This technology is able
to pull that information forward into, like, a list where the
claims processor can then instead of spending their time
digging for things, they can use their smarts and go through
and find the relevant information faster. That is saving time
and it is really focusing the lift from the technology on
finding the most actionable information.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you because we do want to get this
right. The second question is what is the VA doing to improve
the quality assurance process for the claims process so that
the notices veterans and survivors receive are accurate and
their access to benefits is not unnecessarily delayed?
Ms. Murphy. We are constantly looking to improve. I mean,
the reason that these letters are so complex is that we are
trying to help. There are a vast number of veterans, vast
number of types of claims, different things that they are
claiming, different things they are entitled to. I will be the
first to acknowledge I understand a daunting feeling when you
take the letter out of the envelope, and it is this thick.
You know, my husband--my husband is retired Air Force. He
gets these letters as well and sometimes I could see it on his
face. He almost says, you know, do I want to embark on this?
I do understand that I am empathetic to that.
Our perspective also is, though, we are trying to do
everything we can to help veterans get what they are entitled
to. Sometimes that means giving them information, adding a form
to the letter and it extends the length.
We are constantly trying to find that better balance
between giving necessary information and guidance and
simplicity.
Mr. McGarvey. Thank you and I appreciate that, appreciate
your empathy and understanding what a lot of these vets are
feeling when they get this information, how confusing it is,
and your commitment to try and help them do better.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Crane, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you guys for
coming today. Ms. Murphy, has there been any documentation or
communication indicating that outside stakeholders, such as
VSOs, have previously notified the VA about issues with clarity
and complexity of these letters years ago? If so, did the VA
previously take any actions to address these issues? Please
give us specifics.
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir. We get input and feedback from
multiple channels, internal, external, veterans themselves. We
ingest all of that feedback. Some of the types of letters that
we have prioritized recently have been improving debt letters.
A few years ago, our Undersecretary at the time was very
focused on the impact of getting a debt letter and how
traumatizing that can be. There was a focused effort in
updating debt letters.
Mr. Crane. Do you have any of the documentation with you
that you received from any of these VSOs today?
Ms. Murphy. I do not, sir.
Mr. Crane. Do you guys have a to-do list from the VSOs, any
documentation of that?
Ms. Murphy. We have, I am sure we have some correspondence
back and forth, emails, things of that nature, various
feedback.
Mr. Crane. Okay, but you do not have a to-do list of things
that VSOs, some of the folks representing our veterans are
asking for to streamline these letters?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, what we are doing is we have some
feedback. We are going to be soliciting more, and we are going
to have an enterprise-wide plan, multi-year plan to identify
using the VSignals survey information on what the most
actionable letters should be, based on veteran feedback. We are
going to start with those targeted letters and do----
Mr. Crane. Real quick since my time is running out, ma'am,
can you provide some of that documentation to this committee on
what you guys are tracking from the VSOs and how you intend to
take their feedback to streamline this letter process?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. Judge Fleming, since the Board's June
2023 creation of an office for updating its letters, how many
letters have been revised for any reason other than because of
change in law compelled you to do so?
Ms. Fleming. Thank you for that question, sir. I am not
certain of that number off the top of my head, but that is
something I can certainly take back and get you a more concrete
response.
Mr. Crane. Okay, how about this? Have any letters been
revised for any reason other than because a change in law
compelled you to do so?
Ms. Fleming. Yes, sir. My office recently worked on, I
believe the title, internal title was the Notice of
Disagreement (NOD) verification letter. Where we were once
sending out several, one of several different letters if there
were several different issues with a 10182 that a veteran or an
appellant submitted. We have revised it to make the process
simpler for the staff who send the letters out with us. There
is, not to get too in the weeds, but a drop-down menu so if the
issue is that the NOD was not signed then the language
automatically populates, so things like that. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Okay, Ms. Fleming, so that is one that you know
of off the top of your head, right?
Ms. Fleming. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. I am going to go to you next, Mr. Griffin. From
the perspective of the Office of General Counsel, what
measures, if any, has the VA taken to ensure that the letters
comply with legal requirements while also being understandable
to veterans who do not have legal backgrounds?
Mr. Griffin. Thank you for that question, Congressman. I
want to hearken back to what the chair said. He said we are
looking for that sweet spot. The adequacy and comprehensiveness
of notice letters the VA sends does get litigated, and so we
are looking to strike that balance between comprehensiveness
and technical clarity on the one hand for appeals purposes, and
common sense, informality, and readability from the veteran's
perspective. I mean, that is what we are trying to hit.
In terms of specific actions OGC has taken, I mean, when we
receive a request to review particular administrative products
we work closely with our clients to do so, and our input tends
to be front-loaded when a new set of requirements is passed
into law, as you alluded, such as the Appeals Modernization Act
or the PACT Act. I hope that answers your question.
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Ms. Murphy, my last one is for you, and I believe you when
you say, ma'am, we are trying to do everything we can to
provide our veterans help. You said that right after talking
about pulling one of these letters out that feels and looks
like a packet. What do you think happens for an average veteran
that pulls that letter out that looks like a packet? What do
you think their initial response is and what do you think the
chances that they are going to follow up and follow through on
reading through and looking at that entire package is?
Ms. Murphy. Congressman, I can tell you what my veteran at
home says, what he does. He has seen the packet. I think that
his first, initial, kind of big sigh of this is a lot, but then
I have seen him, and I have sat with him and walked through it.
He goes section by section. We have headers. We have
categorized the information and he goes section by section
and----
Mr. Crane. Yes, and that is great, ma'am, but he lives with
you, right? You work for the VA, and you are an expert in this
field. How many veterans have that luxury of having somebody
with your experience and your insight and knowledge that, you
know, I am sure when he sees it, he is, like, oh, my God, this
is huge, but he is, like, my wife is a rock star. She can help
me get through this, right? How many veterans have that luxury?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. To the Chairman's point and others who have made
similar points, what are we going to do to streamline this to
where the first thought that a veteran gets when he opens that
packet is not completely being overwhelmed?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, not every letter is that long. The
notification letters once we make a decision, other ancillary
benefits that somebody might be entitled to, dependency
information, those come with forms. Oftentimes the longer
letters are on the back end.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, ma'am, I appreciate it. Appreciate
you guys.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Crane.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have been called to the floor for
votes so this hearing will be in recess until we return.
[Recess.]
Mr. Luttrell. Well, you know, I actually probably could
have cut you guys loose before we got out of here, but I am
sure you are going to stay after the fact. This is the one
thing that I will ask that we are going to move into the second
panel and thank you for your service. I said that before the
hearing. I said it during, and I most certainly will say it
after the fact.
For the lack of any other better statement, this seems to
be a silly problem to have with these letters and the
complexities. You heard me say it. We have to find that sweet
spot. I am asking you all to do that. We do not need 150
letters, in my opinion. I do not know the depth of it.
Ms. Fleming, I would like to meet with you sometime to dig
into the problem set.
Mr. Griffin, you seem to have a good understanding on that
as well, and we can have a roundtable discussion on exactly
what that looks like. That is an easy ask, yes? Let us do that
moving forward. This just benefits the veterans in the long
term. I think there is absolutely a way we can work together
by, with and through each other to help the men and women out
that served our great country.
With that, thank you very much.
[Recess.]
Mr. Luttrell. Good afternoon. If you are okay we will go
ahead and start. Outstanding.
Our second panel of witnesses will include Mr. Shane
Liermann, good to see you again, Disabled American Veterans
(DAV), Ms. Diane Boyd Rauber of the National Organization of
Veterans' Advocates, and Mr. Michael Figlioli, Veterans of
Foreign Affairs--Foreign Wars, excuse me.
I ask that you all stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you and let the record reflect that the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative. Thank you all for
being here today.
Mr. Liermann, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF SHANE LIERMANN

Mr. Liermann. Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and
members of the subcommittee, we are grateful for the
opportunity to appear before you today. DAV is a
congressionally chartered and VA-accredited Veterans Service
Organization that provides claims and appeals representation to
veterans and their families at no cost.
Mr. Chairman, I refer to my written testimony for the
technical aspects of the Veterans Claims Assistance Act and why
VA letters are in their current form. My comments this
afternoon will focus on three of the VA's letters: the duty to
assist letter, the wrong form or incomplete form letter, and
the VA rating decision letter.
Recently, DAV surveyed our national service officers, VA-
accredited benefits advocates from over 60 offices across the
country. The consistent complaint from veterans about the duty
to assist letters is that they do not understand much of the
language used and they are not clear on what actions they
actually need to take.
In reference to wrong or incomplete forms, the common
complaint is that veterans are being advised that they either
submitted the wrong form or the form was not completed and
signed. However, in many instances, that is not correct. One of
our offices noted the veteran was advised by VA that there was
a missing page from their 526EZ application for benefits. The
veteran responded with the missing page from the application.
Then the VA canceled the veteran's claim as they indicated he
only provided one page of the form and did not submit a
complete claim. This is unacceptable.
Our survey showed that a major complaint from veterans on
VA decision letters is they are too long and contain
information that may not actually directly apply to them or
their decision. It is evident that these letters speak a
language that veterans cannot always translate. It becomes even
more stressful when the VA letters are filled with errors.
Mr. Chairman, one of our supervisors noted they are finding
errors in approximately 30 percent of all VA letters they
review. In our written testimony in Exhibits D, E, F, and G, we
point out several errors, gross misspelling, and completely
inaccurate claims information in VA letters. This compounds
veterans' confusion and frustration.
Specifically, we note in Exhibit E, the VA notifies the
veteran they received his claim for a back condition and a left
Achilles tendon injury. Further, they indicate the veteran must
specify what disability he is claiming, although they just
acknowledged he did claim two specific conditions. They
expected a response from him on what he was claiming, even
though they acknowledged he claimed those two conditions.
It took a DAV service officer to contact a VA employee,
explain the situation to them, they agreed and then VA
rescinded the veteran's letter.
VA letters and notices to veterans and their families have
been bogged down with legal language. DAV makes the following
recommendations. VA should take a new look at letters by
concentrating on the language for the reader, not the legal
requirements. We suggest the use of focus groups populated with
veterans and veteran service organizations developing language
that clearly conveys information and the intent of the letter.
We also believe there should never be a wrong door at VA.
DAV recommends that VA reconsider the standardized forms
requirement or take an approach that will either accept a wrong
form as an intent to file. Or if all of the needed information
is provided, VA should just process and adjudicate the claim.
We recommend VA either to create or improve the quality
assurance of all of their letters before they are being
released. These errors are compounding the inability to
understand what is being relayed and what is actually being
requested.
In the Committee report accompanied with the Veterans
Notice Clarification Act of 2008, Congress stated, ``Instead of
simple, straightforward notices that can easily be read and
understood by claimants, VA is now routinely providing long,
frequently convoluted, overly legalistic notices that do not
meet the objective of the Veterans Claims Assistance Act.''
Here we are 16 years later, and the VA letters have not
improved but actually regressed in clarity and quality. VA can
and must do better.
This concludes my testimony, and I look forward to any
questions you and the subcommittee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Shane Liermann Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. The written statement of Mr. Liermann will be
entered into the hearing record.
Ms. Rauber, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DIANE BOYD RAUBER

Ms. Rauber. Good afternoon, Chairman Luttrell, Ranking
Member Pappas, and members of the subcommittee, NOVA thanks you
for the opportunity to discuss whether VA's letters are easy to
understand and provide information needed to navigate claims
and appeals effectively and timely.
As accredited attorneys and agents, NOVA members most
frequently review letters describing legal decisions, seeking
additional information, and conveying deadlines. Although legal
in nature, these letters do not have to be complicated. They
must, however, be clear and accurate so the recipient
understands how to preserve their rights.
Unfortunately, many VA letters are too difficult to read,
too confusing to understand, and too disorganized to be
effective.
First, VA needs to improve the readability of its letters.
VA does not consistently apply plain language concepts to
individual letters. Their 2023 Plain Language Act compliance
report acknowledges that best practices include use of the
Flesch-Kincaid readability standard.
However, the passages we tested under this standard fall
far short of an eighth-grade reading level, which is generally
recognized to be understandable by 80 percent of the
population. In fact, many passages scored on a late high school
or college level. This is problematic and, as demonstrated in
our written testimony, can be fixed.
Second, improvements to readability alone are insufficient.
A letter can be written at an appropriate reading level but
still be inaccurate or misleading. Take, for example, notices
telling veterans their benefits may be reduced or severed.
Veterans have important but limited rights that can impact
whether they continue receiving their full benefits while they
appeal.
Specifically, if a veteran requests a hearing within 30
days of the notice letter, VA regulation allows benefits to
continue at the current level pending a final determination. If
a veteran misses the deadline they still have up to 60 days to
ask VA to review the decision, but their benefits can be
stopped in the meantime. Unfortunately, VA places the
information regarding the 30-day deadline for a hearing on Page
4 of its notice underneath the heading that says, ``60-day
deadline to respond.''
In the words of one NOVA member, ``We have way too many
clients miss their opportunity to a hearing and basic due
process because the due process notice is positively buried.''
We hope VA will fix this problem immediately.
Another frustrating and increasingly common problem
involves notice letters to veterans who have allegedly
submitted the wrong form. For example, one veteran submitted a
supplemental claim form and VA sent a letter telling the
veteran they needed to file 526EZ. When the 526EZ was
submitted, VA wrote again and told the veteran to submit a
supplemental claim form. Yes, that was the original form the
veteran had already filed.
That veteran was represented by an accredited attorney.
Accredited VSOs, attorneys, and agents are able to look in
Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) to see what is going
on and intervene, but unrepresented veterans are bound to
become frustrated, and some will abandon their claim or appeal.
Those who stay the course and attempt to figure it out are
forced to waste valuable time.
In these situations, VA first has to be sure something
really needs to be fixed. If it does, VA needs to clearly
identify the problem and give simple instructions for solving
it.
Our concerns about letters are not limited to VBA. Our
members frequently review letters sent by the Board of
Veterans' Appeals impacting legal rights but lacking notice of
due process. Furthermore, veterans are forced to contact the
general VA call center number and frequently report Board-
specific questions are not adequately answered.
The Board should use its Clerk of the Board function to
provide clearer written communication and a direct line for
appellants seeking answers.
Finally, VA letters are frequently disorganized. Some
letters contain important information but not necessarily
information critical to the immediate claim. We appreciate VA
is seeking to provide veterans with information about other
benefits they may have earned and recognize it is a balancing
act. VA should put required information up front and provide a
table of contents to other information for better organization.
In conclusion, as VA considers how best to improve letters,
it should include feedback from veterans, survivors, family
members, caregivers, and accredited representatives, as well as
pilot new letters to ensure they are readable, accurate, and
organized.
We thank you again for the opportunity to testify today and
are happy to answer any questions you have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Diane Boyd Rauber Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. The written statement from Ms. Rauber will be
entered into the hearing record.
Mr. Figlioli, you are now recognized for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL FIGLIOLI

Mr. Figlioli. Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas,
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of
the VFW and its auxiliary, thank you for the opportunity to
provide remarks on this important issue.
Having worked in this field since 2008, I know the VA
letters veterans receive required time and attention at nearly
every step of the process. While VA has worked to address this
issue, there is work to be done.
For veterans who have served their country, the transition
to civilian life can be challenging. However, the complexity of
these letters often makes it difficult for the veteran to
comprehend the details and implications.
Before the implementation of the Appeals Modernization Act,
the VFW, and the VSO community advocated for the simplification
of decision notices and supported its directive to improve
notification letters to veterans. Even with our input,
notification letters from the VBA and the BVA continue to be
notorious for complexity and legalese. The average veteran
still needs to consult an accredited representative, attorney
or other trained professional to help decipher them.
To its credit VA recognizes the complexity of these
letters. They have consulted with the VSO community to help
make them more understandable, such as letters related to MST
and Veterans Readiness and Employment (VR&E), reserve drill
pay, and Blue Water Navy benefits.
When easily understood language is used, the time needed to
manage expectations and reduce appeals is lessened. Past
administrations have convened small working groups of
stakeholders to review letters to veterans with positive
results. The VFW encourages VA to consider reestablishing a
similar process for all correspondence in the future.
One of the primary challenges veterans encounter when
reviewing notification letters is intricate language and
terminology used. Legal jargon and medical terms can often be
overwhelming for those without a background in law or medicine.
This leads to confusion and frustration.
Our accredited representatives spend a great deal of time
explaining letters that make sense to the trained eye but not
to anyone else. The notification letter may mention various
forms of compensation and other benefits, but veterans struggle
to connect these pieces of information. This lack of clarity
impedes veterans' ability to make informed decisions.
Dealing with this bureaucratic process can take a toll on a
veteran's mental health. As a result, the emotional impact
further complicates the already challenging task of
comprehending the details of a notification letter.
VA uses letter-generating technology. While there are key
components that decision-makers must contain there is a free
text option. Under proper supervision decision-makers should be
allowed to better opportunity to explain parts of these letters
that are confusing.
The debt management center attended one of our national
training sessions. They brought with them two mockups of
letters that they were developing. They asked every student to
review the letters and offer input as to clarity and content.
The result was a collaboration that made the mystery of VA debt
collection much less stressful for recipients.
Recently, we have represented the claimant from Texas who
filed a claim for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). We
submitted the complete claim package to VA. After acknowledging
receipt, VA generated a letter to the veteran stating it
received the claim but included another blank application. This
led the veteran to believe that there was something wrong with
the submission, so they completed another application. This
claim was dormant for another 135 needless days for a
substantially complete application that was already in VA's
possession.
AMA was a great collaborative process between VSOs and VA;
however, implementation is often where good intentions are
lost. The Board also has its challenges with decision notices.
What is received by appellants is redundant in nature, generic
in scope and missing critical information specific to the
appeal.
VBA notifications often include references to
correspondence already received. The VFW regularly hears from
veterans that the letter contains an additional 20 or more
pages of information which are generic explanations. There are
more if the letter contains a decision.
Aside from the endless paragraphs of VA jargon or VA-
related jargon and Federal Code, the notification still may not
explain its intended purpose. An additional challenge is
effectively communicating due dates. The veteran that is
receiving assistance with an appeal typically has critical
dates explained by their representative. If a veteran feels
overwhelmed when reading one of these letters or fails to read
it completely, the appeal could be closed by VBA due to not
receiving a response. This is a higher probability with an
unrepresented veteran who is likely confused by the entire
process.
There has been a substantial loss of institutional
knowledge as a large part of the workforce retires. The VFW is
pleased to see the influx of younger talent comprised of
veterans who have the same or similar experiences as that of
the claimants. With the implementation of the PACT Act, the VFW
thanks the Undersecretary for allowing quality errors to be
less punitive. These are good learning opportunities, but
errors are still punitive for veterans who are waiting for
their benefits.
The VFW urges VA to continue to seek stakeholder input in
developing letters that will impact benefits. The VFW is
committed to working with VA to develop notifications with a
common-sense approach. VA has shown a willingness to do so but
not consistently. Let us make a continued effort at all levels
that will lead to better outcomes for veterans.
This concludes my testimony, and I am happy to answer any
questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Michael Figlioli Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Luttrell. The written statement from Mr. Figlioli will
be entered into the hearing record. We will now move into
questioning.
Okay. The four lovely people from Veterans Affairs who
provide oversight for this issue are in the room with us. Three
organizations who speak by, with and through our veterans on
this problem are in the room with us, which means we can solve
this problem today if we want to. I will ask if the three of
you have not gotten the phone numbers and emails of the four
people sitting behind you and vice versa, you are absolutely
wrong.
This issue should not be living in front of this Committee
in front of the ranking member myself. This should have been
handled at the lower levels, but here we are. Okay? Either I am
going to put the Committee together and have all of us at a
table figuring this out on a whiteboard or you guys can do it
and he and I can move on with every other single problems that
we have got. I put that out with the utmost respect to
everybody, but I am sure you are listening to what I am saying,
yes? Okay, great.
I can appreciate that the VA has to, and we know that the
150 different letters is a problem set, Ms. Murphy stated that
absolutely. It almost seems like a summation page on the page
number 1, a summation page that says here it is and all the
amplifying information follows. Is that possible? This is one
of those ones where I wish everybody was sitting up there in
front of us, Okay?
I have the list that we pulled out of all of your
testimoneys, two pages worth of probable fixes for this issue,
Okay? I am sure if they have not heard it, I am going to hand
it to them when we walk out of here.
My question to the three of you is I am guessing this is
not the first time. Let me ask you this. Have you sat down with
anybody at the VA to discuss these issues face-to-face or has
it all been over the virtual space and gets lost in the middle
of nowhere?
Mr. Liermann. Our national service department Director and
his staff have addressed this issue with the VBA on multiple
occasions.
Mr. Luttrell. VBA is working on the issue as best they can
from what I understand, right?
Mr. Liermann. Right, but yes to answer your question, we
have addressed this face-to-face with them before, yes.
Mr. Luttrell. Obviously since we are sitting here today it
did not go very far?
Mr. Liermann. Correct. A lot of the issues that we brought
up specifically on the VA form letters and the complications
and the----
Mr. Luttrell. Give me a name of who you are talking to. I
want the person so we can reach out directly to that individual
and say what is happening here?
Mr. Liermann. I would have to ask my service Director on
who he specifically spoke to. I am not sure who it was.
Mr. Luttrell. I will be waiting for that response.
Mr. Liermann. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Ms. Rauber.
Ms. Rauber. Well as you can see from our testimony, I think
it really needs to start with the fact that they are not even
using the readability scale. These letters, like, they are not
using simple tools that they are stating are important and I
think it kind of needs to start there. We have certainly raised
issues with VA in various capacities about letters, labels and
all those situations. We have even had some focus groups, but I
think sometimes there needs to be more follow up on those.
We could have a focus group ready by 5 today for people to
sit down and talk about letters with our members.
Mr. Luttrell. Perfect. I am all about that. Lets get it
done today.
Mr. Figlioli.
Mr. Figlioli. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Yes, we have had
conversations with--from the Under Secretary for Benefits (USB)
on down as benefits and starts. You know, you have heard us all
acknowledge that there are issues with these letters. We
started a small group. We will have conversations. We get some
things done but it needs to be more consistent.
Mr. Luttrell. It sounds like these are just meetings to
have meetings. That happens every day in this place.
Mr. Figlioli. Well, it does but there is a concern that
they have taken it back, but it needs to be a consistent basis.
I said my testimony a past administration tried to stand up a
letter-writing office that was staffed with a couple of people
when we saw these letters and they did address those issues.
Now, with the change of administration that has gone by the
wayside. Happy to work with VA. Happy to continue to have these
discussions. Happy to convene a roundtable if it means that we
can get these letters simplified and out to veterans so that
they understand them.
Mr. Luttrell. I will personally make sure that we are all
in the same room together in a very short period of time.
I am sure I have something more profound to say, but
Ranking Member, I will pass it off to you so I can gather
myself.
Mr. Pappas. Please do. Thanks very much to our panel. I
appreciate your thoughts here today.
Mr. Liermann, you mentioned that when a veteran receives an
incorrect form letter your service officers often find that the
correct form was actually submitted. Why can DAV find that out
but why does VA miss it? Is there something in VBMS that you
can see that they cannot see?
Mr. Liermann. Actually no. We only have read-only access so
we can only see what is in the file. I think there is a
disconnect from maybe an autofill capability to what some of
these forms are getting when they scan the documents in and
advising them that it is wrong, but when we go back and check
we will find that the forms were signed, the correct form was
submitted. How this happens it could be a variety of reasons of
the technology, but I think at times, too, if you look at the
volume, pure volume right now of claims coming in and claims
they are processing that can have an impact when you are very
concerned about hitting your widget production for the day. You
may be looking past the quality assurance to make sure it is
being done correctly.
Mr. Pappas. Okay.
Ms. Rauber, you were talking about the readability scale.
We heard in the last panel they talked about human-centered
design measures that they were taking when crafting these
letters. Are those just two different metrics? Is there a way
that we can really insist on a greater readability for these
letters?
Ms. Rauber. I do not know much about human-centered design
so I do not know how that really fits into the readability
scale. I can tell you that those scales are very easily found
online and are very easy to use. It does not--I mean, we showed
you some examples in our testimony. We took the language; we
changed the language and we brought it down from a college
level to an eighth-grade level and still conveyed the legal
information that needs to be in those letters. It is that part
it really is not that difficult.
Mr. Pappas. Yes. I was going to ask you that question. You
represent accredited attorneys so making something readable at
an eighth-grade level does that sacrifice at all any of the
legal requirements that VA has?
Ms. Rauber. No. They can go hand-in-hand.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Do you think VA has the right, I mean, I
appreciate some of the discussion here about engagement and how
your organizations can be heard as part of this process. I
think, Mr. Figlioli, maybe it was you that mentioned working
groups that had been convened in the past. Do you know when
that was last done?
Mr. Figlioli. I think just last week, sir, Mr. Ranking
Member. There was an MST, although text, working group related
to those letters. Again, you know, keep it up front. Keep it
consistent. If we are going to do it let us do it consistently.
Let us meet consistently. Let us talk about the issues and have
the veteran get those benefits quickly and understand what VA
is conveying to them.
I want to just go back to the question you asked Mr.
Liermann. You asked about incorrect forms. We see it all the
time. A lot of it is communication amongst the VA and the VA
Regional Offices (VARO). We have 52 or 54 regional offices.
Forty-eight of them will understand that there is a new form
and will accept it and process that claim, but there are always
a few others that will send that claim back and say, no, this
is the wrong form. Then just it is always the claim that causes
issues.
It is also communication, training and oversight.
Mr. Pappas. We had heard in the last panel about the
VSignals survey, that gets feedback from veterans about their
claim experience. Do you know anything about that and how would
you rate that opportunity to capture that feedback? Is it
effective? Anyone is welcome to chime in.
Mr. Liermann. I am aware of the program. I personally have
never received the survey so I cannot from my personal
experience say I have seen it and know what it is. From a
perspective of my own, we have been to several meetings. We
have heard it talked about for quite a long time, but I cannot
answer directly from my own experience on what it looks like.
Mr. Figlioli. Yes, thank you, Mr. Ranking Member. We have
met with VA and Outreach, Transition and Economic Development
(OTED) and been briefed on VSignals. It was, like, a positive
thing. I have not seen those surveys either, but we did receive
a briefing from a few months ago talking about they were going
to start this VSignals process. We will be meeting with them to
have a follow-up discussion about VSignals, and again, happy to
meet with them and have that discussion.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Any other thoughts on specifically how we
get--oh, and Ms. Rauber, go ahead.
Ms. Rauber. No. I was just going to say I do not know a lot
about VSignals, but I think when it comes to surveys you really
need to be looking at how many people are responding, are they
getting a high response rate.
Mr. Pappas. Yes. I think they indicated 18 percent for a
response rate. Do you have any thoughts on whether that is
adequate?
Ms. Rauber. I think that is low to be making determinations
based on it.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Any other thoughts on capturing the
veteran feedback specifically, whether or not it is a VSO that
is a conduit for that or directly through one of these surveys?
Mr. Liermann. Representing veterans as long as I have,
there is a level of frustration and anger within them when they
get these letters and do not understand what they need to do.
For example, there was a veteran who filed a claim for an
increase for his diabetes mellitus II. VA sent him a letter
saying you used the wrong form. We previously denied your claim
for diabetes. What the veteran automatically assumed, VA
severed his service-connection from diabetes and took it away.
The anger conveyed to us from him I do not think gets through
to VA or VBA so they truly understand the level of frustration
veterans actually experience because of these letters.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Thank you very much for those comments.
I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. We are asking the VA to restructure the
letter formats, decrease the amount or the number of letters,
but restructure where it is easier for the veteran to
understand.
My question is have any of the three organizations in front
of us today taken a letter from the VA that is unreadable and
rewritten it in a way that I can take it to the VA and go this
works. Here is a sample of what the veteran--they understand it
100 percent because I am asking them to rewrite something that
they are writing so the chances are it is not going to be
exactly how the veterans want to receive it. You touch the
veterans all three of your organizations. Has that been done?
That will make it easier for us to engage with the VA to say
this makes sense.
On our last committee I said we need to find that sweet
spot. Now, I could sit here and argue all day long and say,
like, well, we are trying to fix this, but nobody says well,
this is how you do. If we have a legitimate rock drill that
works that makes it easier on them and it makes it easier on
you all. It makes it easier on us and then we could take a step
forward. Have we done that?
Ms. Rauber. I do not think we have done it officially but
certainly in the testimony we provided we showed how it can be
done and----
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, ma'am, I got it, but it is----
Ms. Rauber. Great. I think we are ready to certainly help
and support and work collaboratively with VA.
Mr. Luttrell. I am not asking to do all 150 letters, but if
we take an end value of 20 and we present that to them, like,
this is the direction we need to move and this is why, I think
they will receive it very well. Can I get a head nod in the
back of the room? There you go. We are good.
Mr. Liermann. Thank you. That is actually a very good idea,
Mr. Chairman. We have not done that with our members but to the
point when you said earlier, we should have one sheet, one page
that would give you a brief explanation. I think that is really
a good place to start because if you just tell the veteran here
is what we decided, here is what you are getting, here is the
date it is going to start it would eliminate a lot of the other
problems on a 20-page letter with forms they do not need to
complete.
Mr. Luttrell. I had to brief the President one time and I
took a 100-page document. The guy said--and you walk in there
you have got one page and three bullet points. If you cannot
get your point across in three bullet points you are done. It
is that easy, so thanks for saying that.
Ranking Member, you have something else?
Okay. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you again for coming up
and sharing these concerns with us. It is very well-received.
Again, the VA is still in the room with us and they are taking
notes. I am watching. Okay?
I think if we take the ideas that we discussed and take the
next--our Committee is going to move to get everybody in the
room together. That is literally--I am tired of meetings to
have meetings. I do not want to show up. This is just a done
deal, right? Okay. Let us really get this together. Let us move
on this like we should, right?
I ask that you do your best to take the letters that we
received and break them out so again the veteran can understand
it and then I can move to the VA and say here we go. Can we do
that? Okay. I will put a timeline on it. Let us get this done
in a month, all right? You can shake your head off. Hey, I am a
forward team guy. We are moving in 30 seconds. That is how we
operate, Okay? That may not work everywhere, but I am putting--
you have got 30 days. Does that work? Outstanding. Nobody is
arguing with me.
Then we can reassess, all right? I know that is just 30
days. Everybody up here works on an annual basis, like, 3 years
from now. That is not how this Committee is going to roll while
I am the chair.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much and this hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:46 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Beth Murphy

Good afternoon, Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
disability compensation claims and appeals letters. With me today are
Denise Kitts, Executive Director, Veterans Experience Office, Brian
Griffin, Deputy Chief Counsel, Office of General Counsel, and Caroline
Fleming, Veterans Law Judge, Office of the Clerk of the Board of
Veterans' Appeals (Board).

Overview of Claims and Appeals Letters

VA administers a wide variety of benefits to Veterans, survivors,
and dependents, to include disability compensation, pension, dependency
and indemnity compensation (DIC), and numerous associated ancillary
benefits. VA handles claims requesting these benefits, as well as
requests for decision review, either supplemental claim or higher-level
review, regarding disagreement with the decisions made on those
benefits. VA frequently communicates with Veterans and claimants via
letter to request or provide information required to complete the
claims process, and to provide notification when claims are decided. VA
has taken a proactive approach to continually review and revise
communications based on stakeholder feedback, to include collaboration
with Veterans Service Organizations (VSO) and use of human-centered
design (HCD). VA seeks to strike a balance between ensuring our letters
are clear and readable for Veterans and claimants and complying with
the various statutory and regulatory requirements regarding what our
communications must include.

Statutory and Regulatory Requirements

Many of the current letter requirements date back to the Veterans
Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA) (P.L. 106-475), enacted on
November 9, 2000, which codified VA's statutory duty-to-notify and
duty-to-assist requirements in 38 U.S.C. Sec. Sec.  5102, 5103, and
5103A. This law:

Redefined VA's requirements to assist claimants with
obtaining evidence needed to substantiate a claim;

Removed the previous requirement that claimants must
submit a well-grounded claim to obtain assistance;

Required notice requirements to inform claimants of
evidence needed to substantiate a claim;

Afforded claimants the opportunity to submit this
evidence within 1 year from the date of notification; and

Required VA to make reasonable efforts to help claimants
substantiate a claim (to include potentially obtaining federal records,
private treatment records, and examinations).

VA implemented these requirements in regulation in 38 C.F.R. Sec.
3.159 and 38 C.F.R. Sec.  3.103.
Since the VCAA was enacted, additional laws have been passed that
impact VA's notice requirements. For example, P.L. 112-154, the
Honoring America's Veterans and Caring for Camp Lejeune Families Act of
2012, streamlined VA's duty-to-notify and duty-to-assist
responsibilities and afforded VA more flexibility in how and when VA
delivers the notice required under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5103. This law
allowed VA to deliver notice electronically or in writing. It also
removed the requirement that such notice must be provided upon receipt
of a complete application, thus allowing the notice to be included on
the application so that claimants have this information before
submitting a claim. VA implemented this change by including a summary
of the evidence required to substantiate various types of claims on
initial claim forms, reducing the need for manual letters containing
this information to be sent and reducing the time needed to gather all
the evidence needed to process the claim.
In addition, P.L. 115-55, the Veterans Appeals Improvement and
Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) significantly revised VA's claims
appeal process, as well as the requirements for the notification letter
once a decision is rendered on a claim. Under AMA, there are eight
items required to be included in decision notification letters (which
are frequently referred to as eight-point decision letters).
Notification letters must include the following: 1) identification of
the issues adjudicated; 2) summary of evidence considered; 3) summary
of applicable laws and regulations; 4) listing of favorable findings;
5) for denied claims, elements not satisfied that led to the denial; 6)
if applicable, criteria required to grant service-connection or the
next higher-level of compensation; 7) information on how to obtain
evidence used in making the decision; and 8) a summary of applicable
review options to seek further review of the decision. VA updated its
regulations, procedural guidance, and letter templates in accordance
with AMA requirements.
In December 2022, several laws related to military sexual trauma
(MST) claims were enacted which required updates to VA letters. Public
Law 117-300, the Dignity for MST Survivors Act, was enacted, which
required VA to audit denial letters for claims related to MST to ensure
use of trauma-informed language in order to prevent Veterans from being
re-traumatized through insensitive language. Public Law 117-303, the
MST Claims Coordination Act, also requires VA to provide MST claimants
with certain information at specified points in the claims process.
The compensation decision notification letter is often lengthy due
to the eight required items which must be included following AMA, the
attached copy of the rating decision, and inclusion of additional
helpful information and guidance for Veterans and claimants regarding
potential next steps, including potential eligibility for ancillary
benefits. For example, in the notification letter, VA may solicit for
unclaimed, chronic disabilities shown by the evidence. In such cases,
VA would also include a copy of the application form, which adds length
to the letter. While not required, the notification letter may also
include content on the following, which provides useful information:
how VA combines rating percentages; how to contact VA by phone, online,
mail, and on social media; how to obtain representation; and
information on the spectrum of Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)
benefits available.
VBA's pension, survivor, and fiduciary programs are similarly bound
by statutory and regulatory requirements governing VBA's duties with
obtaining and relaying evidence needed to substantiate a claim. Some
pension, survivor, and fiduciary letter templates are used to address
more than one benefit or claim type to ensure consistency. For
instance, when a claimant applies for survivor benefits via VA Form
21P-534EZ, Application for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation,
Survivors Pension and Accrued Benefits by a Surviving Spouse of Child,
VBA is required to provide a decision on each of those three benefit
types in the decision notice. As a result, there are situations where
letters require tailoring based on individual circumstances to ensure
consistency in the level of service provided to claimants. This
requires VBA to be cognizant of the need to allow our letter formatting
to have some freedom in templates to ensure adaptability for the
circumstance. This assists in cases where a letter may be communicating
a partial grant, or where the development of specific evidentiary needs
is communicated.
For decision reviews and appeals-related letters, the same
procedures as disability compensation letters are used. Decision review
rights are included with all decision notification letters, which
outline the options under the AMA (supplemental claim, higher-level
review, or appeal). In addition, when the Board grants a legacy or AMA
appeal in full or in part, VBA issues a notification letter
implementing the grant. These letters note whether the Board decision
reflects a ``full'' or ``partial'' grant as to the issue or issues on
appeal. Such letters further outline actions required of the claimant
to subsequently continue the legacy appeal process where applicable, or
to continuously pursue a claim or appeal under the AMA system. In some
cases, the Board will decide all relevant facets of an appeal, such
that VBA's notification letter upon implementation will direct the
claimant to the review rights document sent by the Board.
The Board currently uses approximately 150 different letters to
share information with or seek clarity from Veterans and appellants
throughout the appeals process. All form letters used by the Board have
undergone multiple levels of review. Over one-half of the outgoing
letters from the Board originate in the Office of the Clerk of the
Board (OCOB). The Board has recently instituted a process to regularly
review and update those letters on a yearly basis, or more frequently
if required by changes in statute, caselaw, or regulations. All the
letters originating from the Legal Division of OCOB have undergone a
review for clarity and legal accuracy within the past 6 months.

The Veteran's Voice

Beginning in October 2021, VBA partnered with the Veterans
Experience Office (VEO) to learn about the experience of Veterans who
navigate the disability claims process and VA employees who process
disability claims. The team utilized HCD methods and produced a journey
map, service blueprint, and a VSignals survey specific to the
disability compensation program, which was deployed in April 2023.
These artifacts help build empathy for and understanding of the Veteran
experience. The survey is being used to institute Veteran-centered
measurement regarding the disability claims process to inform future
process and program improvement opportunities.
On April 28, 2023, VBA launched the Disability Compensation
VSignals survey to allow the program office to better understand the
voice of the Veteran with respect to the disability claims experience
by enabling Veterans to provide input on key elements of the process.
Veterans are able to provide input on key dimensions such as VA's
communication to Veterans about claims eligibility standards,
requirements and reasons or rationale for the initial rating, ease and
effectiveness in scheduling the compensation medical examination,
ability to keep track of current claims status, extent to which claims
decisions are received in a timely manner, understanding Veteran
options to challenge initial disability ratings, and gauging whether
Veterans trust VA to make fair and accurate decisions on disability
compensation claims. This input is actively being reviewed and used by
VBA for quality and systems improvement of the disability claims
process. Utilizing existing insights from the Journey Map research, HCD
methodology, as well as other data assets, and a participatory design
approach, VBA is working to develop solutions to improve the Veteran
experience, which include enhancements to notification letters to
revise the content aesthetics, provide additional resources, and
deliver other improvements.

Language Change Control Board

VBA has instituted a governance process for review and updating of
compensation and pension-related letters. Since 2013, VBA has utilized
a Language Change Control Board (LCCB) to review and approve all
disability compensation and pension-related language change requests
for letters, glossary texts, fragments, or any other external-facing
communications. The LCCB is responsible for ensuring that identified
language changes are tracked, reviewed for accuracy, and sent to
implementation in a timely manner. The LCCB is made up of members from
various staffs across multiple VBA business lines. Requests are
generated by statutes, regulation, policy, or procedure being
implemented, or when deficiencies within our products are identified by
internal or external stakeholders. All letter changes must be concurred
upon by a majority of LCCB members. Most letter updates require a
system enhancement and prioritization into upcoming Veterans Benefits
Management System (VBMS) releases. Following letter concurrence, LCCB
requests are submitted for prioritization and implementation in VBMS
and will follow the change until it is implemented in VBMS. From Fiscal
Year (FY) 2022 through February 2024, the LCCB has completed 57
disability compensation and pension-related language change requests.
As an example, a recent LCCB task involved a request to include a
paragraph in all decision notification letters under the ``What Should
You Do If You Disagree With Our Decision'' heading to explain the
difference between submitting a claim for increase and a supplemental
claim, which was implemented in VBMS on July 30, 2023.

Additional Letter Improvement Efforts

Following passage of the Dignity for MST Survivors Act in December
2022, VA formed a collaborative workgroup including members from
various VBA offices and the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) to
review MST-related letter language to ensure it is trauma-informed.
Although the law only required VA to audit the MST denial letter
language, VA took a more holistic approach and reviewed MST claim-
related grant letters, development letters, and associated text used in
rating decisions. In addition to carefully evaluating and re-phrasing
the language to be trauma-informed, a thorough review was completed for
clarity and flow to improve the Veteran's perception of the notices.
Throughout this process, VA held several meetings with VSOs, seeking
their input and providing an opportunity for them to provide feedback.
On June 30, 2023, VBA claims processors were given temporary guidance
on how to manually modify the decision notification letter when any
condition claimed due to MST was denied. On February 11, 2024, VBMS was
updated to include the required MST language into applicable automated
decision letters.
Additionally, from October to December 2023, VBA also collaborated
with VEO to conduct HCD co-design workshops to redesign Character of
Discharge letters sent to former Service members with an Other Than
Honorable discharge. The objective was to enhance clarity,
accessibility, and usefulness of these letters for Veterans seeking to
understand their eligibility for benefits from VA. VA is currently
working to implement the findings.

Technology

VBA claims processors operate in a paperless environment and
utilize VBMS to process claims for compensation and pension. There are
more than 300 different letter templates available for claims
processors to use-the number of unique letters grows exponentially when
factoring in all the various combinations of decision points and
subject matter included in the templates. While some of the information
in the letters is automatically generated by system inputs made during
the decision-making process, claims processors are required to input
specific data fields or select from standardized language to input into
the letters and have the option to add free text to the letters.
In Fiscal Year 2022, VA implemented functionality to enable VBA
business lines to edit existing letter templates without the need for
information technology resources and inclusion in a VBMS release,
allowing for quicker implementation.

Conclusion

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas, this concludes my
testimony. My colleagues and I are happy to respond to any questions
you or the Subcommittee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Shane Liermann

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking Member Pappas and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting DAV (Disabled American Veterans) to be a
witness at your hearing titled, ``Lost in Translation: How VA's
Disability Claims and Appeals Letters Should be Simplified.''
DAV is a congressionally chartered and Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) accredited veterans service organization. We provide
meaningful claims support free of charge to more than 1 million
veterans, family members, caregivers and survivors.
To fulfill our service mission, DAV directly employs a corps of
benefits advisors, national service officers (NSOs), all of whom are
themselves wartime service-connected disabled veterans, at every VA
regional office (VARO) as well as other VA facilities throughout the
Nation, including the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board). During 2023,
DAV national and transition service officers interviewed over 300,000
veterans and their families, and filed more than 200,000 new claims for
over 600,000 specific injuries and/or illnesses. Thanks to the great
work of our service officers, those represented by DAV obtained more
than $28 billion in earned benefits in 2023.
Based on our decades of direct experience, we are pleased to
provide our insight, concerns, and recommendations about VA letters and
notices to veterans and their families. Our testimony will address how
VA letters got to their current state by providing a brief history of
the VA's duty to assist, Standardize Forms and the Appeals
Modernization Act, as well as addressing the VA's letters to claimants
with our recent survey and VA letters filled with errors compounding
the confusion.

Brief History of VA's Duty to Assist, Standardized Forms and the AMA

To truly understand the changes and impacts to VA's duty to assist,
duty to notify and required VA forms, appeals language and VA's
letters, we will briefly address the significant changes over the past
two decades that have caused VA letters and notices to become more
complicated and legalistic.

Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000

In 2000, the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA) was
enacted into law, creating a landmark change in the VA's duties to
notify and assist claimants for VA benefits. The enacted version of the
VCAA adopted notice and assistance provisions from both the House and
Senate bills reads as follows:

Sec.  5103. Notice to claimants of required information and
evidence
(a) REQUIRED INFORMATION AND EVIDENCE.--Upon receipt of a
complete or substantially complete application, the Secretary
shall notify the claimant and the claimant's representative, if
any, of any information, and any medical or lay evidence, not
previously provided to the Secretary that is necessary to
substantiate the claim. As part of that notice, the Secretary
shall indicate which portion of that information and evidence,
if any, is to be provided by the claimant and which portion, if
any, the Secretary, in accordance with section 5103A of this
title and any other applicable provisions of law, will attempt
to obtain on behalf of the claimant.

(b) TIME LIMITATION.--(1) In the case of information or
evidence that the claimant is notified under subsection (a) is
to be provided by the claimant, if such information or evidence
is not received by the Secretary within 1 year from the date of
such notification, no benefit may be paid or furnished by
reason of the claimant's application. (2) This subsection shall
not apply to any application or claim for Government life
insurance benefits.

Sec.  5103A. Duty to assist claimants
(a) DUTY TO ASSIST.--(1) The Secretary shall make reasonable
efforts to assist a claimant in obtaining evidence necessary to
substantiate the claimant's claim for a benefit under a law
administered by the Secretary. (2) The Secretary is not
required to provide assistance to a claimant under this section
if no reasonable possibility exists that such assistance would
aid in substantiating the claim. (3) The Secretary may defer
providing assistance under this section pending the submission
by the claimant of essential information missing from the
claimant's application.

(b) ASSISTANCE IN OBTAINING RECORDS.--(1) As part of the
assistance provided under subsection (a), the Secretary shall
make reasonable efforts to obtain relevant records (including
private records) that the claimant adequately identifies to the
Secretary and authorizes the Secretary to obtain. (2) Whenever
the Secretary, after making such reasonable efforts, is unable
to obtain all of the relevant records sought, the Secretary
shall notify the claimant that the Secretary is unable to
obtain records with respect to the claim.

In turn, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims
(CAVC) and United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
(Federal Circuit) issued several significant decisions interpreting the
VCAA's obligations upon VA and creating significant changes in VA's
claims adjudication process.
Pursuant to statutory edict, the Secretary of VA was tasked with
prescribing rules and regulations to carry out the requirements of the
VCAA. A notice of proposed rulemaking was published on April 4, 2001
and a final rule was published on August 29, 2001.The final regulations
were made effective retroactively from November 9, 2000.They were soon
subject to legal challenge in Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) v.
Secretary of Veterans Affairs. In Disabled American Veterans (DAV) v.
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the appellants challenged not only VA's
regulations, but also their retroactive effect.
Along with addressing the scope of the VCAA and the validity of the
regulations enacted to implement it, the courts were to be called upon
to clarify such topics as the timing and content of appropriate VCAA
notice. In Pelegrini v. Principi, the CAVC addressed the issue of the
timing of proper VCAA notice. The Federal Circuit more fully addressed
the timing of the VCAA in Mayfield v. Nicholson, in which it made clear
that proper notice must, if possible, be provided prior to initial
consideration of the claim by VA, and the duty to notify was not
satisfied by ``various post-decisional communications from which a
claimant might have been able to infer what evidence the VA found
lacking in the claimant's presentation.
As in Pelegrini, the CAVC in Dingess held that notice concerning
all five elements of a service connection claim ``must precede any
initial adjudication on them.'' Thereafter, upon the award of service
connection, with an accompanying initial disability rating and
effective date, 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5103(a) no longer applies, at it has
served its purpose and the claim has already been substantiated.
Thereafter, 38 U.S.C. Sec. Sec.  5103A and 7105(d) were created to make
certain the claimant was provided assistance throughout the claims
process. Next, in Kent v. Nicholson, the CAVC considered VCAA notice
requirements in the context of an application to reopen a claim
pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5108.
In Hupp v. Nicholson, the CAVC addressed VA's 38 U.S.C. Sec.
5103(a) notice obligation in the context of a claim for DIC benefits
under Sec.  1310. The CAVC next addressed, in Vazquez-Flores v. Peake
(Vazquez I), the question of 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5103(a) notice in claims
for increased ratings.

Veterans' Benefit Improvement Act of 2008

Congress acted to more explicitly clarify the notice requirements
of 38 U.S.C. Sec.  5103(a), amending it effective October 10, 2008 to
require the Secretary to promulgate regulations, which differentiated
notice to claimants depending on the type of claim, benefit, or service
sought.
In the Committee Report associated with the Veterans' Notice
Clarification Act of 2008, Congress took direct aim at both the CAVC
and VA, citing the CAVC's decisions in Dingess and Vazquez I and VA's
interpretation of Vazquez I, noting these as instances where the intent
of Congress was thwarted and resulted in negative consequences for the
claimant. Congress went to multiple ROs and examined the notice letters
provided to various claimants. After this review, Congress noted:

Since the enactment of the VCAA, various actions, including
decisions of the [CAVC] and VA's responses to some of those
decisions, have led to notices that are not meeting the goal of
providing claimants with sufficient, clear information on which
they can then act. Instead of simple, straightforward notices
that can be easily read and understood by claimants, VA is now
routinely providing long, frequently convoluted, overly
legalistic notices that do not meet the objective of the VCAA.

Standard Claims and Appeals Forms Regulation

Effective March 24, 2015, VA amended its adjudication regulations.
The major provisions included:

VA standardized the claims and appeals processes through
the use of specific mandatory forms prescribed by the Secretary,
regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises.
These amendments applied to all benefits within the scope of 38 CFR
part 3, namely pension, compensation, dependency and indemnity
compensation, and monetary burial benefits.

Additionally, it eliminated the provisions of 38 CFR
3.157, which allowed various documents other than claims forms to
constitute claims; specifically, VA reports of hospitalization or
examination and other medical records that could be regarded as
informal claims for increase or to reopen a previously denied claim.

This rule implemented a procedure to replace the non-
standard informal claim process in 38 CFR 3.155 by employing a standard
form on which a claimant or his or her representative can file an
``intent to file'' a claim for benefits.

Finally, this rule provided that VA will accept an
expression of dissatisfaction or disagreement with an adjudicative
determination by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) as a Notice
of Disagreement (NOD) only if it is submitted on a standardized form
provided by VA for the purpose of appealing the decision.

Veteran Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017

The Veteran Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017
became law on August 23, 2017 (Pub L. 115-55). It is also known as the
Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Starting in 2015, DAV collaborated
with the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), the Board, and other
stakeholders to improve and streamline the appeals process. The AMA, a
veteran-centric appeals process, was the result of those combined
efforts and was implemented in February 2019.
AMA created three options, referred to as lanes, for claimants
dissatisfied with the initial decisions on their claim. Claimants may
seek a higher-level review of the decision based on the same evidence
presented to the initial claims processors; they may file a
supplemental claim that includes the opportunity to submit additional
evidence; or they may appeal directly to the Board.
Claimants appealing to the Board may elect one of three appeal
options: 1) a direct review of the evidence that the AOJ considered; 2)
an opportunity to submit additional evidence without a hearing; or 3)
an opportunity to have a hearing before a veterans' law judge (VLJ),
which includes the opportunity to submit additional evidence.
Additionally, the AMA included seven new notice items that must be
implemented in VA rating decisions and notices to veterans. This
includes:

1) Identification of the issues adjudicated.

2) A summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary.

3) A summary of the applicable laws and regulations.

4) Identification of findings favorable to the claimant.

5) In the case of a denial, identification of elements not
satisfied leading to VA's denial.

6) An explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in
making the decision.

7) If applicable, identification of the criteria that must be
satisfied to grant service connection or the next higher level
of compensation.

The VCAA changed the VA claims and appeals process in drastic ways;
however, it is extremely beneficial to veterans and their families as
it enforces VA's duty to assist and duty to notify. As we demonstrated,
between the CAVC, the Federal Circuit and the Veterans Benefits
Improvement Act of 2008, the demands on the VA to explain these via
letters with legal language adds complications and creates confusion
with veterans. Couple this with the VA's changes to Standard Claims and
Appeals forms in 2015 and the AMA in 2019, VA letters now have a
complex legal style which mostly cause frustration with claimants
trying to comply with VA to ensure they receive their earned benefits.

VBA Letters

Per the VCAA, VA is required to advise and notify veterans of
receipt of their claim, also known as the duty to assist letter, it
also provides additional information on VA's development of the
benefits sought. Additionally, VBA sends letters to veterans to notify
them on wrong forms or incomplete applications, and decision letters in
reference to their claims.

Duty to Assist Letters

The duty to assist letter, as required by the VCAA, provides
claimants with acknowledgement that the claim was received. VA is
required to advise on the evidence they have received or requested and
advise the veteran of any additional evidence needed. Additionally, VA
advises on what is referred to as the ``38 U.S.C. 5103 response.'' This
requires claimants to respond with a form stating they have enclosed
additional evidence or have no additional evidence. They can also
select that they have additional evidence to submit and request VA to
wait 30 days before deciding the claim.
Included with this testimony is Exhibit A, which is a redacted duty
to assist letter from March 11, 2024. This letter with attachments is
17 pages, which includes the 38 U.S.C. 5103 Notice and Response, A
Statement in Support of Claim and three different releases for
information. However, you will notice the VA acknowledges a claim was
received but does not list the conditions claimed. Additionally, it
does not indicate VA requested any of the veteran's service records.

VBA Incorrect Form Letters

As required by the Standard Claims and Appeals Forms Regulation,
all claims must be on the appropriate VA form. If the veteran uses the
wrong form, VA sends a letter to acknowledge they received a claim but
it was on the wrong form. However, VA is no longer required to provide
the correct form to the veteran.
Included with this testimony is Exhibit B, which is a redacted VA
incorrect form letter dated March 6, 2024. VA notes they received the
claim for a mental health condition that they previously denied and
that the veteran submitted the claim on the wrong form. The letter does
not indicate the correct form, instead, they list four different forms
the veteran could use and provide the link to VA.gov to find the form.
The correct form in this case is VA Form 20-0995, a Supplemental Claim;
however, the veteran would not know which form to complete and send to
the VA. The letter notes that VA is not able to process the request and
will establish the claim when they receive the correct form.

VBA Decision Letters

When the VA decides a claim, they are legally required to notify
the veteran of the decision as well as comply with the provisions of
the VCAA and the AMA in explaining the three ways to reply to a
decision as well as the required additional seven items we noted above.
Included with this testimony is Exhibit C, which is a redacted VA
decision letter dated March 14, 2024. The notification letter is ten
pages with additional explanations. The actual VA decision is 9 pages
with another page at the end advising the veteran on fraud protection.
This 20-page notification letter is the product of the VCAA and the
AMA, which can be difficult for a veteran to navigate and understand
the decision.

DAV's Benefits Advocates Survey on VA Letters

Recently, DAV surveyed our national service officers, VA-accredited
benefits advocates, who provide veterans and their families with free
representation at 63 different locations across the country and Puerto
Rico. The survey was focused on the most common complaints and
frustrations from claimants on the three VA letters noted above.
Approximately 41 percent of our offices stated they get the most
veteran inquiries and complaints on VA incorrect form letters. 38
percent of offices stated the duty to assist letters received the most
inquiries and complaints and 19 percent stated they get the most
inquiries and complaints on decision letters.
The consistent complaint from veterans about the duty to assist
letters is that they are too long, they don't understand much of the
language used, and they are not clear what actions they need to take or
why they are being sent so many additional forms. One veteran provided
the following comments:

The letter is headed ``Important--reply needed within 30
days,'' and it says ``We need additional evidence from you.''
I'm not entirely clear from the letter's wording, but it sounds
like they are encouraging me to submit ``buddy letters'' in
support of my claim, and giving me a 30 day window to do so.
From our last conversation, it didn't sound as if ``buddy
letters'' were all that necessary. Can you please advise me as
to what I should do in response to this letter?

In reference to wrong or incomplete forms letters, the common
complaint is that veterans are being advised that they either submitted
the wrong form or the form was not complete. Our service officers
review the electronic claims folders and discover in most cases, the
correct form was submitted and they did indeed sign the form. However,
one of our offices noted:

The veteran was advised by VA that there was a missing page to
the 21-526ez application for benefits. The veteran responded
with the missing page from the application. Then VA canceled
the claim, as they indicated the veteran only provided one page
of the 21-526ez and submitted an incomplete claim.

The survey showed that a major complaint on VA decision letters is
they are too long and contain information that may not apply directly
to them or their recent decision. Another key point about veterans'
confusion with VA decision letters is due to the favorable findings'
requirement. Per the AMA, VA must provide favorable findings on facts
or information provided; however, this does not result in a grant of
the benefits sought, as other information is missing which results in
the denial. One of our offices provided:

What frustrates veterans the most is reading the favorable
findings and believing the favorable findings means they should
have been granted the benefit sought. The reason for the denial
is buried in the written narrative.

Additionally, we asked for specific comments and complaints about
VA letters. Below are some of those comments directly from our benefits
advocates:

An example of frustration is that veterans don't understand the
letter because it's not clear or explained in layman terms.

Many veterans call frustrated because they feel that VA is
requesting documents that they have already submitted.

Earlier today a veteran came in with his decision letter and asked
why does VA send all this information as it is confusing to understand
what was granted or denied.

VA letters and notifications not only comply with law, but inform
claimants on specific information and fulfill VA's duty to assist and
notify. However, it is evident that these letters speak a language that
veterans cannot always translate. It becomes even more stressful when
the VA letters are filled with errors.

Compounding the Confusion

As our survey notes, claimants are being confused and frustrated by
VA letters and it is greatly compounded when these letters are filled
with inaccurate information and errors. One of our supervisors noted
they are finding errors in approximately 30 percent of all VA letters
they review. Attached to this testimony are redacted VA letters that
show a few of the errors found in VA letters that were sent to
claimants.

Exhibit D

Included with this testimony is a redacted VA letter, noted as
Exhibit D, dated March 7, 2024. VA indicates they received a claim
``for left lower extrem; right lower extremely; restless les syndom;
res. of pratectomy--; incresse : lumbar that we previously denied. VA
regulations require you to file this request on the proper form.''
It is obvious that this letter is filled with spelling errors. Our
service officer reviewed this claim and determined the veteran
submitted the correct form, 21-526ez, for the left lower extremity and
right lower extremity. We do note that the veteran did not ever file a
claim for restless leg syndrome, residuals of a prosectomy or a lumbar
spine condition. However, VA indicates the veteran did claim those
conditions, notes two different forms he could use and that it is
waiting for the correct form to be sent before they process the claims.
Since the veteran never filed for these three conditions, he will not
be submitting the ''correct form.''

Exhibit E

Included with this testimony is a redacted VA letter, noted as
Exhibit E, dated January 23, 2024. The VA notifies the veteran they
received his claim for a back condition and left Achilles tendon
injury. Further, they indicate the veteran must specify what disability
he is claiming, although they acknowledge he did claim two specific
conditions.
This letter caused confusion with the veteran and our service
officer spoke to the VA development clerk who wrote the letter. The VA
employee agreed he did not need to include the left Achilles tendon
issue but then questioned the service officer about the back condition.
DAV reminded the VA employee that it is part of their duty to assist
with development and the VA employee agreed and rescinded the letter.

Exhibit F

Included with this testimony is a redacted VA letter, noted as
Exhibit F, dated March 6, 2024. VA notifies the veteran they have
received his claim for increase for his back condition and his private
medical examination.
VA wrote, ``The examiner provided a new diagnosis. We need to
clarify if the new disability is a progression of your service
connected disability received, on January 9, 2024. We are returning
this application to you because it was incomplete.'' The letter directs
the veteran to contact his physician and ask her to provide a reply.
Any claim for increase for an existing condition automatically
requires VA to provide a new medical examination and to develop the
claim. This letter tells the veteran to contact his private examiner
and VA returns this as an incomplete claim. Our service officer
reviewed the claim and discovered the veteran is claiming an increase
for the service-connected fractures of L2, L3, and L4 vertebrae. The
veteran submitted a Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) completed
by his private physician. VA failed to comply with their duty to
assist, failed by advising the veteran to get his private doctor to
explain, and they failed by rejecting this as a complete claim, which
was on the proper form and provided all required information.

Exhibit G

Included with this testimony is a redacted VA letter, noted as
Exhibit G, dated March 7, 2024. VA indicates they received a claim for
``hypokalemia; chondromalacia athritk; bilateral fearing loss;
scarssternum bilaterm lees; conjunctivitis; sinusitis; hypertension
that we previously denied. VA regulations require you to file this
request on the proper form.''
The letter is filled with spelling errors. Our service officer
reviewed this claim and determined the veteran submitted the correct
form, 21-526ez, for increased evaluations for the already service-
connected sinusitis and hypertension. However, VA indicates the veteran
did not submit the correct form.

Recommendations

The VCAA positively changed the VA claims process by ensuring that
the VA's duty to assist and duty to notify are provided to all
claimants. However, the many precedent CAVC decisions along with the
Veterans Benefits Improvement Act of 2008, and the additional
requirements imposed by the VA's changes to Standard Claims and Appeals
forms in 2015 and the AMA in 2019, VA letters and notices to veterans
and their families have become bogged down with legal language.
Our attached exhibits provide examples of the VA's duty to assist
letter, VA's wrong or incomplete form letter and VA decision letters.
After their review, it is clear that letters are too long, too complex
and frustrate veterans attempting to access their earned benefits. This
is displayed by the additional information provided by our survey of
DAV benefits advocates and comments directly from them and the veterans
we represent.
DAV recommends VBA take a new look at their letters by
concentrating on the language for the reader and not the legal
requirements. We suggest the use of focus groups populated with
veterans and veterans service organizations to assist in developing
language that is understood and clearly conveys information and the
intent of the letter.
As our survey indicated, the major complaint from veterans was the
incorrect VA form letters. We understand the reason for VA's regulation
on standardized forms was to streamline the claims process for the use
of information technology to include scanning and populating the
electronic claims folder and establishing claims. However, we have
clearly demonstrated that many of these letters for correct forms are
confusing and can have a negative impact on effective dates.
DAV believes there should never be a wrong door at VA and we
recommend that VA reconsider the standardized forms requirement or take
an approach that will either accept the wrong form as an Intent to File
or if all of the needed information is provided VA should process and
decide the claim. We remind VA of Omar Bradley's quote while serving as
the Administrator of the Veterans Administration, ``We are dealing with
[veterans], not procedures; with their problems, not ours.''
In addressing the numerous errors in letters to veterans we
provided, we noted many were errors made by VA employees and some
appear to be auto-filled from other VA applications. We recommend VA to
either create and/or improve the quality assurance of all letters
before they are being released. These errors are compounding the
inability to understand what is being relayed and what is being
requested.
Mr. Chairman, in closing, VA letters should not be structured in a
way that induces confusion, anxiety and frustration from veterans. VA
should utilize resources in a way that actually aids veterans and their
families in substantiating their VA claims, which may be done with
clearly worded, concise notice letters that are relevant to the
submitted claim. VA must do better. This concludes my testimony.
______

Prepared Statement of Diane Boyd Rauber
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Prepared Statement of Michael Figlioli

Chairman Luttrell, Ranking member Pappas, and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars of the United States (VFW) and its Auxiliary, thank you for the
opportunity to provide our remarks on this important issue.
The VFW thanks the Chairman and subcommittee for holding this
hearing regarding notification letters from the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA). Since working in this field since 2008, I can confirm
that the letters veterans receive from VA continue to require time and
attention at nearly every step of the process. While VA has worked to
address this issue and some improvements have been made, much remains
to be done.
For veterans who have served their country with honor and
sacrifice, the transition to civilian life can be challenging,
especially when dealing with the intricacies of the VA disability
system. The cornerstone of this system is the VA disability
notification letter, which is a document intended to communicate
crucial information about a veteran's disability rating and associated
benefits. However, the complexity of these letters often makes it
difficult for the veteran to comprehend the disability status details
and implications.
Even before the implementation of Public Law 115-55, commonly
referred to as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the VFW and the
Veterans Service Organizations (VSO) community advocated for the
simplification of decision notices from VA. We supported the
implementation of AMA and its directive to improve notification letters
to veterans on seven specific pieces of information in each letter.
Each must include the issues adjudicated; a summary of the evidence
considered; applicable laws related to the claim; any review options;
how to obtain the evidence used in making the decision; the criteria to
grant service connection or the next higher level of service
connection; and, if the claim was denied, the elements needed to grant
the claim and a listing of favorable findings.
Even with our input, VA notification letters from the Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA) or the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA)
continue to be notorious for their complexity and legalese. The average
veteran still needs to consult an accredited representative, attorney,
or other trained individual to help decipher them.
To its credit, VA does understand the complexity of these letters
and the angst they can induce, and has consulted with the VSO community
to help make them more understandable. We have been asked to
participate in focus groups on letters related to military sexual
trauma, Veteran Readiness and Employment, Reserve Drill Pay, and Blue
Water Navy benefits, among others. When common and easily
comprehensible language is used, the VFW found that this resulted in
decreased time needed to manage expectations and a reduction in
potential appeals.
Past administrations have also had concerns about the difficulty
veterans encounter comprehending letters from VA. A previous VBA Under
Secretary convened a small working group of stakeholders to review and
mark up letters to veterans. This was well received and resulted in a
handful of VA letters being revamped with positive results. The VFW
encourages VA to consider re-establishing that office or developing a
similar process for all correspondence in the future regardless of who
is in leadership.

Veterans Benefits Administration

One of the primary challenges veterans encounter when reviewing
their disability notification letters is the intricate language and
terminology used. Legal jargon and medical terms can be overwhelming,
especially for those without a background in law or medicine. This
complexity often leads to confusion and frustration, hindering veterans
from grasping the full scope of their benefits and entitlements.
Far too often, accredited representatives spend a great deal of
time explaining letters that make sense to the trained eye, but not to
anyone else. The VA disability system involves a multitude of
regulations, policies, and procedures. Unfortunately, these guidelines
can be subject to interpretation, resulting in inconsistencies in
notification letters. Veterans often find it challenging to reconcile
the information presented with their own experiences, leading to
uncertainty about the accuracy of the provided details.
Understanding the full spectrum of benefits associated with a
disability rating is another hurdle for veterans. The notification
letter may mention various forms of compensation, health care coverage,
and vocational rehabilitation, but veterans may struggle to connect
these pieces of information and effectively access the services to
which they are entitled. This lack of clarity can impede veterans'
ability to make informed decisions about their health care and overall
well-being.
Dealing with disabilities and the associated bureaucratic processes
can take a toll on veterans' mental health. The stress of navigating
complex paperwork and the fear of being misunderstood or overlooked can
contribute to anxiety and depression. As a result, the emotional impact
further complicates the already challenging task of comprehending the
intricate details of a disability notification letter.
Many of the concerns that we have to address are common in nature.
VA relies heavily on the use of letter-generating technology. This does
make it easier for a reviewers to click a box or cut and paste from a
previous decision to create boilerplate letters. While there are key
components that decision letters must contain, certain circumstances
allow a free text option. Under proper supervision, decision-makers
should be allowed better opportunity to explain parts of these letters
that are known sticking points.
A few years ago, the Debt Management Center (DMC) attended one of
our national training sessions. They brought with them two poster
mockups of letters they were developing to send to veterans. Aside from
speaking to the class about DMC and its initiatives, they asked every
student to review the posters and offer input as to ease of
understanding, clarity, and content. The end result was a beneficial
collaboration that made the mystery of VA debt collection much less
stressful for recipients.
Recently, we represented a claimant from Texas who filed a claim
for post-traumatic stress disorder, and other issues. Our
representative submitted a complete claim package to VA. It contained
every element required to obtain a grant. VA simply needed to establish
the claim, review it, and send it for adjudication. After acknowledging
receipt and generating a letter to the veteran stating it had the
claim, VA included a blank application for benefits (that had actually
already been completed in full). This led the veteran to believe there
was something wrong with the submission, so the veteran completed
another application. This claim was dormant for an extra 135 needless
days for a substantially complete application that was already in VA's
possession.
VSOs have expressed concern about the standardization of forms. We
have seen hundreds of examples where VA will update a required form.
For many VSOs that use claims management systems, these changes need to
be updated in their platforms. The Office of Field Operations will
inform all VA Regional Offices that there is an ``end date'' to using
the former version. Countless veterans have received notification
letters from VA that it received the claim but cannot take action
because the wrong form was used. Veteran after veteran has had this
happen because there is a lack of communication and training. This
often leaves the organization that assisted with the submission to
explain to the veteran that the error is not on the part of the
accredited representative but is with the VA system, and to ignore the
letter.
Our representatives also face the challenge of what is uploaded
into the Veterans Benefits Management System by VA. Labeling
conventions are completely inconsistent. What one claims assistant
labels a piece of evidence as ``general correspondence'' is then in
turn labeled as ``medical evidence'' by another. This has caused delays
because VA will send the veteran another development letter asking for
that same specific evidence which was already submitted. Our field
staff spends a great deal of time trying to filter through claims files
so they can try to find the submission or any related VA
correspondence.
For denied claims, the VFW maintains that it would be more
beneficial to the claimant if the items that are missing were better
identified within the notification letter rather than having to search
through paragraph after paragraph of Federal code. This would enable
quicker filing of a potential supplemental claim or higher-level review
and get benefits to the claimant sooner.

Board of Veterans' Appeals

The AMA was the most collaborative process I have ever seen between
VSOs and VA. However, implementation often is where good intentions do
not follow. Like VBA, the Board also has its challenges with decision
notices and explanations that can be too long and unclear. Letters
received by appellants are redundant in nature, generic in scope, and
missing critical information specific to the appeal. Veterans prefer to
be told the status of their appeals and what, if any, options they may
have in clear, simple language. Open-ended communication creates
confusion and speculation.
Sending repeated update letters can be frustrating and misleading
for veterans. The appellant believes that the case is being reviewed
when in actuality it is in a queue for its docket date. The VFW
believes that these notifications should better inform the appellant as
to the current status and progression of the appeal. If any additional
evidence is needed, these letters should clearly address that so when
the appeal is before a Veterans Law Judge it has the best chance of
being decided as quickly as possible.
BVA notification letters will repeatedly include references to
correspondence already received. The VFW regularly hears from veterans
we represent that the letter contains an additional 20 or more pages of
information which are just explanations. There is even more if the
letter contains a decision. Aside from the endless paragraphs of VA-
related jargon and Federal code, the notification still might not
explain exactly why it was sent and what is needed.
An additional challenge is effectively communicating due dates. The
veteran that is receiving assistance with an appeal typically has any
critical dates explained by the accredited representative. If a veteran
feels overwhelmed and irritated when reading one of these letters, and
does not read it completely, the appeal may be dropped due to BVA not
receiving a response. This is a higher probability with an
unrepresented veteran who is likely confused by the entire process. VA
should consider putting the due date of any correspondence at the
beginning of the letter so the risk of the appeal being closed out is
less of a possibility.

Conclusion

Nearly every time I have sat before Congress or submitted
testimony, I have mentioned training and quality assurance. There has
been substantial loss of institutional knowledge as a large part of the
VA workforce ages out of the system. The VFW is pleased to see the
influx of younger talent, mostly comprised of veterans who have the
same or similar experiences as that of the claimant, and who can apply
logic and common sense to reviewing a case. With the implementation of
the PACT Act, the VFW thanks the Under Secretary for allowing quality
errors to be less punitive in an employee's development. These are good
learning opportunities for some Veterans Service Representatives/Rating
Veterans Service Representatives, but errors are still punitive to
veterans who are waiting for benefits to improve their quality of life.
Simplifying letters in terms that the average veteran can understand
would have immediate and considerable impact on adjudicating claims.
The VFW urges VA to continue to reach out and seek stakeholder
input in developing letters or any other correspondence that may be
sent to a veteran that will impact benefits. It has been stated
countless times that we are partners in this process. The VFW is always
willing to lend our assistance in making the claims process more
seamless and accessible for all veterans, family members, and
survivors. We are committed to working with VA across all departments
and business lines to continue to develop notifications with a
commonsense approach. VA has shown a willingness to do so as well, but
not consistently. Let us make this a continued effort at all levels
that will lead to better outcomes for veterans.
We thank you for the opportunity to appear before this subcommittee
today, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, the VFW
has not received any federal grants in Fiscal Year 2024, nor has it
received any federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.

The VFW has not received payments or contracts from any foreign
governments in the current year or preceding two calendar years.

Statements for the Record

----------

Exhibits Submitted by Disabled American Veterans (DAV)

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Exhibits Submitted by National Organization of Veterans' Advocates,
Inc. (NOVA)
