- WEATHERING THE STORM: THE ROLE OF PRIVATE TECH IN THE SOLARWINDS BREACH AND ONGOING CAMPAIGN

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WEATHERING THE STORM:
THE ROLE OF PRIVATE TECH
IN THE SOLARWINDS BREACH
AND ONGOING CAMPAIGN

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

[Serial No. 117-5]

and the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

[Serial No. 117-4]

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 26, 2021

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-755 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Vacancy

David Rapallo, Staff Director
Peter Kenny, Chief Investigative Counsel
Elisa LaNier, Chief Clerk

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director

Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York Ranking
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Minority Member
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Michael T. McCaul, Texas
J. Luis Correa, California           Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Michael Guest, Mississippi
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Al Green, Texas                      Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Eric Swalwell, California            Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    Peter Meijer, Michigan
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Kat Cammack, Florida
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            August Pfluger, Texas
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey           Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Ritchie Torres, New York
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Clerk

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 26, 2021................................     1

Witnesses

Sudhakar Ramakrishna, President and Chief Executive Officer,
SolarWinds Corporation; accompanied by Kevin B. Thompson,
Former Chief Executive Officer, SolarWinds Corporation
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Kevin Mandia, Chief Executive Officer, FireEye, Inc.
Oral Statement...................................................     9

Brad Smith, President and Chief Legal Officer, Microsoft
Corporation
Oral Statement...................................................    11

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available in the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep. Connolly.

* Questions for the Record to: Ramakrishna; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record to: Thompson; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record to: Mandia; submitted by Chairwoman
Maloney.

* Questions for the Record to: Smith; submitted by Chairwoman
Maloney.

* Questions for the Record to: Ramakrishna; submitted by
Committee Chairman Thompson (Homeland), Rep. Titus, and Rep.
Guest.

* Questions for the Record to: Thompson; submitted by Committee
Chairman Thompson (Homeland), Rep. Titus, and Rep. Guest.

* Questions for the Record to: Smith; submitted by Committee
Chairman Thompson (Homeland), Rep. Titus, and Rep. Guest.

Documents entered into the record during this hearing, and
Questions for the Record (QFR's) with responses are available
at: docs.house.gov.

WEATHERING THE STORM:

THE ROLE OF PRIVATE TECH

IN THE SOLARWINDS BREACH

AND ONGOING CAMPAIGN

----------

Friday, February 26, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Committee on Homeland Security
Washington, D.C.

The committees met, pursuant to notice, at 9:06 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Carolyn Maloney [chairwoman of the Committee on
Oversight and Reform] presiding.
Present from Committee on Oversight and Reform:
Representatives Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton,
Lynch, Cooper, Connolly, Krishnamoorthi, Khanna, Mfume, Porter,
Tlaib, Bush, Rice, Wasserman Schultz, Welch, Johnson, Sarbanes,
Speier, Kelly, DeSaulnier, Comer, Jordan, Hice, Grothman,
Cloud, Keller, Sessions, Biggs, Donalds, Fallon, and Franklin.
Present from Committee on Homeland Security:
Representatives Thompson, Langevin, Payne, Correa, Slotkin,
Cleaver, Clarke, Swalwell, Watson Coleman, Rice, Demings,
Barragan, Gottheimer, Malinowski, Torres, Katko, McCaul,
Higgins, Guest, Bishop, Van Drew, Norman, Miller-Meeks,
Harshbarger, Clyde, Gimenez, LaTurner, Meijer, Cammack,
Pfluger, and Garbarino.
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good morning. I want to welcome everyone to this joint
hearing of the Committee on Oversight and Reform and the
Committee on Homeland Security. Welcome to Chairman Thompson,
Ranking Member Katko, Ranking Member Comer, and all of our
members. Today's hearing is the first in the House on the
cyberattack uncovered last year that initially targeted the
software company, SolarWinds, and its Orion product. The
details are truly frightening.
Here is what we know. A sophisticated attacker, reported to
be the Russian Government, broke into SolarWinds' system and
inserted malicious code into its software which customers then
downloaded. The numbers tell how dangerous an attack like this
can be. Nearly 18,000 customers downloaded updates containing
the malicious code. It is not just the number of potential
victims, as staggering as that is, or even the number of known
victims of secondary attacks, but the nature of this attack and
the profiles of victims that should give us all grave concern.
Among the victims were major technology companies, some of
which have the best cybersecurity in the world, as well as
critical infrastructure firms, our Nation's law enforcement and
government agencies involved in foreign affairs, and national
security. It has affected approximately 100 private sector
companies and at least nine Federal agencies, including the
Department of Homeland Security, Department of Justice, and
state, and Treasury, and that is just what we know. There is
much more that we still don't know. We still don't know if they
are still in the system. In the weeks and months ahead, our
committee will continue our joint investigation to examine
other aspects of this massive attack.
Today, our focus is on the private sector. The private
sector plays a key role in our Nation's cyber defenses, they
own critical infrastructure, and they develop essential
information, communications, and technology products. They help
the government and other companies secure and defend their own
networks. It was the private sector that uncovered this attack,
not our own government. Specifically, FireEye discovered it,
reported its findings, and shared it with the world. Had
FireEye not taken that action, the attack could very well be
fully up and running today.
At the same time, the private sector was targeted as part
of a campaign to gain access to government networks and other
entities. All of the companies here today are victims of this
attack, and all provide products and services to the government
that puts the government at risk. Additionally, it is the
private sector to whom the government must turn. In particular,
the government has turned to Microsoft to learn whether it was
exposed and how badly due to the widespread adoption of Office
365 Cloud.
The private sector must be held accountable for its role.
Our committees recently obtained a presentation made by a
former employee at SolarWinds named Ian Thornton-Trump. The 23-
page presentation, a portion of which I will put up on the
screen now, appears to include a proposal from 2017 that
stated, and I quote, ``The survival of the company depends on
an internal commitment to security. The survival of our
customers depends on a commitment to build secure solutions.''
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Thompson about the steps the
company took in response.
Cybersecurity demands strong leadership, but,
unfortunately, we have suffered under four years of terrible
leadership at the very top. On December 18, Secretary of State
Mike Pompeo stated during a public interview, and I quote,
``This was a very significant effort, and I think it's the case
that now we can say pretty clearly that it was the Russians
that engaged in this activity.'' Yet the very next day,
President Trump tweeted this, and I quote, ``The cyber hack is
far greater in the fake news media than in actuality.''
So, what can we do now? First, I am pleased the Biden
Administration has taken early steps to elevate the importance
of cybersecurity and supply chain risk. Our committee plans to
focus on Federal procurement. The government pays hundreds of
billions of dollars for goods and services each year. We must
demand better cybersecurity practices from our suppliers as
well as increased information sharing with the private sector
as a product of the contract agreement. Finally, the Oversight
Committee plans to closely review agency roles,
responsibilities, and strategy under the Federal Information
Security Modernization Act, known as FISMA, to meet the complex
and dynamic cybersecurity landscape of today. Much work needs
to be done. Today and in the weeks and months ahead, we will
focus on the facts with an eye toward legislative solutions in
how we can improve cyber defenses across both the public and
private sectors.
With that, I now recognize the distinguished ranking
member, Mr. Comer, for his opening statement.
Mr. Comer [continuing]. Thanking the chairwoman for having
this hearing. Last year, our Federal Government was hacked in
the largest cyberattack in history. Some of the largest
technology companies in the country were also hacked. The
cyberattack took months of planning. It took extreme patience
to execute. According to all the experts, it was incredibly
sophisticated. The attackers covered their steps so they would
not be detected, and it was wildly successful. According to one
of our witnesses today, over 1,000 people were involved in the
attack, and the likely culprit of the attack? Russia.
Three months after the attack was discovered, there is
still a lot we don't know, and many government agencies and
companies were hacked. We don't know what the extent of the
damage is, whether or not the Russians still have access to the
systems they hacked, or whether we have been able to
successfully kick them out. You may not have heard about this
attack because it hasn't affected your daily life. You still go
home to a warm house every night, you can still flip on the
television at night and watch TV, you can still facetime with
your friends and family, but that is only because the attackers
chose not to disrupt those activities. As far as we know, this
attack was an espionage campaign, an intelligence-gathering
operation only, but what the attackers have shown us is none of
the software we use in our daily lives is truly safe. The apps
we download on our phones, laptops, and tablets, any device,
can be sabotaged.
Last week, we all prayed for millions of people in Texas as
the power grid failed and they froze in their homes. Now,
imagine if an adversary had the ability to take our electric
grid offline in the dead of winter or the peak of summer. Now,
imagine if this took place during a national crisis. Imagine if
an adversary wanted to toy with our financial markets. Imagine
if an adversary had the ability to control supply chains and
manipulate whatever they wanted. It doesn't take much to
realize the horror that would ensue if an adversary were
motivated to do any of these things.
The attackers did not take down our electric grid, poison
our water, or cause chaos in our financial system, among other
necessities or occurrences of our daily lives. At least this
time they didn't, but that is not to say they couldn't have.
The truth is this attack is still ongoing even today and has
not been completely neutralized. This offers the potential for
unforeseen additional damage. The fact the attackers did not do
these things that received the attention of Americans going
about their everyday lives says nothing of their capabilities
to do so the next time. This isn't the first-ever attack of
this kind, nor will it be the last. For far too long,
cybersecurity has been addressed as the mere cost of doing
business, an add-on, a minor line item to simply check the box.
This mindset must end.
No one, including Congress, the Administration, or the
private sector can afford to allow this moment pass without
ensuring we finally adopt effective solutions. I appreciate
this opportunity to review what happened in this massive
cyberattack that one of our witnesses referred to as the
largest ever, and to play a part in developing a game plan for
deterring and responding to any future event. I am convinced,
though, that cybersecurity must not be left to the recesses of
academic debate or half-hearted compliance, but, instead, it
must become a daily focus for all involved in software
development, procurement, and operations.
Just contemplate for a moment this particular attack.
Companies, which many expect to secure their systems with
topnotch cybersecurity, were the very ones who failed to
identify the attack before damage had already occurred. Some of
those organizations are here today. The same goes for our
government agencies who glaringly missed the adversary's nearly
year-long presence freely roaming about in our most sensitive
network. I believe the time has come to take concrete action to
actively defend our Nation from foreign cyberattacks just as
forcefully and with the same resources as we would if the
instrument of attack were physical or kinetic. We don't sit
back when our country is physically breached or our homes and
places of business are invaded, and neither should our
responses be to roll over following an attack in cyberspace.
It is only a matter of time or chance until we are faced
with real disruption and destruction. We must do everything in
our power to defend this digital sphere and forecast to our
adversaries that we at least are no longer asleep at the wheel.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Chairman Thompson. I now recognize
Chairman Thompson for his opening statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Good morning. I would
like to thank Chairwoman Maloney for holding today's joint
hearing on the SolarWinds breach and the related malicious
cybercampaign. Just over two months ago, we learned that a
state actor, likely Russia, had engaged in a large-scale
cybercampaign, infiltrating government and private sector
networks and burrowing inside them. By the time FireEye
voluntarily shared information about the breach of its network,
Russian actors had established a presence on victims' network,
undetected for nearly a year. That is hardly comforting. While
the campaign is notable for its patience, assistance, scope,
and scale, the methods and tools used, though sophisticated,
are not entirely new.
NotPetya, a 2017 destructive supply chain attack with a
global impact, involved Russian actors compromising Ukrainian
tax preparation software to access victims' network. That same
year, security researchers published their findings regarding
an attack vector using forged SAML tokens. Nonetheless, the
Federal Government and the private sector were caught flat
footed. I do not mean to diminish the complexity of the attack
or to suggest we could have prevented it, but I want to make a
point that our collective failure to make cybersecurity a
central component of our national security and invest in it
accordingly contributed to the success of the campaign and the
difficulty we face in understanding its impact. In short, past
warnings of what could come failed to trigger a meaningful
shift in our approach to security.
My goal in our joint investigation is to move beyond
admiring the complexities of this campaign and the challenges
associated with stopping one like it and start charting a path
forward. In the 15 years I have served on the Homeland Security
Committee, one thing has become clear. We can't become so
consumed by preventing the last attack that we are blind to the
threats of the future. Instead, we must identify systematic
opportunities to improve our ability to prevent, defend
against, mitigate, and raise the cost of all malicious
cyberactivity. Toward that end, I hope to identify a
combination of next-term fixes and longer-term structural
solutions that will improve our ability to better understand
the adversary, defend our networks, and identify attacks more
quickly.
None of the witnesses here today can have a conversation
with me or with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency about malicious activity occurring on an agency network
because of restrictions agencies add in their contracts. That
unnecessarily complicates our oversight work, limits
situational awareness, and slows recovery. I believe that is a
problem we can fix quickly. In recent days, I have been
encouraged to learn of growing interest in enacting a cyber
incident reporting log. Former chairman of the Cybersecurity
Subcommittee, Cedric Richmond, authored an amendment included
in the House-passed National Defense Authorization Act that
would have established a cyber incident notification
requirement. Unfortunately, we were unable to reach agreement
with our Senate counterparts, but we look forward to trying
again this year and hope we can enact cyber incident
notification legislation in short order.
In the longer term, we must figure out how to make security
a value proposition, not only for policymakers, but for
investors in the private sector who are focused on earnings. We
must address persistent challenges in threat information
sharing and find more strategic ways to effectively leverage
the unique capabilities of the government and the private
sector in our shared goals of better security. In that vein, it
may be time to reassess the obligation of large, highly-
resourced companies with outsized footprints in our economy, in
our government, and evaluate whether more should be expected of
them. And we need to find ways to change behavior in the
private sector, particularly those in the government supply
chain, so executives value security as much as earnings
statements and fast product rollout. I look forward to candid
conversations about these issues today.
Before I close, I want to thank our witnesses for being
here today. Since December, I have been impressed by the degree
of transparency in their conversations with us. It is important
to have a complete record of what happened, and how, so we can
have a candid conversation about what needs to change. With
that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. I now recognize Ranking Member Katko
for his opening statement.
Mr. Katko. Chairwoman Maloney, and Chairman Thompson, and
Ranking Member Comer, and all my other colleagues that are with
us today, this is a very important hearing. It is one of the
most important threats facing our country today, cybersecurity,
and it is important, I think, that we take a good look at the
situation and learn from it.
As everyone in this hearing knows, we are in the midst of
arguably the most devastating espionage campaign ever waged
against our Nation. With each passing day, we learn more about
the tactics, techniques, procedures, and unprecedented
sophistication surrounding this campaign. While a number of
details remain elusive, the overall picture is slowly coming
together, and much of this incremental clarity is due to what
we have learned from our private sector partners, so I
appreciate their steady engagement in the whole-of-society
response. I also recognize that we need more of this private
sector sharing. I hope we can spend our time during this
hearing evaluating the best paths forward. How can the
cybersecurity community do more than just bounce back, but also
bounce forward from these events?
From my vantage point, we know enough to identify initial
lanes of policy responses that fall into five categories.
First, we need to seriously rethink our fragmented approach to
dot-gov security by centralizing authority with the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, known as
CISA, wherever possible. While CISA's Federal hunt authority
from the 2021 NDAA is a welcome step in the right direction,
CISA still does not have the proper authorities, resources, or
holistic visibility into the Federal networks enterprise to
effectively defend and nimbly respond to attacks.
Second, we need to better understand the nature and extent
of third-party cyber risks. With no disrespect at all to our
witness, Mr. Ramakrishna, relatively few people had even heard
of SolarWinds in early December 2020, yet its products are
leveraged by most of the Fortune 500's, with a relationship
between vendor and customer that inherently enables a high
degree of administrative privilege on the host network. In this
interconnected web of hardware, software, and services that
underpin our way of life, there are concentrated sources of
risk that could result in cascading or systemic impact if we
assume there is a breach. We need to better illuminate answers
to these questions.
Third, once we identify the potentially concentrated
sources of cyber risk, we need to ensure that vendor
certification processes actually reduce that risk, not create
perfunctory compliance exercises. There are a number of vendor
certification or risk of judgment regimes in various stages of
operationalization right now across the Federal Government with
DOD's Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification, or CMMC, and
the Federal Acquisition Security Council, or FASC, garnering
the most headlines. Let's work together to ensure these regimes
accomplish our common goal of actually reducing the risk.
Fourth, we need to drive better software assurance and
development life cycle practices across the entire ecosystem.
Whether software flaws are deliberate or not, the software
supply chain represents an attack vector that, if exploited,
leaves the potential for a digital pandemic of sorts, where the
impact of one bad line of code can be felt across the entire
country. Last, we must impose real costs on cyber adversaries
like Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea. While there is no
silver bullet, deterrence still matters. Naming and shaming,
indictments, sanctions, offensive measures where appropriate--
these should all be tools in our toolkit and tools that we
utilize. From the sophisticated nation-state-led incident to
the more routine, such as ransomware, the cost-benefit analysis
of cyber aggression still favors adversaries far too often. In
short, they are winning the modern-day arms race, and we need
to step up. I welcome the recent announcement by the
Administration to begin to hold Russia accountable through
sanctions. I hope those sanctions are real, I hope they are
firm, and I hope they are severe.
I imagine we will hear a constructive dialog today about
breach notification and incident reporting. An undeniable gap
in our country's cybersecurity posture is the fact that there
is not a consistent, overarching incentive for industry to
disclose a breach. As a result, our Federal agencies are often
operating in the dark instead of having access to the critical
aggregate data regarding the tactics, techniques, and
procedures of bad actors. As we move forward, we must consider
approaches to close this gap. Whether that should be
partnership based or compulsory or hybrid is yet to be seen,
and I welcome robust private sector feedback on this issue.
These are all necessary and worthy policy conversations for
our homeland security, but we must also not lose sight of the
immediate needs to put necessary resources toward the Federal
dot-gov SolarWinds response. I feel strongly that any executive
branch actions related to SolarWinds must build upon and
bolster CISA's mission as the lead Federal civilian
cybersecurity agency, as I recently stated in a letter to
President Biden.
I, again, want to thank our witnesses for testifying today.
I look forward to hearing from you all on an issue of great
bipartisan interest for the Nation. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Now I will introduce our witnesses. Our
first witness today is Sudhakar Ramakrishna, who is the current
CEO of SolarWinds. Then we will hear from Kevin Thompson, who
is the former CEO of SolarWinds. Next, we will hear from Kevin
Mandia, who is the CEO of FireEye. Finally, we will hear from
Brad Smith, who is the president of Microsoft. The witnesses
will be unmuted so we can swear them in. Please raise your
right hands.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, so help you God?
[Chorus of ayes.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you. And without objection,
your written statements will be part of the record. With that,
Mr. Ramakrishna, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SUDHAKAR RAMAKRISHNA, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SOLARWINDS CORPORATION; ACCOMPANIED BY KEVIN
B. THOMPSON, FORMER CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SOLARWINDS
CORPORATION

Mr. Ramakrishna. Chairwoman Maloney, Chairman Thompson,
Ranking Member Comer, and Ranking Member Katko, and members of
the committee, on behalf of SolarWinds employees, customers,
and partners in the U.S. and around the world, I would first
like to say thank you for inviting us to participate in your
hearing today. By way of background, my name is Sudhakar
Ramakrishna, and I joined SolarWinds as president and CEO on
January 4 of this year. I was previously CEO of Pulse Secure
and before that held other executive roles at technology
companies. In these roles, I have had the experience of being
involved in cyber incidents and seen firsthand the challenges
they present as well as the opportunities for learnings and
improvements.
Also joining me today is Kevin Thompson, who served as our
president and CEO for 10 years until his departure on December
31, 2020, which he had previously announced in August 2020. Mr.
Thompson cares very much for our customers and employees, and
we appreciate his long service to the company. To aid in our
investigation, he has agreed to serve as a special advisor to
me and the board. He has had the opportunity to meet the staff
of both of your committees to provide early insight into the
event. While our products and customers were subject of this
unfortunate and reckless attack, we take our obligations
seriously to work tirelessly to understand it better, to help
our customers, and to be transparent with our learnings.
SolarWinds started in 1999 in Oklahoma as a provider of
network tools, and we have remained true to the mission of
helping IT professionals solve problems and better manage IT
environments, now through more than 90 products. Today, we
remain a U.S.-headquartered company, and our 3,000 dedicated
employees work hard every day to help customers succeed. When
we learned of these attacks, our top priority was to ensure
that our customers were safe and protected. Our teams have been
working tirelessly to help our many customers first and
foremost, while also investigating the what, who, and how of
the attack. We acted quickly to disclose the attacks, provide
remediations and support to our customers, and share our
learnings publicly.
We believe our Orion platform was specifically targeted in
this nation-state operation to create a backdoor into IT
environments of select customers through versions that we
released between March and June 2020. That is a three-month
window. SUNBURST has been removed and is not an ongoing threat
in Orion. Additionally, after extensive investigations, we have
not found SUNBURST in any of our more than 70 non-Orion
products. Perhaps the most significant finding of our
investigations to date was the discovery of what the threat
actor used to inject SUNBURST into the Orion platform. The
injected tool, named SUNSPOT, poses a grave risk to automated
supply chain attacks through many software development
companies since the software build processes, like ours, are
very common in the industry.
As part of our commitment to transparency, collaboration,
and timely communications, we immediately informed our
government partners and published our findings with the
intention of helping other companies combat current and future
attacks. We understand the gravity of the situation and are
applying our learnings from the event and sharing this work
more broadly. Internally, we are referring to our work as
Secure by Design, and it is premised on zero-trust principles
and developing a best-in-class secure software development
model to ensure our customers can have the utmost confidence in
our solutions.
We have published details regarding our efforts, but, in
summary, they are focused on three primary areas: first,
further securing our internal environments; second, enhancing
our product development environments; and third, ensuring the
security and integrity of the products we deliver. Given our
unique experience, we are committed to not only leading the way
with respect to secure software development, but to share our
learnings with the industry. While numerous experts have
commented on the difficulties that these nation-state
operations present for any company, we're embracing our
responsibility to be an active participant in helping prevent
these types of attacks. Everyone at SolarWinds is committed to
doing so, and we value the trust and confidence our customers
place in us.
Thank you again for your leadership in this very important
topic. We appreciate the opportunity to share our experience
and our learnings, and I look forward to addressing your
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. [Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Ramakrishna, and
because Mr. Thompson and Mr. Ramakrishna submitted joint
testimony, Mr. Thompson is not providing oral testimony at this
time. Therefore, we are going to move on to Mr. Mandia. Mr.
Mandia, you are now recognized for your five minutes of
testimony.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN MANDIA, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, FIREEYE,
INC.

Mr. Mandia. Thank you. I would like to thank Chairwoman
Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, Chairman Thompson, and Ranking
Member Katko for this opportunity, and I am excited to share my
observations with you, a first-hand account of what took place
at FireEye and at many of these other victims. So, I am going
to share what happened to most of the victim organizations, and
I know Mr. Smith's going next. He's going to talk a lot more
about what to do about it, and though I have opinions about who
did it and what to do about it, I'll reserve those for the
moment when we get questions.
I want to set a little bit of background first about what
FireEye does, and it is just to provide context. Responding to
breaches is what we do for a living. So, when we ourselves were
breached based on having a SolarWinds implant, we put nearly
100 people on the job, and the majority of the folks working
it, figuring out what happened and what to do about it, did
their proverbial 10,000 hours of computer forensics on
intrusions. And as I'm sitting here talking to these
committees, we're responding to over 150 security breaches, and
in 2020, a tough year for chief information security officers,
we responded to nearly 1,000 security breaches globally. So,
we're a company that every time we respond, we're the
detectives, and we take the trace evidence of every single
breach that we have firsthand experience of, and we put in a
data base and track it. So, with that, let me talk about the
anatomy of this intrusion.
First and foremost, everybody's calling it the SolarWinds
hack. In reality, this is an ongoing saga. The group that did
the compromise that led to 100 different organizations
compromised and nine government agencies compromised is not new
to the game. These are folks that are special operations. And
think of it as, if you're an organization and you've locked
your doors and locked your windows, this is the special ops
robbing the house, not some average criminal just trying to
shake the doorknobs or trying to crack open the windows. So,
this was the varsity team on offense, and all the signs, all
the digital fingerprints that our company cataloged proves
that, that this was a foreign intelligence service.
So, stepping through the anatomy of this intrusion, I look
at it in two stages. Stage one, the attacker had to break into
SolarWinds, and when they did that, you already heard the
details from Mr. Ramakrishna that the attackers did something
that's pretty darn hard to detect. At the very end of a build
process, they altered the production environment. So, this
isn't somebody hacking in and changing source code. They're
hacking the build process, and when you go to build your
production code, it is altered at the last minute. In this
case, to provide the timeline, the attackers that broke into
SolarWinds for this stage one of this whole campaign, the first
thing they did, they got the implant in, but the implant was
innocuous, and there's evidence that in October 2019, the
threat actors put the innocuous code in simply to test, ``Do we
have a way to get into the supply chain?'' After the attacker
proved that they could get their arbitrary code into
production, then they created, by March 2020, an implant that
provided surreptitious access to anyone who updated their
networks with the next SolarWinds update to the Orion platform.
So, how did we find this implant at FireEye? We found it
based on literally exhausting every single other investigative
lead at FireEye. We had detected some unusual activity on our
network, and when we investigated that and started pulling the
thread, the earliest evidence of compromise kept going back to
a SolarWinds server. And the reason I am sharing this story
with you is there is no magic wand on finding an implant.
People trust the third-party software that they buy, rely on,
and install. In this case, because we do forensics for a
living, special operations attacked us. It would take special
operations, people that are in the trenches responding to
breaches every day, to detect it. We had to reverse over 18,000
files that were in the SolarWinds platform; 3,500 of those
files were executables. We de-compiled them into a million
lines, and with people that can read assembly language and
understand it, they are the ones that found the implant, and
that's why this was so hard to detect. So, that's the stage one
of this breach.
Stage two I'll cover very quickly because after stage one,
the attackers had a menu of over 17,000 companies that had
downloaded the implant, but that doesn't mean the attacker
stole anything from 17,000 companies. The stage-two victims are
where the attacker decided, ``I want something,'' and the
attackers manually engaged with about 100 different
organizations. In stage two, the attackers did three things:
first, steal your keys. They came in through the trap door in
the basement that you didn't know about. They took your keys,
and with those keys, they accessed your information the same
way people and employees do. Second thing they did is they did
very specific and focused targeting of documents and emails.
And the third thing these attackers did, I put in the ``other''
category based on the victim. They stole source code or
software, and in the case of FireEye, they stole assessment
tools that we use to assess the security of organizations.
So, with that level of detail, I'd like to thank the
committee for this opportunity. We stand ready to work with you
and work with the companies in the private sector to defend the
Nation. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much. That is very helpful
testimony, Mr. Mandia. We appreciate it. Mr. Smith, you are now
recognized for your testimony for five minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF BRAD SMITH, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER,
MICROSOFT CORPORATION

Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, and I want to thank Chairwoman
Maloney, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Comer, Ranking
Member Katko, and really all the members of the two committees.
I think Sudhakar and Kevin have done an excellent job of
describing a lot of what happened, and no doubt we'll get into
more of that. I thought I would, as Kevin suggested, build on
what the two of them said and talk a little bit about what is
it that we can do. What is it that the private sector can do?
What is it that all of us can do by working together? I think
there are a number of concrete steps, and some of the opening
comments, I thought, did an excellent job of identifying, as it
was said, many of the lanes down which we need to travel. As
Sudhakar said, this was an attack on the software supply chain,
and by that, he meant it planted malware into a software
update. I think that points to one of the first things we need
to focus on securing, more broadly, across the software
ecosystem.
The International Data Corporation has estimated that as
many as a half a billion software apps will be created in the
next three years globally. Well, all of these applications will
be distributed. They'll need to be updated. I think we all have
work to do. Certainly at Microsoft we look forward to working
with others on what we can do to help secure the software
supply chain and avoid this kind of risk, this kind of problem,
this kind of tampering with software updates. That is a very
specific activity.
I think the second thing we need to do is think much more
broadly. We need to focus on the modernization of the
information technology infrastructure, and we need to apply,
more broadly, cybersecurity best practices. We've looked at the
customers that use Microsoft software that we were able to
identify had been hacked in this incident, and what we have
found repeatedly is that they could've better protected
themselves simply by applying the many cybersecurity best
practices the world has recognized already, that we've
encouraged customers to apply already. And I think this is an
important day for us to step back and think again about how we
better help small businesses, as well as large customers, to
apply these best practices.
I think that leads us to a third opportunity for us all to
do better. When we ask ourselves why the world is not using all
of the cybersecurity best practices that exist today, I think
one of the reasons becomes self-evident. It's because in the
United States and around the world, there is a shortage of
trained cybersecurity personnel. In the United States today,
there's a shortage of more than 300,000 trained cybersecurity
personnel, and this is something that we, a tech company like
Microsoft, can focus on addressing by helping colleges and
universities, high schools, and others develop the people we'll
need in the future. But I think there's an important role for
government to play as well.
The fourth area where I think we can do better, where we
really need to do better, is to share threat intelligence
information to ensure that when there is information about this
kind of hack or attack, it is being shared first with
customers, something that we do immediately when we detect this
kind of hack at a Microsoft customer, but something that
doesn't happen broadly enough across our industry, and we can
share it with the government. It needs to be, I think, better
shared across the government and then in appropriate ways back
with the private sector itself.
Fifth, I think the time has come to adopt a national law
that will impose cyberbreach incident reporting obligations,
and there are important questions to be considered. To whom
should it apply? When should it apply? How should it be
administered? To whom should the information go? How should
that information be shared? These are all questions for your
two committees and the Congress as a whole, but 2021, I
believe, needs to be the year that Congress acts and we use
this step to strengthen the security of the Nation.
Finally, I think we need to strengthen the international
rules of the road. What happened here is and should be a
violation of international norms and international law. It is
the kind of act that was reckless. It is the kind of act that
needs to have consequences, and those consequences need to be
based on global standards. This is a combination of six steps
that we can take, steps that I believe will make us stronger.
Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Now I would like to
recognize my friend, the gentleman from Mississippi, Chairman
Thompson, for five minutes for questions.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank
the witnesses for their very important testimony. This is to
Mr. Thompson and Mr. Ramakrishna. A theme emerging this week is
that the supply chain compromise that exploited the SolarWinds
Orion platform could have happened to anyone, but since
December, I have read troubling accounts about the security
culture at SolarWinds. One report indicated your server
password was ``SolarWinds123.'' Now, according to another
report, a former employee raised concerns about the security
culture at SolarWinds four years ago. As you know, we have
recently obtained testimony from that employee during a
presentation. So, Mr. Thompson, did you take any action based
on the security recommendation that this employee, Mr. Trump,
made to the company?
Mr. Thompson. So, I believe that we have, over the history
of time at SolarWinds, taken security seriously, security of
our internal systems and the secure development of our
products. Mr. Trump arrived in the company April 2017. Shortly
after that, we actually hired Tim Brown, who is a 30-year
veteran from Dell who was a fellow at Dell, which is one of
their highest-ranking engineers, to be in charge of not only
the internal security of SolarWinds, but also product security
at SolarWinds. We also actually did hire Mr. Trump back in
September 2017 as part of some of the initiatives that we were
working on. So, I believe we have taken security seriously in
2017, and really beginning in 2016, we enhanced our security
posture.
We hired a CTO in 2016 who had been a CIO at a large global
Fortune 500 company. We hired a very experienced CIO in 2017.
As I said, we hired Tim Brown in the middle of 2017, who is a
very experienced VP of security. We also implemented a----
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much.
So, your testimony is that, based on that recommendation, you
did do things. So, Mr. Smith, you talked about the challenges
facing companies, like all of the cyber companies that we have
talked about. One you talked about, the challenge of a work
force. You know, our committees are constantly being requested
by many of the companies on the screen to expand the visa
programs so that we can import labor supply because we don't
have it here. So, tell me what a company like Microsoft is
doing with historically black colleges and minority-serving
institutions to help that labor force be developed right here
in this country.
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, Chairman Thompson. I think it
is a very important question. You know, so far, just this year,
Microsoft has spent more than $2 million to provide grants to
faculty members at HBCUs to add cybersecurity and other
information technology curriculum to, you know, the courses
that are offered at these institutions. We are going to be
increasing that amount to $3.2 million per year. We are going
to be spending that each of the next three years.
But it is not just, I think, investing in these
institutions so that they can train the next generation of
professionals. We are very focused on hiring individuals at
HBCUs. Our recruiting season is still unfolding this year, but
already we have had recruiters at 27 HBCUs. We are excited that
already 136 students at these institutions have accepted jobs
to work at Microsoft, 73 full time, 63 to be with us as interns
this coming summer. I do believe that the HBCUs are growing and
powerful engines for the protection of cybersecurity. We can
collectively, I think, as an industry add to their strength,
and we will be the beneficiary of the students that they will
graduate.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. This notion of a cyber
breach info office, I take from your testimony, as you know, we
tried to get it passed last year, and it was taken out in the
Senate. So, your testimony to both committees is that that
would be an important instrument for us to have to get in-time
notification of breaches.
Mr. Smith. Yes, that's correct. I think we do need to take
that type of step. There will be important details that need to
be discussed, but this is the time to take that kind of action.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Ranking Member Mr.
Katko. You are now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank all
the witnesses for their very thoughtful and engaging testimony.
I am really heartened that your comments are consistent with
and supportive of the five categories of response that I laid
out in my opening statement, and I want to explore those a
little bit more if I can.
First of all, with Mr. Mandia, earlier this week, you
outlined, Mr. Mandia, some of the enormous time and costs that
go into the threat-hunting and intrusion-remediation services.
Can you describe briefly for me, just briefly, the magnitude of
the resources that go into these threat-hunting teams and
penetration-testing services, how much they cost, the man
hours, woman hours that go into it, things like that briefly?
Mr. Mandia. You know, sir--thank you for the question--I
don't think it takes a lot of people to test your networks on
how secure they are, and I do believe that is the best way to
get unvarnished truth in security. Kind of like you do crash
test dummies to test the safety of a vehicle, shoot real
bullets at a bulletproof vest to determine how effective it is,
in cybersecurity you need to test your security, and that is a
couple folks. There is a great asymmetry between offense and
defense. To have somebody perpetrate what would be perceived as
offense, not a lot of resources.
The problem is the 52-card pickup you play on the other
side because of that asymmetry. One attacker can create work
for hundreds of thousands of defenders. It is a bad asymmetry
in cyberspace I think other nations have picked up on where
they can't beat us with tanks, won't beat us with planes, but
in the cyber domain, if they train folks, the A-team can create
work for potentially millions of defenders. So, the bottom
line, that asymmetry is the problem. It is hard to answer your
question without cataloging the offense, very few people.
Defense, you have to pitch a perfect game every day and put a
lot more people on it.
Mr. Katko. Got it. Thank you for that. And to followup on
that, as you know, CISA was granted authority in the Fiscal
Year 2021 NDAA to conduct threat hunting on Federal agency
networks----
Mr. Mandia. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Katko [continuing]. With or without consent, which is,
I think, a very positive step forward. Do you have
recommendations on how CISA can most effectively implement this
new authority?
Mr. Mandia. Well, I am convinced this will work with the
private sector on that. We all have threat-hunting teams. My
company does it every single day all the time for thousands of
customers. Microsoft has a team that does it. There are a lot
of security folks that do threat hunting, and the reason we
have to do threat hunting is not every product stops
everything, period. There is no such thing as perfect security,
so you have to have the catcher's mitt behind your products.
And CISA's folks that do threat hunting will be able to tap the
private sector and be driven by the private sector, so I think
it is exactly the right thing to do.
Mr. Katko. Mr. Smith, I am going to followup on something
Chairman Thompson said, and I am in complete agreement with him
that the information sharing is such a critical component. But
the problem with the information sharing is if a company is
hacked into and they share the information, are they buying
themselves more problems and more public scrutiny and perhaps
more liability if they do the right thing and share that
information with CISA? So, what role do you see CISA as a hub
for a Federal focal point to help aggregate all this national
risk picture across the sectors, right, No. 1? And No. 2, how
do you do so in a way that protects the industry and
incentivizes the industry to share this information instead of
just not sharing it because they are afraid of opening
Pandora's box and problems for them?
Mr. Smith. Well, first of all, I think you make a really
important point. The White House said a week ago that more than
100 companies, or roughly 100 companies, in the United States
had suffered this kind of attack or hack. You have three
companies here today, and that is because we have chosen to
speak up, and what you get is an invitation to appear as a
witness under oath at a House hearing. And so I think a lot of
companies choose to say as little as possible, and often that
is nothing.
But silence is not going to make this country stronger, and
so I think we have to encourage and, I think, even mandate that
certain companies do this kind of reporting. I think we do need
to identify the right place where the report should go. CISA is
a very strong candidate, and it deserves serious consideration,
and we need to think about the process and the type of
information that should be shared and when it should be shared.
And we need to be very careful that we don't, in effect, tell
firefighters to stop fighting the fire so they can fill out
forms and, you know, meet with government officials instead.
So, we need to balance all of the work that needs to be done,
but Kevin really captured well the asymmetry, and we can only
be effective if we can connect the dots in everything that we
see. That can only be done with this kind of effective
information sharing.
Mr. Katko. Well, it is not often that you hear the private
sector saying they need more government mandates, so that, I
think, highlights the importance and the magnitude of this
problem. And I think Chairman Thompson, and I, and the others
are going to work very hard to try and make this a reality
because information sharing is what made us a much safer nation
after 9/11 with the Joint Terrorism Task Forces. We need to do
the same thing in the cyber area, and anything we can do to
turbocharge that process, we have to do going forward. I have
so many more questions, but I am out of time and I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentlewoman from the District of Columbia. Ms.
Norton, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentleman for yielding. This is an
important hearing, and we have heard of breaches of both the
private and the governmental sectors. It is kind of a two-
fisted breach. My first question is for Mr. Mandia of FireEye.
Our most recent information from the current White House, I do
believe these breaches occurred in the last Administration, but
it is clear that it could occur and may be occurring right now.
So, let me ask about the breaches or the impact on government
agencies in particular.
For example, the information I have been given is that the
breaches included the Department of Energy, including a
component responsible for managing the Nation's nuclear
weapons. You can see the issue there, Mr. Mandia. Another
agency was the Department of Justice, of course, which enforces
our laws, but breached also, but also has to do with countering
foreign intelligence on the United States. Also breached, of
course, was the Department of Treasury. Now, that Department
maintains the Nation's financial infrastructure and imposes
financial sanctions on our adversaries. You can see, Mr.
Mandia, what this leaves us open to. Would you agree that
compromising any one of these agencies would be considered a
victory for an adversary?
Mr. Mandia. Well, I think the first comment I would say is
this is an ongoing intrusion set. The SolarWinds backdoor was
just part of a very long saga. I first started responding to
breaches for the U.S. Government in the 1990's. This group was
active then. They are going to be active tomorrow. There is
going to be ongoing targeting of those agencies. This intrusion
set using the SolarWinds backdoor happened to be successful at
least for surreptitious access and staying surreptitious and
clandestine on the networks for a certain period of time. You
know, we will respond to it, and it will take those agencies
time, months, to get their arms around the scale and scope of
what happened. And I think we are in that window where they
don't know yet, and we got to wait on the final investigation.
Ms. Norton. Well, we certainly need the investigation to be
finalized because we are still in the window and they are still
being breached. That raises continuing problems for us. And
continuing with you, Mr. Mandia, in 2015, a foreign actor or
groups compromised the systems of the Office of Personnel
Management. They accessed clearance information on 21 million
people. Now, that was only one agency. Mr. Mandia, would the
OPM compromise be considered a serious breach?
Mr. Mandia. I think you have to consider it a serious
breach. When you look at these breaches, what generally happens
is there is a successful breach. We find out about it. We take
steps and do sprints within the Federal Government to try to
escalate our security programs. The bottom line, there are
threat actors out there that attack the U.S. Government on a
daily basis, and they are feeling no risk or repercussions to
doing it. So, we are just sitting here playing defense every
day against an A-team that is going to have successes.
Ms. Norton. Yes. This time around, these actors were able
to compromise up to 3 percent of Microsoft Office email
accounts at the Department of Justice. Again, that sounds like
a small number until you put it in perspective. Three percent
of email accounts at the Department of Justice translates into
roughly 3,500 accounts. Mr. Mandia, if you were writing up a
damage assessment for a customer and they had 3,500 accounts
compromised for months, how would you categorize that? Would it
be sincere even what seems to be a small number? How would you
categorize that?
Mr. Mandia. Well, this is obviously a group that
compromised with collection requirements, so the damage
assessment is going to be based on the content of the emails,
period. And how that information is intended to be used, we
don't know. That is the problem. We have to get our arms around
all the content and all the potential use and misuse of all
that content. So, the bottom line, we may never know the full
range and extent of damage, and we may never know the full
range and extent as to how the stolen information is benefiting
an adversary.
Ms. Norton. Well, we better get our arms around the full
impact of these breaches, but we know that it has very serious
implications for both the government--that is why I focused on
Federal agencies--as well as the bottom sector. You have given
us a mandate in this committee to get to the bottom of how this
breach occurred, every entity that was affected, and how to
protect against this type of incident in the future, and it
looks like we have a lot of work to do. I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, for five
minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it and appreciate this hearing. As ranking member of Gov Ops,
it has been honor working with Chairman Connolly on these
issues over and over in the past trying to improve our
government-wide information security. And, of course, we both
know, and I am sure everyone on both of these committees, in
fact, everyone involved in this hearing right now is keenly
aware of the importance of cybersecurity, the vital nature that
it provides for our government, and to make sure, frankly, that
our government continues to run efficiently and effectively,
and, most importantly, in this context, securely. I am
certainly looking forward, in that light, to the upcoming
FITARA hearing on the FITARA scorecard that Chairman Connolly
is going to be bringing up, and hopefully we will be able to
discover the level of preparedness of various agencies within
our government.
But in light of the massive attack, the cyberattack that
brings us to this hearing today, these efforts around Federal
information security are obviously extremely important and all
the more prescient for us. And I understand, I get it, and I
think it is probably good that our witnesses today are from the
private sector. They certainly are able to bring some valuable
insight to us today as to what and how we can best secure our
IT assets in Federal Government.
So, Mr. Mandia, let me begin with you. Beginning with your
company's focus on cybersecurity services, I am wondering your
opinion in regard to cloud migration, and, in particular, what
I am talking about, or what at least I have in mind, is
Chairman Connolly's bill, FEDRAMP, which both myself and
Ranking Member Comer have both co-sponsored. But how do you
view that in terms of is it a step in the right direction for
improving cybersecurity?
Mr. Mandia. Sir, first off, the migration cloud is going to
happen whether we want it or not. It is rare in history where
something costs less and is better. Cloud is actually costing
less and is better. For example, if I wanted a server set up at
FireEye, I could ask an IT staff to do it, or I can go to an
infrastructure as a service provider and get it in five
seconds. So, the cloud is coming. And then you add the pandemic
to it and the work from home. All the major enterprises, all
the major organizations are going to the cloud.
The upside is it cuts both ways, but you should get better
visibility and better controls in the cloud, and the reason why
is you are putting all your decentralized IP and value into one
place. It is easier to monitor it, easier to safeguard it. You
don't have distributed security controls at that point. I think
we are in the middle of the cloud migration, but over time,
what we will see is organizations recognizing at least the
infrastructure portion of the cloud will be more secure because
these companies have to secure it, meaning the providers have
to secure it.
Mr. Hice. OK. OK. So, when you say, ``Whether we like it or
not, it is going to happen,'' I get that.
Mr. Mandia. It is going to happen.
Mr. Hice. And you are exactly right. But with it happening
whether we like it or not, do you feel good that that is indeed
a safe method? Is that good for us to go there that way?
Mr. Mandia. Sir, after 30 years in IT security, I believe
it will be easier to secure the cloud than the last 30 years of
us trying to secure everybody's home offices and secure inside
four different walls all over the place. Yes, it is a good
move.
Mr. Hice. OK. Mr. Chairman, for whatever reason, the clock
is not showing up on my screen, so I really don't know where I
am on time, but if there is time, if I could have a brief
answer from each of our----
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman has 45 seconds.
Mr. Hice. OK. Well, each of the witnesses real briefly,
what needs to be done? What does the private sector have that
we could use? If you can just give a 10-second answer, each of
you, or whatever, just very briefly. I will start with Mr.
Smith.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. The cloud, but then implement the
cybersecurity best practices that are needed to use it
effectively. As a cloud services provider, we can enable all of
the tools, but ultimately, it is our customers that will have
to decide how to use them.
Mr. Hice. Thank you.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Hice, my recommendation would
be to share information as fast as possible in as timely a
manner as possible because speed and agility are key to
addressing these issues.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Mandia. And, sir, in the last 12 seconds, I will get to
what Congressman Katko was referring to. I believe we need to
separate disclosure of a breach to sharing of threat
intelligence. If you can share threat intelligence from the
private sector to the government, or government to the private
sector confidentially, you can do it quickly without worrying
about all the liabilities that come with public disclosure of a
breach. So, we got to think of threat intel sharing and
disclosure of a breach as two separate things, and threat
intelligence sharing will defend the Nation.
Mr. Hice. Very good. Thanks to each of you, and thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now takes
great pleasure to recognize someone who has done yeoman's work
in this area for a long time. The gentleman from Rhode Island,
Mr. Langevin, is now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
your leadership on cyber.
Mr. Lynch. I believe the gentleman may have muted himself.
Mr. Langevin. Yes, I think----
Mr. Lynch. OK. Go ahead.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I was saying
I appreciate your leadership on cyber and data, the chairs of
the two committees that are holding this joint hearing today
and the ranking members. It is obviously a very important
topic, and I want to thank our witnesses for being here this
morning.
Let me start with Mr. Smith, if I could. Mr. Smith, you
have testified that Microsoft is aware of 60 victim
organizations; that is to say, organizations where at least one
Office 365 email account hosted in Microsoft's Cloud was
accessed by the adversary. But how many accounts has Microsoft
confirmed were accessed?
Mr. Smith. I would have to get you the precise number of
accounts. I will say, in general, the pattern that we saw was
typically a relatively small or very small number of accounts
per customer. I think that was indicative of the stealthy
practices that this actor tends to deploy, namely, to take
great care to be very discreet. And so I think----
Mr. Langevin. OK. Yes, if I could just stop you. Let me
just say my time is limited. In conversations with staff
yesterday, Microsoft indicated that about 77 accounts had been
confirmed to have been accessed. Does that sound about right?
Mr. Smith. It certainly sounds like it is in the right
range. Again, I would want to go check the specifics, but it
sounds like it is in the right range.
Mr. Langevin. All right. That sounds like a just incredibly
small number to me. All right. If I could, just in CISA's alert
detecting post-compromised threat activity in Microsoft cloud
environments, they note that the amount of security log data in
cloud environments is often significantly less than in on-
premises environments, which can hamper threat hunting. In
fact, the same alert notes that in order to detect certain
accounts that have been compromised, a special, more expensive
Office 365 account or G5 or E5 license is required. Do you
believe that security should be an add-on or up charge or baked
into cloud accounts from the get-go?
Mr. Smith. Well, the particular offer that you described,
what we call as E5, you know, is the service that we offer that
includes security and other advanced features. We offer a range
of choices to our customers. E5 is absolutely what we hope and
expect and recommend that our customers purchase. Some people
don't want to buy it, and we honor that, but it is absolutely
what we encourage.
Mr. Langevin. All right. Just so that I understand and the
committee understands, is this a profit center for Microsoft
for this, or are the services being provided at cost that you
are charging the customers?
Mr. Smith. Well, you know, we are a for-profit company.
Everything that we do is designed to generate a return other
than our philanthropic work.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Mr. Ramakrishna, if
I could turn to you. Can you shed some light on how the
adversary initially accessed SolarWinds' network? On Tuesday,
you testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee that
your partners had narrowed the number of possible vectors to
three. What are those vectors?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Langevin, thank you for the
question. Our investigation was segmented as to what exactly
happened, how did it happen, and who may have done it. As it
relates to the what, we have made a lot of progress and have
discovered the specific injector tool that I described could
affect any supply chain, and we have been able to publish it
such that other companies can evaluate their security postures
and supply chains and possibly get help from our efforts.
As it relates to your question, we have narrowed it from
several hypotheses. At one time, we had 15 different threads
that we were pulling, so to speak, and we have battled it since
to about three at this point. One is what I call a classic
password spring type approach that we are investigating. Two is
some form of credential theft. That can happen through various
methods. And three is a potential vulnerability in a third-
party software that we have deployed on premises. Just like
other companies on this witness stand, we use a lot of third-
party software as well, and we are looking at it in those three
dimensions at this point. We are evaluating several terabytes
of data to be able to sift through this in the hopes that we
can pinpoint patient zero in this context.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you, Mr. Ramakrishna and Mr. Smith,
to our witnesses. I just wanted to note for the record, Mr.
Chairman, I know my time has expired, but I want to thank Mr.
Ramakrishna for briefing me about a week ago, and I appreciate
how they have been very forthcoming in helping us to get our
arms around this. And to Mr. Smith, your team had briefed me a
couple days ago, and I appreciate them taking some detailed
questions there, too. So, thank our witnesses, and, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul, for five
minutes.
Mr. McCaul. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I have
worked on cybersecurity for very many years along with Mr.
Langevin. And back when I was chairman of the Homeland Security
Committee, we authorized, stood up into law CISA to be the lead
civilian agency to protect our networks, and then we had the
cyber incident response teams that were authorized into law.
You know, 80 percent of this critical infrastructure is done in
the private sector as is most of the threat information, and
that is why these private/public partnerships, I believe, are
so important.
I have had the opportunity to visit with Mr. Ramakrishna.
SolarWinds is actually in my district in Austin, and also with
Mr. Smith from Microsoft, but I want to just get a couple of
just factual details on the event itself. And, Mr. Ramakrishna,
I also want to thank you for being so forthcoming and
transparent with the Federal Government, but do you think the
initial intrusion began around, say, March of last year?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman McCaul, thank you for the
question. March of last year is when we first shipped, so to
speak, the code with the malware injected in it, so three
releases between March 2020 and June 2020 is when the malware
was impacting the Orion platform.
Mr. McCaul. So, between March and June you have the
intrusion. It is detected in December 2020. Is that correct?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Yes.
Mr. McCaul. So, this is very sophisticated malware that
can, as I understand, can go in and out of your system through
the in-door and through the backdoor without detection. Is that
correct?
Mr. Ramakrishna. So, that threat actor I would describe,
Congressman McCaul, as hiding in plain sight.
Mr. McCaul. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Ramakrishna. They were very, very careful about
covering their tracks, cleaning up after themselves, and the
patience with which they worked was not similar to the run-of-
the-mill virus whose job is to spread as fast as possible and
create as much damage as possible. This was very sophisticated.
And, as you heard from Mr. Smith and Mr. Mandia, being in the
security business, it still took them a long time, and in
talking to Mr. Mandia, they looked at this as almost a last
resort in their investigation.
Mr. McCaul. I am sorry, but my time is limited. So, when it
was detected in December, within two days Microsoft developed
and created the kill switch. Is that correct?
Mr. Ramakrishna. That is true, and within a matter of 72
hours, our teams fixed the malware and delivered remediated
code. And since then, we have pretty much had a 7 by 24
operation----
Mr. McCaul [continuing]. Report it to CISA and the Federal
Government? At what time?
Mr. Ramakrishna. We reported it as soon as we knew on
December 12 to CISA and the Federal Government, and we continue
to do so.
Mr. McCaul. We believe that this originated out of Russia.
Would you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, we do not have the internal
expertise to create attribution, but based on our investigation
partners, it appears to be true.
Mr. McCaul. So, this is for both you and Brad Smith. What
is the extent of the damage, to your knowledge, and if it came
from Russia, which I believe it did, by looking at what they
stole, it didn't seem to be a destructive virus, but more of a
theft and espionage type of malware. What was their motivation
and intent here?
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say that, based on every
indication so far, there were probably two or three. One is
espionage, obviously to obtain information, especially, say,
from the U.S. Government and other agencies. Second, to learn
more about technology because obviously technology is the plane
on which this organization's activities take place. That is why
50 percent of the victims that we identified are communications
and technology companies. Third, I think there is an aspect of
this that you would almost put in the context of
counterintelligence. They focus on red team tools so that they
know how to withstand attacks. They look for whether a company
like Microsoft may be knowing about them so that they are able
to try to circumvent what we are doing in the future. That is
true for other tech companies as well.
Mr. McCaul. Now, I applaud you for transparency, the kill
switch, and the notification, but not all companies do this.
And Mr. Langevin and I are working on a mandatory notifications
breach of any cyber intrusions. This can be done by taking
sources and methods and company names out to protect them as
you have a duty to shareholders. It would just simply send the
threat information itself to CISA so they could provide both
industry-wide, and Federal-governmentwide, and state the threat
information that they would need to address it on a larger
scale. Is that something you think would be a good solution?
Mr. Smith. I think that would be an important step. I think
the time has come to recognize that it is probably an essential
step, and I think the precise tailoring, something along the
lines of what you just described, is exactly the kind of
conversation we need to have.
Mr. McCaul. Well, I appreciate that, and I thank you for
testifying here today. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes himself for five minutes.
You know, one of the weaknesses in our system is the
endemic need for us to share information in order for it to be
applied, and that includes classified information. One of the
things, Mr. Mandia and Mr. Smith, that I have come across
during 20 years of these investigations is that the worst is
always denied. So, in this case, we are being reassured by some
that that no classified systems were compromised. That is what
we are being told. But if the previous patterns are followed
here like they have in other breaches and other investigations
that we have done, later on down the line we find out that,
yes, in fact, classified systems were compromised.
So, can you, Mr. Mandia and Mr. Smith, can you reassure me?
I mean, are you willing to guarantee me that no classified
systems were compromised? These people had at least nine
months, and it seems to be the general consensus here that
these were highly professional people. This was a special ops
deal, and they cleaned up after themselves. They clearly
intended, with the patience that they exerted, and we are
talking about thousands of people working on this hack, you
know. Can you assure me that our classified systems were not
compromised?
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say, first, I think we are
probably the wrong people to try to answer that question. You
know, the classified systems are obviously, you know,
maintained by the government, and, you know, it is the
government's----
Mr. Lynch. That is what worries me.
Mr. Smith. But I would say this. I mean, first, there are
two things that one should think about, and they cut in
opposite directions. The SolarWinds hack was one vector of
attack by an agency that, in all probability, is engaged in
many vectors of attack every single day of the year on a broad
international basis. So, what we have seen here is one slice of
activity that is always ongoing, and we should, I think as your
question suggests, always assume that there are things that we
don't know, and even assume that there are things that are
worse than what we do know. That is, I think, a cause for
concern.
Now, I will say, on the other hand, what this actor did in
many instances, really in all instances, is once they were in a
network, they were able to take advantage of lapses in basic
cybersecurity practices. The reason they got into, say, a
particular number of DOJ email accounts, in all probability,
was because they were able to steal the password of someone or
some individuals who had access to those accounts. And by
definition, I think we can count on the government to have
higher levels of cybersecurity precautions in place for secret
and top-secret workloads.
You know, as a cloud services provider, Microsoft, you
know, stands up secret and top-secret workloads for the U.S.
Government, and, you know, what we consistently find is what
you would expect. You know, the people in government agencies
who are working in this space are, by definition, going to be
more rigorous, so, you know, we should assume that there are
more vigorous attacks or hacks. We should also count on
stronger protection for those kinds of workloads.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Mandia?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, I think, again, we are not in the purview
to know the answer to that question. I can tell you this is an
intruder that has collection requirements, sensitive data lost
definitely. I did do my stint in the military. I would say it
is unlikely that classified information was probably accessed,
meaning classified systems, but I can't answer the question. I
am not in a position to do so.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Well, thank you for your service. I
appreciate that. Obviously, it would be valuable to us to know
right now in designing our response. It is a whole different
dynamic and the level of urgency if our classified systems have
been compromised, not only, you know, for the purpose of
plugging those holes, but also protecting, you know, sources
and methods and other aspects of that as well, so it would be
very, very important for us to know that as soon as possible.
With that, I see my time has expired, and I will now
recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, my colleague and
ranking member, Mr. Grothman. You are now recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Can you hear me? Can you hear me?
Mr. Lynch. Yes, we can hear you. Go ahead.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I think Mr. Mandia mentioned that there
was a problem in that we don't have enough people going into
this field. Maybe it was him, maybe it was Mr. Ramakrishna. For
either one of you, first of all, what type of compensation do
people, say, right out college make if they go into this sort
of field? Could you give me an idea? I guess it is maybe an
unfair question.
Mr. Mandia. Yes, I think it was Mr. Smith that commented on
that, but I would comment. I think everybody is seeking to hire
more cybersecurity professionals. This is something that you
don't just walk out of college great at this and proficient at
this. You do come out of college with some background in it,
but generally you have to do some on-the-job training as well,
but right now there is a lot of colleges offering programs.
There is a lot of infusion of talent into those programs, and I
know the military is actively recruiting people into the
cybersecurity space. So, it is something where the ranks are
starting to grow, but right now the biggest challenge is the 1-
A enterprises are getting the talent because they can afford it
and they have the resources for it. And I think there is a
bigger concern for smaller agencies in the government or for
small to medium businesses that may not have the mission or the
money to get the talent.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I realize people probably pay all over
the map and that sort of thing, but give me a general idea, and
two questions. First of all, a general idea of the compensation
people make, and second, what type of background you look at. I
think like a lot of jobs, you are telling me you get hired by
somebody and then they train you, but if that is the case, what
type of background do you get out of college? Do you want to be
a communications major? Do you want to be a physics major? What
type of thing are you looking for when you hire somebody out of
college as well?
Mr. Mandia. For me and then, you know, I would be
fascinated with the other witnesses' answers, it is a computer
science background or just an unbelievable passion and desire
to be in cybersecurity. It has got to be a fit of desire.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I would offer a few thoughts. I mean, No.
1, if somebody wants to go get trained in cybersecurity, they
are likely to have a good job for the rest of their life. This
is an area that is going to continue to grow in importance.
Second, I would just say, you know, if you look at technology
jobs, if you certainly look at companies like ours, you know,
even entry-level positions, you know, have compensation at or
north of $100,000 per year, and, you know, people make more
money over time.
Third, I do think that there is another important aspect of
this, which is really thinking about the pipeline even more
broadly than, say, computer science graduates from four-year
colleges. At one level, I think there is a huge amount that
community colleges can do to help accelerate the development of
the cybersecurity work force. People who might have gotten
their training in something else, if they want to go back, if
they want to want to spend, say, a year taking a set of
cybersecurity-related courses in community colleges, they can
put themselves on a path to quickly enter this field. And then
finally, I would say we need to keep investing even before we
get kids to college.
Mr. Grothman. Right.
Mr. Smith. I grew up in the district next to yours. I grew
up in Appleton. You know, as a company, we in Microsoft, you
know, do work to provide computer science in high schools. We
do it in, say, the two Oshkosh high schools in your district,
and what we are finding is that there are young people
everywhere who want to learn this field. They just don't have
the opportunity that they need and deserve today. So, I think
with the right kind of action from the Federal Government,
state governments, private sector, philanthropy, we can move so
much faster to create more opportunities for people.
Mr. Ramakrishna. And, Congressman Grothman, if I may add, I
agree with both my colleagues here on all the points that they
made. There are a lot of free online courses and resources that
students and kids can essentially access and start becoming
savvy in these fields. The criticality there is that the
internet is not accessible to everyone in the country. And to
the degree that we can do that to ensure that, for instance,
inner-city kids, economically disadvantaged children have
access to the internet and we give visibility to them for these
courses, we will have a larger, more effective, more diverse
work force. And to your question about what can they get paid,
I would say with a high school degree and some experience
learning online and putting it to use, depending on where you
are in the country because cost of living changes, you can make
anywhere from $70,000 to $120,000 to begin with.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Thank you. Next general question. Well, I
will switch to another question here. This is for Mr. Mandia.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman's time has expired. I am sorry.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne, for five minutes.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
thank the chairs of the whole committees, Chairwoman Maloney
and Chairman Thompson, for holding this hearing today. Just to
the point my colleague just before me, to all the witnesses,
that information that you are talking about, the opportunities
to enter that field and have people learn online and what have
you, I think if you could take the time to publicize that more
somehow across your companies, that would be very helpful
because there are a lot of times where inner-city youth don't
know that. But if you were able to publicize it more, they
would be able to find those opportunities, so I just wanted to
mention that.
The Russian Government has backed, either directly or
indirectly, election meddling and other malicious cyberactivity
against our interests for quite some time. During his term,
former President Trump was reluctant to confront Russia for
these attacks and failed to publicly condemn multiple instances
of cyber aggression. It is clear that the former President's
appeasement of Russian cyberattacks emboldened our adversaries
and is partly to blame for the SolarWinds breach. The question
is for all the witnesses. Why is it important that our leaders
present a strong, united front in containing cyberattacks?
Mr. Smith. Well, I will say I think this is like any type
of offense that the world wants to stop. People will only stop
if they are held accountable for the violations in which they
engage. You have got to have clear rules. You have got to have
clear standards. You have to have clear lines so that it is
apparent to everybody when somebody steps over the line. And
then you have to have people, especially people in government,
who are prepared to speak up and hold others accountable. I
think the best type of attribution takes place when it is not
just one government, but even by multiple governments together
when that is what the situation warrants.
We did see that twice in 2017. I think it is right to
acknowledge that. You know, the White House, together with
other governments, did that vis-`-vis North Korea in the wake
of the WannaCry attack. It did it again with Russia in the
NotPetya attack. But we need this on a consistent basis, and I
am very hopeful that with leadership that Anne Neuberger is
bringing to the White House as deputy national security
advisor, with her press conference last week, with the steps
she's talking about taking, you will see the kind of leadership
we need.
Mr. Payne. OK. Thank you. Next?
Mr. Ramakrishna. I agree with Mr. Smith's comments about
accountability and rules of engagement. It is important to
recognize that we do not accept attacks without some form of
reciprocation, so to speak, and holding people to account.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Next?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, and I would just agree with the other
witnesses. It is about risks and repercussions. It is about
understanding the rules of the road.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. And I guess, Mr. Chair, my time is
dwindling, so I will yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, for five
minutes.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here. I really appreciate you taking the
time. I want to especially thank Mr. Ramakrishna for being here
in light of the context of what we are dealing with. Your
transparency and involvement in this process, we are very
grateful for that. I want to ask you, have you provided a list
of your clients to the committee?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Mr. Cloud, thanks for the information.
Thanks for the question. As it relates to providing names of
clients, we have not.
Mr. Cloud. I serve as ranking member, along with Chair Raja
Krishnamoorthi, on the Economic and Consumer Policy
Subcommittee of Oversight. Could you provide a list to our
committee?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Cloud, I will take that for
the record and consult with my team to see what is possible to
disclose at this point in time.
Mr. Ramakrishna. As you can understand, we take the privacy
of our customers very seriously, but I will go back and work
with my team on it.
Mr. Cloud. OK. Thank you. Mr. Mandia, you said December of
last year that this all began as a dry run in October 2019. You
also indicated in December of last year and in Tuesday's Senate
hearing that government agencies sensed something wrong in
their systems but couldn't really connect the dots until they
were notified by FireEye of the breach. What would have enabled
us to connect those dots sooner, and would any of these
proposals of a centralized agency have assisted with that?
Mr. Mandia. You don't know. The bottom line, sir, I just
felt, as soon as we detected our breach, we were in dialog with
our government customers, period, first, to tell them about it.
Regardless of laws and legal liabilities, we told our
government customers about what we were dealing with. My
reaction was that I didn't see surprise. Like, people were
shuffling, thinking, and I think that there are a lot of folks
who have various products that they had little blips on the
radar, and we had to connect dots for many different vectors.
This attack, because of the way it was conducted, is just
harder to piece together. If you centralize the intel, it can
only improve the speed at which that picture and vision will
come together.
Mr. Cloud. OK. One of the questions that I have is, you
know, I wholeheartedly agree we need to invest more in making
sure that we have the capability to defend and also to build in
some attack capabilities certainly to respond to situations
like this, the workflow issue being one of the primary
indicators, so, you know, making sure students have an interest
in engagement. But we also know from past experience that our
universities have been a place where, especially notable actors
like China, which I realize this is attributed to Russia, at
least to our understanding at the moment. But how do we ensure,
of course without creating some sort of discriminatory
environment, that we won't be training our adversaries in this
regard, you know, especially for something so critical to our
national security?
Mr. Smith. I guess I would suggest here a few things. I
mean, one, obviously there is always a role for background
checks in a wide variety of different situations. Two, I think
the best way for us as a country to ensure that the people that
we are training at our universities really support our country
is to bring to the country people that we want to have stay
here and to make it easier for them to stay here. Right now,
unfortunately, it is easy to come study, but it is hard to then
stay afterwards. So we are, almost by definition, focusing on
training people that we expect to go back to their home
country, and I don't think that is the right way to conceive of
the talent strategy for the country. The last thing I would say
is, if you want to pinpoint the greatest risks, I probably
myself would not look to universities.
Mr. Cloud. Right. Right.
Mr. Smith. You know, most of what happens in universities
gets published anyway.
Mr. Cloud. OK. Well, yes, I appreciate that. Those are some
good thoughts. One final thing, and you probably would be the
best to comment on this. In Tuesday's Senate hearing, there was
a discussion about the difference between compliance and
excellence, especially in critical areas of our government
cyber structure, to create some standards that ensure that we
have a high standard of protection. But doing so in such a way,
a lot of times when government imposes a regulation or
mandates, it becomes a check box as opposed to continuing to
foster this innovative spirit. How do we get that balance
right?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Cloud, I think I was the one
that mentioned that distinction. There are a couple of ways we
can do that. One is, CISA has been mentioned a few times in
this conversation. We are dedicating resources from our team to
work directly with CISA on sharing information. So, it is not
just about threat intelligence, but it is also human resource,
and human intelligence, and actual experience of building
software that needs to be shared, such that standards bodies,
like NIST and CMMC, can actually have examples of correct
behavior that will put us all on a path of excellence versus
simply checking boxes on have you done this, have you done that
kind of question and answer. So, that is really where I was
coming from where real examples from companies, such as the
ones here today, can be contributed to those standards bodies
to enrich them.
Mr. Lynch. OK. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you all.
Mr. Lynch. I just want to inform the members that there are
series of five votes on, so after I recognize the next speaker,
I will turn the gavel over to the gentlelady from District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, to preside while I vote. I now recognize
the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Cooper, for five minutes.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me?
Mr. Lynch. I can, yes.
Mr. Cooper. The testimony so far strikes me as at least
fatalistic, if not defeatist, because here we have a number of
prominent tech companies, and they are really not proposing
tech solutions. They are proposing human re-engineering. So, it
is as if they are telling us they really can't sell products
that are completely safe, so we have to have a rule instead of
``let the buyer beware.'' And I think that tech companies
should continue to pursue tech solutions to make us all safer.
But another interesting thing in the testimony that has
been completely unmentioned so far is the fact that there is
already a hidden, private-sector regulator of cyber intrusion,
and perhaps it is hidden because it is private sector, and here
I am thinking of insurance companies that sell errors and
omissions policies. On page 25 of the stock offering that
SolarWinds engaged in in 2018, they talk about how they have
incurred and expect to incur significant expenses to prevent
security breaches. Then they go on to say, ``Our errors and
omissions insurance coverage, covering certain security and
privacy damages and claim expenses, may not be sufficient to
compensate for all liabilities we incur.''
So, I would like to find out from each of the companies
what claims you have already made to your errors and omissions
insurance companies, how much they have paid. Have your
premiums increased or do you expect them to increase, because
this is the primary way insurance companies regulate behavior,
by increasing their premiums for riskier companies. And what
percent of the industry do you think has this sort of coverage
to essentially inoculate yourselves, but not your customers,
against these errors and omissions, and what are the names of
these prominent errors and omissions insurance companies? And
wouldn't you want to suggest to those companies that they
perhaps have a more polite name for the coverage, because
``errors and omissions'' seems kind of disrespectful to their
customers. So, perhaps we can start with SolarWinds and go to
FireEye and then to Microsoft.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Cooper, thank you for the
question. Since my coming on board, we have really focused on
the investigation and addressing the safety and security of our
customers through remediation. And to your point about the
private sector taking on more responsibility for tech-based
solutions, I could not agree more with you, and that is the
reason why we came up with the notion of Secure by Design,
which is completely a technical-based approach to enhancing and
ensuring the safety and security of our supply chain and that
of our customers.
Now, specific to your question, I do recognize that we have
insurance. However, I would like to take that question on
record to give you the specifics, which I don't have handy at
this point in time.
Mr. Cooper. Mr. Mandia?
Mr. Mandia. Sir, same answer. I would like to take that
question on record because I am not prepared to speak to it at
this point.
Mr. Cooper. Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. I would say two things. First, I don't know
about the specifics here, but generally as a company, Microsoft
self-insures. We don't rely on policies from insurance
companies. But second, more broadly, if we have left you with
the impression that we are defeatist, then that is the error
and omission that we should be talking about. We are the
opposite of defeatist. We are looking at this as an enormously
challenging and important problem the country needs to address.
These are major nation-states, but technology is moving
forward. It is getting better. We are offering technology
solutions to our customers, not just as a company, but as an
industry. You are right that ultimately, just like an
automobile, it takes the driver to choose to put on the safety
belt, but we are making it easier every year. And I think we
should be embracing this with an enormous amount of self-
confidence.
Mr. Cooper. Well, instead of two-factor authentication, do
we need three-factor? What is it going to be? Are we stuck with
passwords? There has got to be a better way to do this, to
interface with humans.
Mr. Smith. Oh, I completely agree, but it is really a
combination of steps, and I think that is what your question
points to. You know, it is really some things as simple as
putting your authentication into the cloud. You know, a lot of
what happened here was with customers who did not have it
there. They hadn't secured their devices with a service like
Intune that we offer. They were not necessarily using what is
called ``least privileged access'' so that when one person's
password was stolen, you know, they were able to access more
accounts than they should have been able to. A lot of the
steps, when you really understand them, do rely on common sense
and vigilance. And I do think it is up to us to continue to
make that easier for our customers in this country and around
the world.
Ms. Norton. [Presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
Next is Mr. Higgins of Louisiana.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It is our
understanding that Russia is responsible for this cyber
espionage. They utilized some of our own publicly available
hosting services to orchestrate these illegal actions. In my
opinion, all server hosting companies, large and small, share a
responsibility in vetting their clients, and then also play a
part in preventing foreign interference in their operations.
There is no daylight between private operations and government
operations in the cyber realm. We have to work together to
secure our systems for the citizens we serve. This was a direct
attack on our Nation's technology infrastructure on a scale
never seen before. Eighteen thousand SolarWinds customers
compromised and many more thousands of systems breached in the
private and government sectors. Russian cyber espionage gained
full access across thousands of systems for a number of months.
I think it is important to note that this is not the first time
that the U.S. Government and private American cyber systems
have been subject to major cyber espionage from Russia.
Many years ago, two Administrations ago, the Kaspersky
systems were approved on the GSA catalog. That security system
was brought into Federal cyberinfrastructure. In 2015, it was
identified as being used to steal NSA tools. In 2017, it was
finally banned and removed from the GSA list. There are reports
as recent as 2019 that Kaspersky software lingers in the
government system, and beyond that, Kaspersky had a deal with
Best Buy to preload on every computer they sold. Thus, they
infiltrated the private systems at the same time. So, I have
been listening to the testimony and the questions from my
colleagues. None of us should be surprised about this, and I
believe we should be more prepared than we are right now.
Mr. Thompson, I have a question for you, sir. Is it true
that you received a 23-page PowerPoint presentation from a
former SolarWinds security advisor that listed potential
SolarWinds breach vulnerabilities and suggested improvements
needed to bolster security? Did you receive that briefing in
2017? And if you did receive that briefing, what did you do
about that, good sir?
Mr. Thompson. Yes. I believe that we have really taken the
security of our customers and our products seriously over the
history of the company. We have got a unique relationship with
our customers where we are very engaged with the individual
users of our products. And so this----
Mr. Higgins. Pardon me, Mr. Thompson, but that sounds like
an answer prepared by attorneys. It is a simple question,
respectfully. Did you receive this major briefing in 2017 that
I am referring to? Did they recommend changes, and did you
enact those changes?
Mr. Thompson. So, it is my understanding, based on our
investigation, that there was a briefing provided to some of my
IT leadership team, and that that briefing was about security
posture in general and about what the company could do to make
sure that its security posture was enhanced and to make it a
leader in security. And, yes, not as a result of that
presentation, but beginning even before that, we began to
invest in security and enhancing the posture of our security
environment. In fact, we spent more than the average technology
company of our size over the last four years on security. So,
we have taken security very seriously, but not really as a
reaction to that presentation because we knew security was
important before that, and we were focused on it.
Mr. Higgins. I appreciate your response. My time is winding
down. Mr. Smith, can you quickly address the cloud hosting
systems? It has been reported that threat actors in this breach
leveraged servers from Amazon Web Services. Can you talk about
what we can do to protect our cloud systems from further
espionage efforts?
Mr. Smith. Well, I am obviously not in a position to speak
on behalf of Amazon or AWS. I do think we should take more
steps. We certainly are always taking more steps in Microsoft
to ensure that our cloud services, to the extent possible,
cannot be used by a foreign adversary. I actually think it
should start with transparency. I am here today. I am answering
all your questions. Microsoft has published 32 blogs since this
came to light. Amazon has yet to publish its first. So, I think
we will all benefit if we create a culture where tech companies
are sharing more information.
Mr. Cooper.[Inaudible] for that point, Mr. Smith. Madam
Chair, my time has expired. I yield.
Ms. Norton. Yes, the gentleman's time has expired. I
recognize Ms. Clarke of New York. Go ahead, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Yes. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to, first of all, thank our panelists today for
appearing before us. I currently serve as the chairwoman of the
Cybersecurity Subcommittee, and I want to be perfectly clear
that as a Nation, we cannot let this happen again. SolarWinds
was but the latest malicious cyber campaign against our
country, and it will not be the last. We certainly must hold
the perpetrators of these attacks responsible, but we also must
bolster our defenses so that they can't succeed in the future.
So, my question is for Mr. Smith and Mr. Ramakrishna.
Earlier this week, you both expressed your support for
requiring critical infrastructure owners and operators to
report cybersecurity incidents. Again, as the chairwoman of the
Cybersecurity Subcommittee, this is something my subcommittee
has been working on for some time. In fact, the House-passed
version of the Fiscal Year 2021 NDAA included language that
would require critical infrastructure entities to report cyber
incidents to CISA. Unfortunately, that language fell out during
the conference, but I intend to take a close look at this issue
again, and I am heartened to see that there is so much momentum
behind this.
As anyone that has been working on this issue for a while
knows, the devil is in the details. We need to figure out who
would be subject to reporting requirements and what kind of
incidents would trigger the requirement report. We also need to
determine who they are reporting incidents to, whether that is
CISA, a new agency modeled after the NTSB, or someone else. And
finally, we need to decide what our ultimate goal is, holding
companies accountable or are we just trying to get a better
understanding of why our security controls fail. So, to the two
gentlemen, can you elaborate on the reasons you believe we need
a cyber incident reporting requirement and some of the benefits
you expect to flow from such reporting?
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say we really appreciate the
leadership that you have been bringing to this, and I think you
provided a checklist of some of the most important questions
that need to be answered. But to address the one that you posed
at the end, which perhaps is the most important of all, what
are we trying to accomplish, I think our top priority is to
make the country more secure. And the reason that we should
want companies in the private sector, companies that, as you
mentioned, are in the area of critical infrastructure, it is to
provide information about threats so that one entity is in a
position to scan the entire horizon and connect the dots
between all of the attacks or hacks that are taking place.
I think Kevin Mandia who described it really well earlier--
you know, you really cannot oftentimes determine exactly what
is going on until you connect all of those dots, and today,
this information is in separate silos. So, I would say let's
solve the problem that needs to be solved, which is the
cybersecurity protection for the country.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Ramakrishna?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congresswoman Clarke, thank you again for
your leadership and for your question. Having a single entity
to which all of us can refer to will serve the fundamental
purpose of building speed and agility in this process. Too much
time is wasted in communicating across agencies where
information is very fragmented, and oftentimes the dots are not
connected because they are separate. That is the fundamental
reason why I think having a singular agency to which all of us
can communicate to and have two-way communication with them is
fundamental to improving our speed and agility around these
topics.
Ms. Clarke. We have a few seconds left, but I would be
interested in your thoughts on how Congress should scope this
new reporting requirement. Who should it be subject to, who
should be required to report, and who within the Federal
Government is best positioned to receive and make use of such
reports?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congresswoman Clarke, you mentioned CISA a
few times. We have been engaged with CISA and other government
agencies. We are also offering our human resources to work with
CISA as well. That could be an initial starting point, and
obviously you are more qualified to decide if that is the
established entity to take this on and going public. So, our
belief is all private enterprises should be instructed with
reporting requirements and be made part of this community
vision where public and private sectors can work together to
tackle this issue.
Ms. Norton. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. I have run out of time. I yield
back. I look forward to our conversation as we continue to
address this issue. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentlelady from New York, and I
call on Mr. Norman of South Carolina.
Mr. Norman. Thank you. Two of the most, I guess, disturbing
things that I have heard this morning during this testimony is,
one, that it took nine months, that the Russians or whoever was
involved had access to our most valuable intelligence. And I
agree with Congressman Lynch: our next hearing ought to be with
those that can answer the questions, what has been compromised,
because national security is at risk. The other thing that
really has shocked me is, Mr. Smith, your testimony that,
really, we are at a shortage of cyber experts to connect the
dots. I guess my question, we can't wait to train somebody out
of high school, college, junior college. What group can we go
to? Is it those that have been successful at breaking the
system and are incarcerated, that are street smart, I guess, to
know how to get to making sure this doesn't happen again? Your
thoughts.
Mr. Smith. Well, I think it is a key question, and I would
point to two things that I think we can do to move faster as a
country. No. 1, really harness the power of our community
colleges. We don't need to send somebody back for four years of
education. You know, there is a set of eight or ten courses
that an individual can take over, say, a year or a bit more if
they want to go full time, or they can, you know, take some
courses while they are holding a full-time job. And I think
that is probably the fastest way for us to expand the
cybersecurity work force.
I think the second thing is really for us in the tech
sector ourselves. You know, we are doing more, we are investing
more, but I think we can and should do more, and, you know,
that is a good point of learning for somebody like me and for a
company like Microsoft. You know, we have LinkedIn. That is
part of Microsoft. And so, you know, it is an opportunity for
us to harness the power of, say, LinkedIn Learning and the
connections not just with community colleges, but with
employers. We are also focused on, you know, how we can add
cybersecurity curriculum to, you know, the training programs of
employers of all sizes so that if there is somebody who needs
to learn, you know, six extra things, they don't need to go
back to school. They don't even need to take a course to do it.
We can take the training to where they are, and we can build it
into their workflow on the job. That is something that we are
using our own technology to do.
So, I think this is a lot like anything. Once you
understand the importance of the problem, you can really
harness all of the available resources to address it. And I
think it is right that we make this one of the priorities that
comes out of this.
Mr. Norman. So, as a Member of Congress, what should we do
to get the Amazons on board? You know, you are one company. You
are a big company in Microsoft. But what can we do to get
private sector, the other large companies that, you know,
basically have monopolies, how do we get them activated, or
what is your advice to us?
Mr. Smith. Well, look, I am not the best person to give you
advice on how to get Amazon to do something. There will be
others who will be more insightful than me. What I would say is
if I were in your shoes and I really wanted to have the
broadest impact as quickly as possible, you know, I would look
at opportunities to provide, you know, incentives for
individuals who want to go study at community colleges so they
can do so. And I would look at, say, tax credits for smaller
businesses so that if they want to invest in the training of
their people, they can do that as well, so that you would
target, you know, the limited budget, the limited taxpayer
dollars to the places where they would have the greatest impact
in the shortest possible time.
Mr. Norman. Well, that is just what we need to hear, and a
lot of times in politics, we don't know what we don't know. We
are going to have to depend on y'all to give us a roadmap on
how we can do it. We simply cannot take another nine months to
let countries that don't have our best interests at heart
damage us, and I would be interested in anybody else, any other
comments any of the other panelists have, I would be interested
in.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Norman, if I may suggest one
area where the Congress may be able to help us also is by
encouraging us and incentivizing us to come forward with more
of these intelligence aspects and share them more broadly. In
addition to litigation risk, some of us may be worried about
reputational risk that it causes where the victim is victimized
for coming forward, and those should stop so that we can all
come together and really build our efforts to thwart these
major issues going forward.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired. I will call
on Mr. Connolly of Virginia next.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Is Mr. Connolly there?
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. If Mr. Connolly isn't there, I am looking for
the next Democrat. Please give me the name of the next
Democrat. I think you are the next Democrat, sir.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Were you talking to me, Chairwoman?
Ms. Norton. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. OK.
Ms. Norton. I am moving to you, yes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. OK. OK. Very good. Thank you so much
for all of you testifying today, and thank you for your
transparency and for giving us some very insightful
information. So, my first question is to Mr. Smith. Mr. Smith,
you gave an interview with ``60 Minutes'' recently, and in that
interview, you said that essentially the supply chain tech
attack was ongoing currently. One question I have right out of
the box is, are you aware of whether that malware and that
attack is potentially present on computers in the U.S. House of
Representatives?
Mr. Smith. We are not aware of this being focused on the
U.S. House of Representatives, so no. The answer is, no, I am
not aware of that.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. How about the U.S. Senate?
Mr. Smith. I am not aware of any use of this tactic on the
U.S. Senate either. We have seen cyberattacks, you know, in the
past on members of the House and members of the Senate, and
whenever we have detected them, we have let either the
Sergeant-at-Arms or the Speaker or members know.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Sorry. My time is limited, Mr. Smith,
so I am just to ask you to respond briefly.
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. How about the Office of the President?
Mr. Smith. I am not aware of any attack using this vector
on the Office of the President.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Now, in that ``60 Minutes'' interview,
you also mentioned that perhaps the only way--because you have
to understand this. The way I kind of picture this is that it
is almost like the burglar is in the home while we are all
here. And one of the things that you said that really struck me
in your ``60 Minutes'' interview is that you said that perhaps
the only way to make sure that we get rid of this attack or
this intruder is to ``rip and replace every single piece of
network equipment and computer that may have been affected.''
Do you still stand by that quote that you gave to ``60
Minutes''?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I don't believe that I am the one who said
that. If I did, I referred to the thought that some have that
that may need to be done. I don't----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. OK. Let me stop you there for a second.
Have you done an assessment of what that might require?
Because, at the end of the day, we need a foolproof way to
eject the intruder from our homes. We cannot be in a situation
where the intruder has carte blanche espionage capability on
us. So, talk to me a little bit about that. What type of, you
know, effort would be required if we were to undertake that?
Mr. Smith. Well, we have not been asked to do it. To the
best of my knowledge, we have not undertaken an analysis of
what it would take to rip and replace all of the, say,
technology infrastructure of a particular agency or part of
government. It is actually not what I believe needs to be done.
I think that efforts are better focused on other approaches.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Well, here's my concern, which is, what
is the foolproof way to get rid of the intruder from our
collective home at this point, because we are tired of hearing
that the intruder is here. We have no idea what that person,
that intruder is doing, but we should just kind of move on to
the next subject. We need to eject the intruder from our
computers right now, whether it is in the private sector or in
the public sector. So, what is the foolproof way that would
come short of ripping and replacing all this network
infrastructure?
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say two things. No. 1, one always
needs to identify how someone got in or is getting in in order
to get them back out. So, you know, that is in the realm of the
kind of cybersecurity sort of forensic investigation that, you
know, a company like Microsoft can help with, a company like
FireEye does, you know, every day. You know, among the best, we
are the best in the world. That is one part. The second thing
is, there are five really straightforward cybersecurity steps
that we believe, put together, will strengthen protection
across the board: move authentication into the cloud, secure
each of your devices, ensure that you are using anti-malware
software across the board, use multi-factor authentication,
apply privileged access. If you do those five things following
a review by a company like FireEye, you should be in a much,
much stronger position.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I guess my final question is to Mr.
Ramakrishna. You know, you are the new CEO and you are coming
into a pretty bad situation. The NSA is not allowed to surveil
private networks. It is only allowed to surveil foreign
networks. Is the FBI and current agencies capable of doing what
is necessary to surveil private sector networks in the U.S.?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Krishnamoorthi, I wish I were
an expert in being able to give you a yes or no answer on that,
but I am not particularly qualified to address that. Does some
level of surveillance and sharing of information between
private and public sector need to happen at a level that is not
happening today? My belief is absolutely yes, but with regards
to surveillance, I am not the expert to address it.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Fair enough. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentleman for his questions. His
time has expired, and I call on Mr. Biggs of Arizona next.
Ms. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. Because of the scope of
this attack, I am concerned. It looks like it may take years
before we fully understand its impact. Mr. Smith, my first
question is for you. How likely is it that these attacks are
continued, and, if so, how can we best determine who is still
being attacked?
Mr. Smith. Well, the first thing I would say is this
agency's attacks or hacks did not start with the use of
SolarWinds software, and it did not and will not end there. I
think we should assume that this is an agency, and this is one
of a relatively small number of very well-resourced governments
that are focused on these kinds of threats against the country
every single day, and they will be for the rest of our lives.
And so I think what we need to do is just continue to
strengthen the cybersecurity defense of the country, and we
need, in part, to couple that with the better sharing of threat
intelligence so that we are better able to spot the attacks or
hacks as early as possible after they begin.
Ms. Biggs. So, one of the concerns I have is that Congress
is going to say, well, let's just create another layer of
bureaucracy in there and then call it good. We will have done
something until the next time we have an episode like this that
we need to deal with. And I am wondering, and I will just turn
to all the panelists, real briefly if you would. Would you tell
us whether you see the solutions to prevent future attacks
coming from government, or are they going to come from the
private sector? So, let's start with Mr. Smith and then just
move on down the panel.
Mr. Smith. Well, I think we each need to play our role and
do it well. I think that the public sector, the government has
a unique role to play in establishing rules of the road, strong
laws and holding foreign governments accountable. I think the
government has a unique role to play, both in and securing the
government's own infrastructure and in collecting threat
intelligence in a centralized way and putting it to good use. I
think those of us in the private sector have an enormous role
as well. We need to continue to strengthen the technology. We
need to continue to make it easier for people to use the
technology. We need to share the information we have, something
that is not yet happening nearly to the extent that it needs to
happen across the tech sector.
Ms. Biggs. Thank you. Mr. Ramakrishna, if you would go next
please.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Biggs, I agree with my
colleague, Brad Smith's, comments here and the work that he,
and Kevin Mandia, and our colleagues at CrowdStrike and others
are doing. As it relates to your question, the picture I would
like to paint is, we are dealing with intruders, not an
intruder, in this case. They behave like Transformer toys in
many ways where they are constantly morphing and changing their
tactics and procedures on us. So, to that end, we have to be
nimble as well in working between the private and public
sectors, and shaping our policies and shaping our information
practices to adapt to this changing set of intruders and go on
the offensive.
Ms. Biggs. Thank you. Mr. Mandia?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, I agree with both witnesses, both Sudhakar
and Brad, on this one. It comes down to the government exists
to have a proportional response and deterrence. The private
sector will most likely be building the technology to safeguard
in cyberspace working with the government, and you meet in the
middle with the threat intelligence sharing.
Ms. Biggs. So, all of you at one point, either in answering
this question or other times today, have talked about
information sharing. I just want to know, are there any legal
or regulatory barriers to information sharing that you see that
currently exists? Back to you, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say there are two barriers today.
The first is, it is not always entirely clear to whom we should
be sharing the information or sharing it with. But then second
is, the one thing that we have noticed that we have mentioned
publicly that is a legal barrier, is today, it is a fairly
standard aspect of Federal contracting practices that agencies
restrict a company, like Microsoft, from sharing with others in
the Federal Government when a particular agency has been hacked
in this way. So, one of the specific things that we had to do
in December was go to each agency, tell them that we had
identified that they were a victim of this. And then we had to
say, you need to go over to this person in this other part of
the government to let them know. Please do that. We cannot do
that for you. And the good news is that people did that. They
did it quickly. But I think it is a barrier that is an
impediment.
Ms. Biggs. In what little time I have left, I would urge
the chairs of these two committees to take us into a classified
hearing because I think there are some things, like, I would
like to know, how do we know it was Russia. I would like to
know what China's involvement was. A classified hearing would
allow us to get more of that information, and I would look
forward to that. And I thank all the panelists, I thank the
chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Norton. Well, that, I think, is certainly an idea. The
gentleman's time has now expired, and I call on Mrs. Watson
Coleman of New Jersey now. Mrs. Watson Coleman, you are
recognized for five minutes.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Mrs. Watson Coleman appears to have stepped
out. Mrs. Demings of Florida, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Madam Chair, and thank you
so much to those who are with us today. It has been a very good
discussion. As I listened to the line of questioning from Mr.
McCaul from Texas, those were particularly some areas that I
certainly was interested in. I believe during that line of
questioning, there was an indication that the malware was
hiding in plain sight, and I've also heard that in order to
keep up, that we have to constantly change and adapt and
improve, I guess, our capabilities. What I am particularly
interested in is a better understanding of how the transition
to iCloud services, like Microsoft, affects a customer's
visibility related to network activity. Although the cloud
environment was not the initial entry point for malicious
actors in this campaign, it is where they were able to access
data and proliferate through iCloud assets undetected for the
better part of the year.
So, Mr. Smith, have any of Microsoft's cloud customers
informed Microsoft that their cloud environment was accessed as
part of this campaign, or has Microsoft had to inform its
customers?
Mr. Smith. Yes, it is an excellent question. The first
thing I would say is the right way to think about what happened
here is that each and every one of these attacks, hacks, that
we have seen happened on premise, meaning it was on a server,
say, that was in the server room or onsite. Now, once the
attacker was in the network, one of the things it did was it
looked for the keys or the passwords to get into cloud
services, like email or documents, or other things. Once they
did that, then they were able to go up into the cloud and
access those kinds of cloud services.
Once they did that, we were able to see them because we
scan the services that we run every day with a specific eye
toward some particular threats. We have a Threat Intelligence
Center that does that. So, in each of the 60 instances where
there were Microsoft customers that were victims, we identified
that they were the victim and we notified them. We have a team
called the Detection and Response Team, DART. It is their
mission to every day take this kind of information and let
customers know if they are being victimized in this way. And,
yes, it is one thing that we do. I think it is something that
the tech sector more broadly needs to do.
Mrs. Demings. OK. Thank you so very much for that. And for
my kind of breaking it down as a former law enforcement
officer, I kind of liken what you just said as to a burglar
going around trying the doors. You are looking for that
unlocked door or the key, and then they are able to access, as
you just indicated. Can a cloud customer identify unauthorized
access to their Office 365 accounts with their own logs? Can
they do it themselves, the customers?
Mr. Smith. I think the short answer is, yes, they can do it
in a variety of ways. They can do it either by themselves or,
you know, some customers may want to rely on the help of a
third-party service provider, a cloud service provider and the
like, you know, that is working with them. So, yes, they don't
need to rely exclusively on the infrastructure or, you know, a
company like Microsoft to do that, but it is an added service
that we do provide both in terms of detection and letting
people know.
And then I will also say we also try to offer advice. In
some ways, what happened here was, you know, for example, it is
like leaving your keys on the kitchen table, and when you do
that, somebody can go steal your car, you know. The cloud may
be, in this case, you know, your email that they access.
Mrs. Demings. Right. And, you know, Mr. Smith, what bothers
me so much about that is we are talking about nine governmental
agencies, right?
Mr. Smith. Well, that is why we say don't leave your keys
on the kitchen table.
Mrs. Demings. Yes. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Smith. We give people advice and secure ways to store
their keys.
Mrs. Demings. What steps have been taken, finally? I have
14 seconds. What steps have been taken or discussions that have
taken place to really review the cloud environment logs and
prepare for the next breach?
Mr. Smith. Well, I think that work is ongoing. Any time
something like this happens, it should cause all of us to step
back and say what have we learned and how can we get better
because we continually must. We are definitely working through
an effort like that here at Microsoft, and, yes, I would hope
it is taking place at other companies in the cloud services
business as well.
Mrs. Demings. Mr. Smith, and to all of our witnesses----
Ms. Norton. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentlelady's time has expired. I call on for five minutes Mr.
Van Drew of New Jersey.
Mr. Van Drew. Thank you, and I want to thank the chairs and
ranking members for doing this. This is good work. You know,
America is under constant attack from adversaries looking to
damage our businesses, our hospitals, our municipalities, and
critical infrastructure using cyber warfare. Like the witnesses
have already stated, we face serious threats from Iran, China,
Russia, North Korea, and other bad actors in the global
landscape. The SolarWinds campaign was a devastating attack
that showed how vulnerable we are to those types of attacks.
The integrity of our critical infrastructure is not as robust
as we thought it was.
The Federal Government needs to do better and so does the
tech industry. With close to 80 percent of Fortune 500
companies utilizing SolarWinds technology, there needs to be
collaboration obviously between public and private entities to
protect America. We owe it to our constituents, our
municipalities, and our country to ensure that we are
adequately prepared for these harmful actions.
In my district, two years ago, the Atlantic County
Utilities Authority, located in Egg Harbor Township, New
Jersey, was the victim of a cyberattack. The Utilities
Authority reported an incident in which perpetrators gained
unauthorized access to sensitive data of customers.
Additionally, operational information was withheld as the
criminals demanded ransom. Fortunately, the overall function of
the Authority was minimally impacted, but the fallout could
have been far, far worse. I applaud the previous
Administration's efforts to increase our Nation's cyber
defenses and improve gaps in our framework, and I implore the
Biden Administration to take this issue seriously and
prioritize the safety and well-being of Americans.
For Mr. Smith, in your written testimony, you discuss
Microsoft's relationship with other technology companies and
their role in Microsoft's response to the attacks. How is
Microsoft's relationship with the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA, and do you feel we are
safe from future cyberattacks of this nature?
Mr. Smith. Well, I think it is an excellent question. We
feel very good about the progress that CISA has been making. It
is a young agency. It has moved far, and it has moved fast. It
is going to need, I think, to move farther and faster in the
future, and that will require additional resources as we
continue to build the role of CISA in protecting the country. I
also think it is just worth noting, your examples, I thought,
were so important because so often we see two things. We see
the most sophisticated cyberattacks begin with nation-states,
and then we see their tactics copied by cybercriminal
organizations, and then they go to the weakest point. And the
kind of ransomware attacks that you have experienced in your
district, they were experienced in Baltimore, in New Orleans,
by hospitals across the country.
And if there is one thing I consistently find today, it is
that many of the public sector computers and information
systems software, especially at the state and local level, are
not as modern as they should be. Just to give you one example,
one department of health at the state level that we are working
with on the distribution of vaccines, we went to help them
strengthen their work. And when our consultants looked at the
manual for the software program they were using, it was for a
company that Microsoft acquired more than 20 years ago, so the
software was more than two decades old. So, part of what I
think we need to do is strengthen CISA, but I think part of
what we need to do is really, across the country at the state
and local level, embrace the modernization of our IT
infrastructure, and, in so doing, embrace the modernization of
our cybersecurity protection.
Mr. Van Drew. So, thank you for a very good answer. Do you
know what they are doing with localities? Are they specifically
working? Like, I know, for example, in our utility, there was
ransom, the ransom was paid, it went through insurance, and
then they still didn't have a key to get them out. They
actually had to figure it out on their own.
Mr. Smith. Yes. No, that is often a problem. We oftentimes
work with hospitals and municipalities that have been the
victims of these kinds of ransomware attacks. There are times
when consultants like ours can go in and solve the problem, and
there are times when it is not possible because of the
effectiveness of the attack. I do think CISA does an important
job in providing advice, but this also comes down to really
state and local government budgeting for modernization, and, I
would say, decisionmaking so that you integrate the decisions
of the IT team with the needs of, say, in vaccines, the
epidemiologist, for example, that need the technology to help
them do their jobs. You know, we need to just think anew about
how we manage technology across the public sector.
Mr. Van Drew. Real quick. Are we going in the right
direction?
Mr. Smith. We are going in the right direction. We need to
move much faster.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi.[Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Van Drew. I
would like to now recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Gerry Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can I be heard?
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. I want to talk about threat
hunting and cyberdefense, and I am going to ask all the
witnesses when I pose a question to be as succinct as you can
because I have a lot of them. Last month, Mr. Ramakrishna
announced SolarWinds intends to increase threat hunting
capabilities to bolster the company's security. Mr. Thompson,
did SolarWinds routinely employ threat hunting before the
discovery of the attack in December?
Mr. Thompson. We had a number of security defenses at the
company before the discovery of the SUNBURST malicious code.
So, we leveraged a lot of the technologies that other companies
leverage, and I think that we were doing more than the average
software company to protect our environment.
Mr. Connolly. The question was threat hunting capabilities
specifically.
Mr. Thompson. And I don't recall whether we were doing
threat hunting specifically.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Smith, Microsoft provides threat hunting
as part of its cybersecurity services. Why did Microsoft's
threat hunters fail to discover the SolarWinds compromise?
Mr. Smith. We do have a large number of threat hunters. I
would say we did not detect this intrusion as quickly as we
might because, first, it was very limited on Microsoft's own
network, and second, until we heard from someone else, like
FireEye, you know, we didn't have the specific threat to hunt
for. You know, it is definitely a capability that we are
continuing to invest in to expand at Microsoft.
Mr. Connolly. Has Microsoft learned any lessons from its
investigation of the compromise that could improve hunting for
this type of threat in the future?
Mr. Smith. Absolutely. I mean, I think whenever something
like this happens, we need to learn a lot, and you need to take
a little bit of time and let the dust settle. You know, there
is the kind of threat hunting that needs to take place every
day, and that includes the work of our Threat Intelligence
Center to scan the horizon. I think one of the things that we
learned is when you have an adversary that is this focused,
this determined, and this well-resourced, there will be major
cyber incidents that require you to expand overnight the number
of individuals who are engaged on response or threat hunting.
We did that in this instance. We expanded to more than 500
engineers who were pretty much on this 24 by 7, but we are
asking ourselves how we build the capability in the future to
grow to even a larger number if that is what we need to do.
Mr. Connolly. OK. I am sorry. I am going to run out of
time, but let me ask one more question in this series. How can
the government support private companies that have been engaged
to threat hunt on Federal networks?
Mr. Smith. Well, I think the single most important thing
the government can do is create a centralized point of intake
so the threat intelligence, the information that is found from
threat hunting, can go to a central place, but there is a
second step that is needed as well. The government then needs
to decide when and how to share information it is finding back
with companies, like FireEye or Microsoft, so that we can act
using that information in an appropriate way.
Mr. Connolly. The National Defense Authorization Act
provided cybersecurity agencies with increased authorities to
do threat hunting across the Federal civilian networks. Do you
believe those provisions in the National Defense Authorization
Act would do what you just suggested?
Mr. Smith. I think the NDAA that was just passed goes far
in adding additional tools and layers of protection. I think
there is more that we need to do to add to what was passed last
year. In this area of, you know, information about threat
intelligence, I think, you know, this is a specific topic that
it is good we are talking about here. I think it is an area
where additional legislation would be helpful.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Ramakrishna, you indicated, in response
to Mr. Langevin, three theories you have about the attack, but
the third one intrigued me, that you were a victim of supply
chain attack. What is the evidence to support that?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Connolly, my point on the
third hypothesis that we laid out was a potential vulnerability
in a third-party software that we are deploying at our company.
So, I wasn't referring to necessarily a supply chain attack on
a third party as much as a vulnerability that we are yet to
discover.
Mr. Connolly. And my final question is to Mr. Mandia. Based
on your experience in the Air Force and the Pentagon, what are
the limitations from your perspective about threat hunting when
used by the Federal Government, and then I will yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Mandia. First, I think threat hunting is something that
is probably a decade old. Not every company does it. We are
talking about an attack that impacted 17,000-plus
organizations, and nobody detected it until we reversed the
whole thing. So, you are going to see threat hunting gain in
popularity, but it is a high-skill-set thing. Government
agencies that we have worked with are well trained, can conduct
threat hunting, and I think it is all about authority. Do they
have the authority to do it or not?
Mr. Connolly. Does the NDAA give broader authority?
Mr. Mandia. I am not prepared today to speak to that. I
haven't read the whole document.
Mr. Connolly. Maybe you could get back to us with that for
the record.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Connolly. Now I would
like to recognize Mr. LaTurner from Kansas. Mr. LaTurner, you
are on the clock.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you. My question is for Mr. Smith, and
I would like to discuss cyber deterrence as it relates to the
private sector. This is a discussion that you had some on
Tuesday, but I want to talk about the frustration that does or
does not exist in the private sector that the U.S. Government
just isn't doing enough to deter these attacks. Could you speak
to that?
Mr. Smith. I think that there is a need for additional
deterrence or accountability measures, and I think it probably
needs to fall into three categories. First, in certain areas,
there is an opportunity to strengthen the rules of the road
and, in particular, with respect to three issues: something
that puts this kind of software supply chain or hardware supply
chain disruption off limits, especially for these kinds of
disproportionate and indiscriminate attacks; second, something
should put attacks on hospitals and the public health service
off limits; and third, it should put attacks on the electoral
system off limits. That is step one.
Step two, I think we then need a consistent government
policy that says that when these lines are crossed, the
government, whenever it finds sufficient information, is going
to have public attribution, and that public attribution, where
possible, should be with our allies as well so it has
multinational effect. And third, the government needs a set of
tools so that there are consequences for when these lines are
crossed.
Attribution is the first step, but there may be instances
where there are sanctions. There may be instances where there
are other steps. I think this is fundamentally a question for
the government itself, but it is like anything. If you catch
somebody who is engaged in an offense, you need to hold them
accountable, and you need a variety of ways to do that.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that, and I want to talk about
information sharing and how that can enhance the ability to
address some of these threats. And specifically, does Microsoft
contracts prevent you from sharing threat intelligence with the
government? What kind of restrictions does that put on you?
Mr. Smith. Well, the government's contracts impose
restrictions on Microsoft and other government contractors in
this kind of situation. So, that was the specific limitation
that we encountered when we wanted to notify different parts of
the U.S. Government of what we were seeing. And we found that
we could only inform the agency that was the victim itself, and
we had to ask them to go talk to another person, or individual,
or part of the government, which they did. But it struck us as
a barrier that is not serving the government itself very well.
Mr. LaTurner. But no issues with private sector contracts.
Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Smith. No. I mean, it is very interesting to me how
varied the practice is across the tech sector. At Microsoft,
when we see one of our customers that are attacked, I think it
is our first responsibility to let the customer know. We have
done this more than 13,000 times in the last two-and-a-half
years with nation-state attacks, and yet there are other
companies that, to the best of my knowledge, have not even
alerted their customers or others that they were a victim of
the SolarWinds-based attack. These are companies where their
own infrastructure was used to launch the attack, and somehow
they don't think it is part of their responsibility to let
these victims know that they are victims. And that needs to
change, and it needs to start in the tech sector. I think we
need to come to terms with this.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you for your testimony today. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you very much, Mr. LaTurner.
Congresswoman Kelly?
[No response.]
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Congresswoman Kelly?
[No response.]
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Congresswoman Kelly, can you hear me?
[No response.]
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Robin? She just responded.
Congresswoman Kelly, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Oh my goodness. I can't believe it. OK. Let me
get the thing up. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and thank you
to the witnesses. Can you hear me?
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Yes.
Ms. Kelly. OK. The SolarWinds hack reflects a disturbing
new paradox for the security of U.S. computer and information
technology systems. Regular software updates and patches are
often critical for correcting known vulnerabilities and
preventing cyberattacks. Many of my colleagues will recall the
March 2017 Equifax data breach that resulted in the loss of
massive amounts of personal and sensitive data. In that case,
the hackers exploited a widely known vulnerability that should
have been patched several months earlier. Mr. Mandia, can you
tell us why regular software updates and patching is important
for protecting an individual or a business's systems and
networks?
Mr. Mandia. Absolutely. When you are patching, what you are
trying to do is close the window of vulnerability, period. You
know, software, there is always first-to-market versus secure-
to-market, and a lot of times it is hard to find security
imperfections in software ahead of time because it is hard to
predict the thousands of different ways people may use your
software. So, I have heard people say building software is like
building a bridge. It is not. Bridges follow the laws of
physics. Software does not. But the bottom line is this: there
is always a gap between what attackers can do and the
capability and the safeguards that we have. When you get a
patch, the faster you patch it, you are reducing your window of
vulnerability.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. In the case of SolarWinds, a software
update itself, a trojan horse, ended up installing malware on
the victims' computer networks. I am concerned that at a time
when regular software updates are as important as ever, the
SolarWinds attack might deter individual customers and systems
administrators alike from installing needed software updates.
Mr. Mandia, what would you say to customers or systems
administrators who may be concerned or reluctant to download
updates or patches for software for fear that updates might
contain malware?
Mr. Mandia. Well, I can tell you even in the SolarWinds
breach, we have to remember the funnel. Over 17,000 companies
were stage 1 victims, but the attacker only accessed 100. This
was a manual attack, not an automated virus. There is a human
on a keyboard. This is a threat group that doesn't target
everybody all the time, so the risk is far less based on the
constraints that the hacker had or the attack group had based
on manual labor. The bottom line is everybody is now
recognizing the rules of the road are that foreign intelligence
services are hacking the supply chain, and everybody is
wondering is there another implant in some other software. So,
I think that there is going to be more inspection, where the
capability to inspect exists, for all updates on a go-forward
basis, and the industry is going to change both how software is
created and how software is vetted.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much. Mr. Ramakrishna, SolarWinds
has reported that the company has 33,000 Orion users. You later
identified that 18,000 had downloaded an effective version of
Orion during a three-month period. My question is, customers
have to manually download updates from you, correct?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Kelly, that is true, yes.
Ms. Kelly. This would suggest that just over half of your
customers downloaded an update during three months, to say
nothing of whether or not they actually installed it, correct?
Mr. Ramakrishna. That is correct.
Ms. Kelly. And then at the same time, the customers that
did download the update exposed their systems to this malware.
Mr. Ramakrishna. That is a potential, yes, Congresswoman.
As Mr. Mandia described it, once the patch with the affected
code is installed at a customer site, in certain installations,
not everywhere, not in every place, they try to connect back to
essentially their home server to see if they can actually get
connectivity and then potentially start doing some things
manually to break through the defenses once they have gotten
in, which is----
Ms. Kelly. OK. I got you. Mr. Smith, let me turn to you
quickly. Does it concern you that users may think twice about
downloading an update, and can you explain?
Mr. Smith. I think it should concern us all. I think Kevin
Mandia put it well. I mean, I do think that this will
strengthen the process that is used to build and vet software,
but I would still say the message to the consumers of America
should be clear: you are far safer if you update your software.
It is a little bit like thinking----
Ms. Kelly. And what----
Mr. Smith. Well, one seat belt may have a defect, but you
should still put on your seatbelt. You are going to be far
safer every day if you update your software.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you so much, and thank you to all the
witnesses. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Congresswoman Kelly. Next, I
would like to recognize the gentlelady from Tennessee,
Congresswoman Harshbarger. You are on the clock.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I just
have a statement first, and then I will go into a question.
Since we don't know how the malicious code was inserted into
the software updates, which is unbelievable, and several of you
have said that the U.S. Government needs a national strategy to
strengthen how we share threat intelligence between the U.S.
Government and the private sector, you know, we are constantly
patching and adopting continuous updates, and it has been a
standard of cybersecurity best practices measures for years. I
guess I was looking at testimony from Tuesday, and, Mr. Mandia,
in your testimony, you mentioned that the adversary was able to
disarm some of your sensors as part of the intrusion. Can you
tell us what you mean by that?
Mr. Mandia. Absolutely. When the implant in the SolarWinds
software ran, one of the first things it did, 11 days after it
installed--mind you, it slept for the first 11 days--is it
looked at the system it was running on, and it looked for
common safeguards, like Windows Defender, like CrowdStrike,
like FireEye's Endpoint, and it shut them off. And, again, the
implant ran at system level. It had the permissions to do
whatever it needed to do, so it just said, ``What security is
running? Kill it,'' and that is why we couldn't detect it in
the first stage of the attack.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you for that. Also, Mr. Smith, in
your testimony on Tuesday, you said that while the adversaries
had gained access to your source code, you don't consider the
code to be particularly sensitive. And I guess from media
reporting, it has been suggested that this effort by the
adversary allowed it to exploit the identity and authentication
features of Microsoft in other breaches of entities. Can you
tell me a little bit about that?
Mr. Smith. Yes, there are two different concepts in your
question. I mean, first, you know, we share our source code
broadly. We share it with all of our employees, and the secrecy
and the security protection of our technology is not based on
the secrecy of the code itself. We live in a world where, you
know, much code is published, you know, to the world on the
internet in open source form. The second part of your question
then goes to, you know, our services overall, and I would say a
couple of things. In no instance did we identify any action or
case where anyone was able to use Microsoft's services as a
vector of attack, as a means to attack any other customer.
There are, you know, discussions that, you know, have ensued,
rightly so, about the use of some industry-standard approaches
for the authentication of accounts. Microsoft, like everybody
in this business, supports these industry-wide standards. One
of the standards, in particular, is 13 years old. It is called
SAML.
It has been superseded, in our view, by something we have
been encouraging customers and developers to move to since, but
there was a vulnerability, so to speak, in SAML that was
exploited in a small percentage--and I think that is important
to underscore as well--a small percentage of the instances that
we saw. And it was only exploited after someone had already
basically gotten elevated privileges, for example, by stealing
a key or breaking a password. But nonetheless, I think this is
quite rightly raising questions, how do we address this issue
in the future. We are focused on that. Others are focused on
it. I do think it is something that we will want to continue to
work to address.
Mrs. Harshbarger. You know, honestly, coming from the
private sector to the government sector, you know, we trust
that those apps that we are installing, those updates on our
Apple phone, on our watch, on anything that we do in a business
environment or the government environment, we assume that it is
safe because it has been vetted. I guess my question is, how
can we be assured in the future that these software updates are
going to be safe, and, in your best estimate, you know, how
soon are we going to be attacked again, I guess is my question.
We update every day something, and that makes me a little
fearful going into the future.
Mr. Smith. Well, I think there are two things that we need
to do to better secure this kind of software updating. The
first, as Kevin Mandia was saying before, is we are going to
need to work with everyone who creates software to secure what
is called their build process and to vet the software that is
built. You know, at a company like Microsoft, we have an
extraordinary range of controls to address that, but, you know,
software is being built by companies and other organizations,
large and small. And second, I think this is why it is so
important for the government itself to send a message to the
world that this type of indiscriminate and disproportionate
tampering with the software supply chain is a violation of
international norms and rules, and there will be accountability
when foreign governments do this.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you. The gentlewoman's time is
up.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me now turn to Congressman Eric
Swalwell, the distinguished member from California. You are on
the clock. You are muted.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
panelists. This attack, I think it is pretty clear, was done by
Russia, likely its intelligence services. That is what public
reporting has shown. So, Mr. Smith, we know that Russia does
not have much use for economic espionage. They are just not a
country that is stood up in a way that they can benefit like
our other adversary, China, who commits economic espionage
every single day. However, this attack does touch not only on
public-sector networks, but also private-sector networks. How
much worse could this have been if an adversary, like China,
had gone as far down the stack as Russia?
Mr. Smith. I don't know that I have the best answer to that
question. I guess I would say we need to recognize that we live
in a world where there are multiple governments that are
investing in these kinds of cyber intrusion capabilities. They
may act based on different motives, and they may use what they
obtain for different purposes, and we do see that in a somewhat
diversified way around the world. I guess you could say, you
know, it can always be worse. It could have been worse, and
obviously it could have been much better. I think the most
important thing is that we learn from this, recognize that it
is a dangerous world in which we live, and we are going to have
to strengthen our defenses.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Smith, earlier my colleague, Mr.
Krishnamoorthi, who is also on the Intelligence Committee with
me, asked you whether the House of Representatives, Senate, or
Office of the President's systems had been penetrated that had
Microsoft platforms, and I believe you said no. How about in
the last election cycle, in the current cycle we are in?
Microsoft was quite helpful in actually being the first to
report that, I think, some campaigns had been breached even
before the U.S. Government had told Congress. Have you seen any
recent attacks against members of the House or the Senate and
against their campaigns?
Mr. Smith. I am not aware of anything since the last
election ended. That doesn't mean that there hasn't been
anything, but nothing has crossed my desk. You know, we
certainly did see a series of intrusions, hacks, attacks, if
you will, during the last electoral cycle, as you mentioned.
You know, we did bring that information forward. You know, we
have created an offering called AccountGuard that we provide
free of charge to every Member of Congress, every political
campaign, to think tanks, to the political parties, if they are
using Office 365. We provide this at no additional cost, and
what we do is employ our Threat Intelligence Center to
constantly look for these kinds of attacks and then let people
know if we find something, and we do that immediately.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Mr. Ramakrishna, you
alluded earlier that you believe that having some sort of, not
incentive, but safe harbor to disclose breaches would likely
result in more cyber companies or companies writ large
disclosing breaches. Can you elaborate on that? How could we
make sure that, one, consumers are able to hold companies
accountable if there is a breach that the company was
responsible for, but that we would still be able to see
companies disclose breaches early to protect consumers? And I
think in tort law, for example, you know, if your restaurant is
being sued because a deck collapsed and the restaurant took
measures to fix the deck, they could still be sued for the
injuries of the deck collapse, but it could not be used against
them if they sought to fix the deck collapse. Can you just talk
about how can you make sure consumers are protected, but
industry is still disclosing and has an incentive to do so?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, thanks for that question.
Where we are coming from on this topic is that, as companies
discover malware and other vulnerabilities, the fact of the
matter is no matter how many resources any one of our companies
have, no matter what level of controls we have, all of our
software has some form of vulnerabilities or another. When we
discover those, we should be able to not only fix them, but
also share them with others such that each one of us are not
discovering the same issues over and over again and, in that
process, losing time. So, where we are coming from is the early
disclosure so that we don't have to repeat the same situation
over and over again, both at the customer level as well as at a
software supplier level, must be eliminated.
So, the challenge here is one of potential litigation and
one of, as I described it, victimizing the victim itself for
coming out. And those are things that need to be eliminated or
those stigmas need to be eliminated for more of us to come out
and speak openly. Obviously, today, three of us have come and
spoken about it. We should get more vendors and more customers
to speak up so that we can together solve this problem. It is
not purely one of resources. It is one of how resources use
information and share it for our collective benefit.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you so much, Mr. Swalwell. Next,
I would like to recognize the gentlewoman from Iowa, Mrs.
Marionette Miller-Meeks.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. I want to
also thank the extraordinary knowledge of our witnesses'
testimony. And also, as a former Army veteran, or as an Army
veteran, I want to thank Mr. Mandia specifically for his
service. This is a tremendously important hearing, and as I
have listened to the testimony of our witnesses and both the
insightful questions from my colleagues and the answers
provided by our expert witnesses, I am reminded of pulling a
single thread which then unravels an entire garment. You know,
we are all a weak link in this system.
So, like many people, I am a doctor. I interface with a
hospital system and have protected health information that I am
concerned about and concerned about my own financial
information. But when I have to change my password every two
months and when I have to do my security training every year, I
perceive it as a nuisance, and I don't think I am alone in
that. However, what you all have brought to our acute awareness
and alarm, we are all each individually a weak link as we
interface and interact both in our private lives and with state
and Federal Governments.
So, Mr. Ramakrishna, as the CEO of SolarWinds, and,
granted, only a very brief time, and I can only imagine coming
into an organization as the CEO with this overhanging your new
tenure, you have been very forthright about some of SolarWinds'
security culture challenges from the past and how you have
leaned into improvements to the security culture, particularly
around software development practices. We need to use events
like these as collective learning moments to raise the overall
tide level for everyone. The stakes are just too high to stand
idly by. What role do you think companies like SolarWinds have
to use their experiences and past challenges to promote better
practices ecosystem-wide?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congresswoman, thank you for your
question. We take our obligation to be a very active
participant in this. While we were subject to this attack, we
have learned a lot as well, and I will elaborate on one
specific thing. I am happy to elaborate further as you please.
As it relates to supply chain, one of the key challenges that
we have uncovered as part of this attack is, typically all of
us as software vendors use our certificate to sign the product
that we deliver as the mark of integrity of the software that
we deliver. Obviously, in this particular unique supply chain
attack, that mechanism is not sufficient.
So, one of the improvements that we are making, which we
are also publishing both to CISA and others as well as our
industry colleagues, is a different way and an enhanced way of
building software that gives more confidence and trust to
customers as to how it needs to be done that does not only rely
on age-old ways of signing with our certificates, and instead,
having parallel build environments that are managed and
accessed by different sets of engineers. And that is an
investment that we are making in that process to ensure that,
across parallel build environments, the integrity of what we
deliver is assessed and not compromised. So, that is a unique
way of doing things and an extended way of doing things based
on this very specific learning that we intend to publish
externally as well.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much for that. And, Mr.
Smith, before my time expires, you alluded to this earlier when
you spoke about training your customers. And so do we need to
have more broad-based security training for all of us as
individuals, again, as we interact and interface with both
local, state, and Federal Government entities? As I mentioned,
it has been raised to my alarm that we are all a weak link, and
I am going to have better security measures going forward.
Mr. Smith. Well, I first want to say we really appreciate
the leadership you have provided in focusing on state and local
needs, and, you know, highlighting some of the kinds of
ransomware attacks in a place like Iowa, because I do think
that that really highlights that this happens in, you know,
every part of the country. I hope we don't need to ask every
individual as a consumer to, you know, suddenly spend a lot
more time than they do today. Our goal is to make it easy and
simple for individual consumers to simply, you know, turn on
something like Microsoft Defender and let it go to work. But I
think when we get to organizations--a hospital, a school, a
municipality, a state agency--you know, that is where we need
more personnel. We do need more training, and we are going to
need more tools, which we are absolutely committed to
providing.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much. I yield back my time.
Ms. Norton. [Presiding.] We will take a recess at this
time. We are not through. Excuse me. There is somebody there
ready to go, so excuse me. I understand that Miss Rice of New
York is prepared to come forward at this time. Miss Rice, you
are recognized for five minutes.
Miss Rice. Thank you so much, and I want to thank our
witnesses today. This is incredibly enlightening at a critical
time. But I also want to thank my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle because the one message that I am getting loud and
clear is that we can be doing better. It is one thing to have
all of our witnesses here talking about what they are doing,
but we need to actually act as well.
So, Mr. Smith, a consistent theme in today's conversation
has been that the U.S. Government needs to improve and
incentivize intelligence sharing between Federal agencies and
the private sector. I believe that you have called for the
Federal Government, and forgive me, I had to
[inaudible] so I left for a little while. I don't know if
you addressed this. But you have called for the Federal
Government to impose clear cyberattack reporting requirements
on the private sector, and you have pointed to the EU's law
requiring digital service providers to notify authorities of
incidents as a model to follow. Would you consider the EU the
gold standard around the globe, and are there any other
countries we can look at to emulate what they are doing and
recreate it here?
Mr. Smith. Well, I definitely think we should learn from
what the European Union is doing. I don't know if I would call
them the gold standard, and there are others worth looking at
as well, and I should do some more homework and get you some
more examples. I think we need something that works for the
United States, and I think we can put something like that
together. Yes, I think we have had good conversation here on
some of the specifics. You know, it is not something that needs
to apply to everyone in the country, but it definitely should
apply, at a minimum, to, you know, those entities like my own
that are part of the critical infrastructure for the country
and that are obtaining this kind of information. I think we can
put together a gold standard ourselves as a Nation in terms of
reporting the right information to the right people as rapidly
as possible, and then I think, critically, sharing back the
right information in an appropriate way as well so that we are
better informed about what to look for.
Miss Rice. Well, I hesitate to speak for every one of my
colleagues on this hearing, but I, of course, stand ready to
work on that with you. Mr. Mandia, in a similar vein, you have
argued that the U.S. should establish a confidential
information sharing solution to encourage public/private
communication after breaches. And I believe you pointed to the
FAA's Aviation Safety Reporting System, which uses non-punitive
anonymous reporting to encourage the private sector to
communicate about threats. To your knowledge, do any countries
take a similar approach to encouraging the private sector to
identify and address threats?
Mr. Mandia. I think nobody does it exactly right. I have
seen a lot of nations go through a lot of different evolutions,
you know. I look at the U.K. They do a better job, in my
opinion, of private and public partnership. They have more
centralization of how they respond to incidents such as this.
You look at Israel, much smaller scale, but, you know, they
have their Iron Dome in how they approach threat intelligence
sharing there.
But my remarks were basically about if the threat
intelligence sharing is not confidential, then as a reporter of
threat intel, you have to get your arms around all the
liabilities first, and it just creates too much delay, too much
time, and the intel won't be actionable. So, I believe threat
intelligence needs to be shared quickly, and I think you can
define first responders in the industry, folks who respond to
unauthorized, unlawful, or unacceptable behavior. If you do
that for a living or provide those services and you see
something, you can report that very confidentially. You can
defend the Nation. You can get it to the right government
entities, and, quite frankly, let the company get their arms
around, ``So, what did we lose?''
And realize this: a lot of disclosure creates fear,
uncertainty, and doubt that is unnecessary. Most organizations,
when they have a breach, lack the expertise to get a full scope
of what did we lose and what should we do about it. They can't
do it, and they are just going to scare the heck out of
everybody by saying, ``Hey, we had a breach,'' and everybody
goes, ``Well, what does that mean? What does it mean to me?''
And it could just be a small thing, a small matter that doesn't
impact the consumers. So, every organization will need some
time.
Miss Rice. So, let me just ask you, Mr. Smith and Mr.
Mandia, you know, what we are talking about today shows a level
of human weakness and bad cyber hygiene. What steps could we
take here in Congress? I mean, I am calling for all of the
members to be required to have cyber education, which we are
not required to do. How can we improve our cyber hygiene at the
Federal level?
Mr. Smith. Kevin, do you want to go, or do you want me to
go first?
Mr. Mandia. Brad, you can go first.
Mr. Smith. OK. Well, I would say, first of all, I think
your question is very important in the sense that everybody
talks about technology, but, ultimately, it is always about
people. And I think what it really connects with is the need to
have, you know, consistent training, consistent implementation
of what we all recognize today, our best practices, and
ultimately an expansion of the work force in the cybersecurity
field so that we have more trained people who can support all
of the organizations and customers across the country.
Ms. Norton. The gentlewoman's time has expired. The
witnesses have asked for a 10-minute recess. They are really
entitled to that. This is a long hearing because there are two
committees meeting and asking questions, but we don't want it
to go on forever, so we will take a 10-minute recess at this
time.
[Recess.]
Ms. Norton. The committee will reconvene. We have a very
large set of members because there are two committees. This is
a joint hearing. That is why this is going on for so long. I
want to call on the next member on my list. It is Mr. Clyde of
Georgia. You are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. As a Navy officer,
a Navy combat veteran, I am quite aware that our military is
tasked with protecting our Nation, and we take that very
seriously and have been very successful in doing that for over
a century. But cyberattacks on our country are something that
literally can go right through whatever military protections we
have, and can affect especially our civilian population in ways
that can be devastating for medium businesses, large
businesses, and even small businesses. So, several of you have
said that the U.S. Government needs a national strategy to
strengthen how we share threat intelligence between the
government and the private sector. So, would each of you give
me an idea of how you would see this playing out? What role do
you see CISA playing to help support this, especially when it
concerns the private sector? And I guess we could start with
the CEO of SolarWinds.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Clyde, thank you again for the
question. In terms of CISA, there are a few things that we can
work with CISA on as part of a private sector entity. One is
CISA can essentially be the clearinghouse of all threat
information that is given to it by the public sector. That is
No. 1, and the converse is true from a private sector
information gathering standpoint as well. Once it has got a
coordinated set of information, it can take the responsibility
to disseminate it to all impacted and potentially impacted
parties as well. That will ensure that we are all coordinated,
that we are fast and agile in learning and responding. The
other major area that I would suggest is CISA can be a big
influencer in establishing best practices and disseminating
best practices across the entire value chain, not just in the
threat aspect of it, but in the standardization of it, such
that as things become more standard and more of us in the
private sector follow, then potential for leakage across
private sector entities is significantly reduced and
diminished.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. I appreciate that. Mr. Thompson, any
comments from you, sir?
Mr. Thompson. Yes. The only thing I would add to what
Sudhakar said is I do believe that CISA has an opportunity,
based on where it sits in the government, to really coordinate
resources from both the private and public sector. I think as
private sector software companies, we would be willing to
dedicate some amount of resources to work with CISA in coming
up with cybersecurity strategies for both the private and
public sector. But someone is going to have to be the
coordinator of that, and I think CISA might be, if resourced
appropriately, be in the right position to be able to do that.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much. Mr. Mandia?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, not too much to add to that other than
when I think about intel sharing, if there is intel in, it
makes sense that it goes to a single entity and the government.
If there is intel out, that has got to be communicable to all
the technology companies that safeguard the Nation in the
private sector, public sector. And then there has got to be a
prioritization, that there is probably different industries--
healthcare, utilities, telecom--that rise above some of the
others that you got to make sure abide by certain legislation
standards or regulations, and most of those are regulated
industries. But that is how I think about it: intel in, then
intel has got to get out, and then we get a Nation that can put
shields up a lot faster than it can today.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. Thank you. And last, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I think these provided good perspectives.
The one thing I would add is, obviously this is a paradigm
where CISA would be responsible for the assessment of threat
data that is being reported domestically from companies inside
the United States. You know, at the same time, you still have
the NSA, which has this critical responsibility and role with
respect to data, that it is able to identify from outside the
United States. And then for the government as a whole, you need
to have, you know, both of these sources to get the full
picture of the threats to the country.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you very much. We had quite a serious
ransomware attack in my district to a private company that
basically shut them down for five weeks and cost them almost
$10 million, so this is very, very important what we are doing
here. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I yield back.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentleman for his questions, and
his time has expired. I call on Ms. Tlaib of Michigan now. Ms.
Tlaib, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairwoman. Mr. Thompson, you
served at SolarWinds for 14 years, including 10 as its CEO, so
I just want to make sure it is fair to say that you know this
company better than anyone. I think Bloomberg News said two
former employees viewed your company's security lapses as so
significant that they said they viewed a major breach as
inevitable. So, one of those employees, Mr. Ian Thornton-Trump,
said that he warned the company in 2017 of security risks, but
found the company's executives were, and I quote, ``unwilling
to make the corrections.'' So, Mr. Thompson, I am sure you were
expecting this question, but, you know, did you all take
immediate action when these concerns were raised?
Mr. Thompson. So, I believe we have taken this security of
our customers, of our company, of our products seriously my
entire tenure at SolarWinds. I believe we have invested at the
appropriate level. In fact, over the last four years, we were
spending at a level meaningfully higher than the industry
average.
Ms. Tlaib. When did you all start investing in security?
Mr. Thompson. We have been investing in security since we
got here, but obviously that security investment has grown as
the company has grown. But if you look back to 2016, in 2016,
we really looked at the business. We looked at where it was,
and we began to invest at a higher level. We brought in a CTO
who had been a CIO for many years. In early 2017, we brought in
a very experienced CIO. We then added a VP of security who
deals with product security----
Ms. Tlaib. And this all happened in 2016?
Mr. Thompson. In 2016 and 2017.
Ms. Tlaib. So, Mr. Thompson, is it true, and this is
something when the committee told me, I was kind of in
disbelief. If all that was going on, then why in 2019 it was
said that you could easily access your server by simply using
the password ``SolarWinds123?''
Mr. Thompson. So, that related to a mistake that an intern
made, and they violated our password policies, and they posted
that password on their own private GitHub account. As soon as
it was identified and brought to the attention of my security
team, they took that down.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. You know, it just doesn't, you know, invoke
a lot of confidence when many of us when we hear it is an
intern could have done that, and, again, that same password was
used to access your server. The other one, is it true that
SolarWinds did not create a role of a vice president of
security until 2017?
Mr. Thompson. So, we did not have a role for vice president
of security, but as I have said, we had a very sophisticated
CIO and a CTO who had been a CIO at a very large Fortune 500
company, and we had a security team, and we had a security
process. We just didn't have a VP of security prior to that
day.
Ms. Tlaib. So, with all those people, two years later,
2019--I don't know if they were in place--you know, how fast
did you fix the issue with the ``SolarWinds123'' password to
access your servers?
Mr. Thompson. As soon as it was identified to us, it was
fixed almost----
Ms. Tlaib. Days, weeks, months? How long?
Mr. Thompson. Faster than days once we found out about it.
Ms. Tlaib. Well, it also has been reported that back in
October, another security company, Palo Alto Networks, raised
concerns with SolarWinds about--am I saying it right, Orion
product--based on behavior that they had observed, which is now
believed to be related to the cyberattack. What steps did you
all take to ensure that this issue was investigated, Mr.
Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. So, I will pass that to Sudhakar because I
have not been the CEO since December 31 of 2020, and there have
been a lot of investigation work done since then. So, I will
let Sudhakar respond to that.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Thank you, Kevin.
Ms. Tlaib. You got any interns messing up, Mr. new CEO? So,
I would love to hear about what you all are doing about these
concerns raised in October.
Mr. Ramakrishna. We heard about it from Palo Alto as a
possible victim of the malware that was delivered as part of
the Orion code and related issues. It wasn't about the security
hygiene or security posture of SolarWinds itself. In fact, we
are a customer of Palo Alto's, and we have 44 pairs of Palo
Alto infrastructure protecting us, not just from a firewall
standpoint, but also doing some threat hunting within our
environments today.
Ms. Tlaib. Well, I appreciate all of that. I just want my
colleagues to understand it is not only that we need to find
out what they were able to access, but the fact that, you know,
SolarWinds did have a weak security culture that, you know, ran
right up against this attack. And we need to acknowledge that
because, I mean, I understand that there was just a recent post
on LinkedIn for different security positions you guys may have
posted recently. And so I just really want to make sure that,
again, my colleagues, that we are all doing our due diligence
in regards to some of these companies that we contract out to,
to protect the privacy and protect our country from these kinds
of attacks. With that, I yield. Thank you so much.
Ms. Norton. The gentlewoman's time has expired, and I thank
her for yielding. Mr. Fallon of Texas is next.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Mr. Fallon, are you there?
Mr. Fallon. Yes, ma'am. Can you hear me?
Ms. Norton. I can hear you. You can proceed.
Mr. Fallon. Well, thank you very much, and I want to thank
the witnesses for bearing with us in a joint committee. I know
it has been a long day thus far. You know, what alarmed me when
I was reading through sourcing material was the fact that, and
it really got my attention, was the fact that the Secretary of
Homeland Security's own email had been compromised. Mr. Mandia,
thank you for your service to our country. I wanted to ask, in
your opinion, what would have happened and how much more damage
would or could have been done if your company hadn't discovered
this breach in December 2020?
Mr. Mandia. Well, you know, I think over time, people would
have come across enough smoke to find the fire, so it would
have been discovered in time and people would have connected
the dots. We just happen to be a forensic firm and, you know,
special ops met special ops. We responded appropriately with
the right skill sets, found the implant. In regard to what
could have happened, the attacker had unfettered access to over
17,000 different organizations and nobody saw it. So, this
attacker stayed laser focused on stealing specific information.
They showed, arguably, constraint, and they didn't do anything
destructive, but in reality, sir, it would have been easier for
this attacker to destroy data than do the operations that they
did. So, I think there was a range of options for the threat
actor to behave like, and they behaved in a manner to steal
emails and documents that they were targeted in collecting.
Mr. Fallon. Just to followup on that, if they chose to
start destroying data, would that have, in and of itself, kind
of raised red flags, and would they have discovered it then? Is
that the reason why they wanted to do that?
Mr. Mandia. I think there is a line of, you know, you are
going to start noticing if machines get shut down or if data
starts getting deleted. My observation on the rules of the
playground in cyber, maybe we don't have written rules that
everybody follows all the time, and maybe it is hard to get
people to agree as to what is fair game for espionage, but here
is one thing I do know. I don't think any modern nation wants
to see modern nations' A-teams break in and start changing
data, deleting data, putting industrial control system malware
in place, and doing certain things that I still haven't seen
done by those threat actors that are representing a foreign
intelligence service. So, there are still another couple levels
of escalation that have not, at least I haven't witnessed yet
in cyberspace.
Mr. Fallon. OK. Thank you. Mr. Thompson, in retrospect, was
this breach, in your opinion, preventable, and if so, what
should SolarWinds have done differently?
Mr. Thompson. So, I will answer part of that question, and
I will let Sudhakar answer some of it because, as I said, I
have been gone since December 31. But this attacker designed
this attack to be very, very difficult to find. They were
incredibly patient. They moved very slowly. And the software
was of tremendous complexity, and so it was designed in a way
that made it very difficult for anyone to detect whether it was
us or whether it was FireEye or Microsoft, which is why it took
as long as it did. And I will let Sudhakar add what we have
learned since December.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Fallon, in addition to Mr.
Thompson's comments, the way we looked at it is, given the
novelty of the supply chain attack and, as I described it, the
attacker hiding in plain sight, the fundamental things that we
are looking at is what do we learn from this. How do we protect
supply chains of companies like SolarWinds and our industry
peers going forward? That led us to build the initiative that
we call Secure by Design internally, which provides specific
guidelines and execution tactics of how to protect internal
environments, how to make build systems a lot more robust,
including access to the build systems, and then how to evolve
software development life cycles to be much more secure
development life cycles where you are not testing security
after something is delivered, but designed as you build it. And
I believe that is the responsibility of the industry to take
more ownership of and share that not just amongst us, but also
with our government colleagues who also build software.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. And I have one quick last question
for Mr. Mandia. While the experts seem to think that this was a
nation-state-sponsored attack, I am guessing because of the
complexity of it all, but I am a lay person. I just look at it
in layperson's terms. Why are we so sure that it was nation-
state-sponsored attack and not just a group of highly talented,
albeit nefarious, cybercriminals?
Mr. Mandia. So, I started responding to breaches in the
United States Air Force by 1995. Back then, most of the
breaches we responded to were not attractive nuisances. It was
dot-gov against dot-gov, dot-mil against dot-mil. I have got
about seven reasons why I believe it is a foreign intelligence
service. I will give you two. FireEye was attacked by over 20
different IP addresses, and we were a Stage 2 victim of this
attack after we did a SolarWinds update. The systems used to
attack us were used in exactly zero other breaches. That is
very uncommon, sir. What normally happens, if I am a threat
actor and I am doing ransomware, I have the same infrastructure
for every attack I do. We went through our partners Microsoft,
our partners in the intel community. None of the systems are
used to attack anybody but FireEye. I have got six other
technical reasons. I am happy to take them offline with you.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you.
Mr. Mandia. I have virtually no doubt, 10 minutes into the
first briefing I got on our incident, this was a foreign
intelligence hack, and I had a good idea which one.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
yield back.
Ms. Norton. Yes, the gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Correa of California.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Mr. Correa of California, are you----
Mr. Correa. Can you hear me OK, Madam Chair?
Ms. Norton. I can hear you now, sir.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, ma'am. I want to thank all of our
chairs and ranking members for this most important hearing. I
wanted to ask a question of all our guests, Mr. Ramakrishna,
Mr. Smith, Mr. Mandia. The question is as follows: Is this a
political diplomatic issue, or is this a technical issue? And I
ask this question because, Mr. Smith, during your presentation
you said that we needed to strengthen international law and the
consequences for violation of international law. Yet I recently
read a report that talked about the Chinese intelligence, that
they had stolen our espionage code and essentially customized
it and were using it against us. So, those folks overseas, are
they better than we are now? Are Russia, China, and others
better than we are in this cyber battlefield, and if they are,
how do we stop them? So, again, my question is, is this an
international law consequences issue, or is this a technical
issue? To all our guests, please.
Mr. Smith. Well, I am happy to field that first. You know,
I think you framed the question well. Is it a diplomatic issue
or is it a technical issue? Yes. That is a way of saying it is
both, and we need to deal with it on both levels. And I don't
believe for a moment that we live in a world where our
adversaries are more capable than our own government, but we do
live in a world where there is an asymmetry. It is easier to
play offense than it is to play defense. When you play offense,
you can scan the horizon and look for the weakest point, and
then that is where you direct your energy. And when you are on
the defensive, that means you need to scan and secure the
entire horizon.
So, on the technical side, that means that there this
enormously important work to strengthen all of our cyber
defenses, and it equally makes it a critical diplomatic and
international legal issue because it simply must be the case
that there are certain acts that are put off limits and for
which there are international and diplomatic consequences. And
this kind of indiscriminate and disproportionate attack on the
software supply chain is and should be one of them.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Ramakrishna, Mr. Mandia, go ahead.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Correa, I agree with my
colleague, Brad Smith, that it is a technology as well as a
political diplomatic issue. Especially as it relates to the
private sector, we have to learn and anticipate issues like
this and collaborate together on coming up with best practices
similar to the ones that we are trying to do at SolarWinds with
our Secure by Design and some new things that our colleagues at
Microsoft and FireEye, CrowdStrike, KPMG are doing.
Additionally, I think internally within the United States, we
need to look at our disclosure rules and, as we have all been
saying, encourage more of us to come forward and disclose
without fear of being punished either in the public or legally.
So, that is as it relates to us in the U.S.
And then diplomatically, setting some ground rules, holding
people accountable, and driving consequences is, I would say,
the help that we can get from the government. And last but not
least, the point I have highlighted a couple of times today
with regards to the need for speed and agility in terms of
information sharing and information dissemination might require
some help from lawmakers such as yourself.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Mr. Mandia?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, I think everything both the witnesses have
said is exactly right. It is a diplomatic issue. It is a
technical issue. What I have learned over 20 years-plus in
responding to security breaches, sir, is that all the threats
we respond to literally mimic real-world geopolitical
conditions and really economic alliances as well. So, when you
look at what the threat is to the United States in cyber, it is
North Korea, it is Iran, China cyberespionage, it is Russia,
and then it is just folks who are safe harbors for ransomware,
so it is going to take diplomacy. It is going to take
technology. It will be both.
Mr. Correa. In my last seconds I have, Mr. Smith, you
talked about a community college being enough to get cyber
education. Do you have a list of community colleges that offer
that education now?
Mr. Smith. I will see what we have.
Mr. Correa. Do you know of any? Do you know of any?
Mr. Smith. Oh yes.
Mr. Correa. It is not a ``gotcha'' question. Are you
showing us how far we have got to go?
Mr. Smith. No, actually the community colleges of the
country have created the kinds of courses that we need. They
have become a much more common part of the curriculum. You
know, we have a robust cybersecurity profession in the United
States. We just need to make it larger. And so I think we can
harness what exists and expand the capacity and basically make
it financially easier for people to go get these courses and
education.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired, and I thank
the gentleman for his questions. Mr. Gimenez of Florida?
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Mr. Gimenez of Florida, are you there?
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. You are recognized for five minutes.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. You are recognized for five minutes. I see you,
but I don't hear you.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. I will go to the next person. Mr. Donalds of
Florida.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Mr. Donalds, are you there?
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Let us then go to Ms. Porter of where?
Ms. Porter. I am from California, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. All right. Ms. Porter of California. Sorry.
Ms. Porter. Thank you so much. Mr. Ramakrishna, we are here
today to talk about a major security breach. Why are security
breaches a problem? Very briefly just in a few words, what are
we worried about?
Mr. Ramakrishna. They could impact people at a personal
level through theft of credentials. They could impact companies
with regards to breach of sensitive information and data, and
they could impact----
Ms. Porter. Wonderful. Mr. Ramakrishna, do you want to
please provide your home address for the committee today and
the American public?
Mr. Ramakrishna. I am happy to provide it, Representative.
I would like take down record and provide it offline.
Ms. Porter. So, you don't want to share it with the whole
world, like with Russia.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Yes.
Ms. Porter. So, you would agree that the information that
got hacked is national security information that is damaging to
national security implications. It could literally put lives at
risk. You don't want to even give out your address, much less
personal security information. What kind of legal liability is
SolarWinds facing for this hack?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congresswoman Porter, we have our standard
end user licensing agreements that we signed with every one of
our customers, including our Federal customers, and we are
bound by those.
Ms. Porter. So, your customers can sue you? There is a law
that makes you legally liable for this data breach.
Mr. Ramakrishna. I do not have the details of it,
Congresswoman. I am happy to find out those specifics from our
teams and furnish them to you.
Ms. Porter. OK. Mr. Ramakrishna, does this look familiar to
you?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Yes.
Ms. Porter. ``SolarWinds123.'' Is it true that some servers
at your company were secured with this Cracker Jack password,
``SolarWinds123?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congresswoman, I believe that was a
password that an intern used on one of his GitHub servers back
in 2017, which was reported to our security team and it was
immediately removed. And that particular----
Ms. Porter. Mr. Ramakrishna, reclaiming my time, I have got
a stronger password than ``SolarWinds123'' to stop my kids from
watching too much YouTube on their iPad. You and your company
were supposed to be preventing the Russians from reading
Defense Department emails. Do you agree that companies like
yours should be held liable when they don't follow best
practices? Yes or no.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congresswoman----
Ms. Porter. Should there a national breach law?
Mr. Ramakrishna. We believe we take our security as well as
the security of our customers very, very----
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time, Mr. Ramakrishna. I am sure
you take everything seriously. You seem like a very serious
person. But I am asking you, should there be a breach law.
Let's move on. Mr. Smith, should there be a law requiring
companies to notify Federal law enforcement when they have had
a cybersecurity breach, yes or no?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I believe there should be a law that
applies to some, and then we should decide who they notify. I
am not sure it should be law enforcement. It could be an
organization like CISA.
Ms. Porter. Excellent. Mr. Smith, thank you for that.
Earlier this week, you told the Senate Intelligence Committee
that it took ``courage'' for FireEye and SolarWinds to reveal
this hack to authorities. What did you mean by that?
Mr. Smith. What I mean is you have three companies here
today because we have chosen to share information. At
Microsoft, we have published 32 blogs about what we observed
and what we have seen. If I take my colleagues at Google and
Amazon and put them together, they have published one blog.
They didn't get an invitation here as a result.
Ms. Porter. OK. So, Mr. Smith, I appreciate that, but you
are not really saying we should give you some kind of Scout
badge for telling the Federal Government that the Russians are
waist deep in your source code. I mean----
Mr. Smith. No, I did not ask for any kind of badge.
Ms. Porter. Well, that is good because I am not going to
give you one, so we are in agreement.
Mr. Smith. I didn't think you would.
Ms. Porter. Do engineers or people at Microsoft, to come
forward and reveal these kinds of breaches, do they have
protection? Can they do so without fear of retaliation?
Mr. Smith. Within our company? It is their job to bring
this kind of information----
Ms. Porter. Is that true at every company, Mr. Smith?
Should it be true at every company?
Mr. Smith. I think it should be true at every company. Yes,
I believe that.
Ms. Porter. There should be whistleblower protection so
that companies don't have to rely on corporate courage.
Mr. Smith. Well, I think that you need whistleblower
protection, but, more important than that, we need to pay more
people to make it their mission in life, their job, to do this
kind of threat hunting, find these kinds of problems, surface
them so then companies can solve them.
Ms. Porter. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentlewoman for her questions. I
recognize Mr. Meijer of Michigan for five minutes.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and ranking member, and
to our witnesses who are here today, and I just want to kind of
echo my gratitude for actually stepping forward. I am not sure
it is within our congressional prerogative to offer merit
badges, but I just want to thank you. You know, on February 17,
Deputy National Security Advisor for Cyber and Emerging
Technology Anne Neuberger announced that hackers had launched
the attack from obviously inside the United States using our
own infrastructure. This is a question for the panel. Can you
explain the unique challenges that are presented when we are
having to mitigate the efforts of a foreign actor, but one that
is using our own internal systems or domestic-based systems?
Mr. Smith. Well, I will offer a couple of thoughts. We are
in, like, hour five now, so we are sort of taking turns. You
know, we have a well-established ability as a government, as a
country through the National Security Agency to look at what is
going on beyond our borders. You know, the question is, how do
we take stock of what is going on inside the United States,
especially when a foreign government can basically use a credit
card and a false ID to get access to a server, you know, in the
U.S. data center. It is not an easy problem to solve. I think
we all would recognize we don't want to live in a country where
there is, you know, extraordinary domestic surveillance, so we
have to ask ourselves, well, how do we collect the information
when there are these kinds of threats. And I think the first
thing we should do is call on what I would hope would be, you
know, sort of the loyalty of companies in the country to step
forward voluntarily and share information.
But clearly that is not sufficient. It is not doing the
job. And so I think we should put in place a legal obligation
that certainly applies to, you know, companies that are in the
critical infrastructure business, people that are the first
responders. At Microsoft, we are a first responder. That is why
we would say we would recognize that it is reasonable for this
kind of law to apply to us. That creates the data that goes to
the government. There needs to be careful thought to how it is
used, with whom it is shared, when it is shared back with
others in the private sector.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Smith. I would hope that, you
know, that sense of shared collective self-interest, not
necessarily originating from a patriotic impulse, but at least
just an awareness and understanding that when we are dealing
with cybersecurity, the contagion component of it is essential.
I mean, we are obviously referring to this as the ``SolarWinds
hack,'' and I know many have referred to it and are looking to
kind of change that to ``Holiday Bear,'' you know, the shift of
the name. The tainting of the reputation all too often goes
toward those who are willing to acknowledge what had occurred
and to share it rather than not. And I guess on that point, Mr.
Ramakrishna, I guess if you can just put it simply, I mean, why
did you come forward to testify today?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, we believe it is our
obligation to learn from incidents such as this and be an
active participant in the recovery and the remediation. As we
heard earlier today, we need to bounce forward from this, not
so much bounce back only. So, we have taken our learnings very
seriously and have created an initiative within our company
that we are sharing very publicly, and so I considered it my
obligation to be very active in the bouncing forward aspect of
this.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you. And then just one kind of, I guess,
more specific question, Mr. Ramakrishna. You know, I think it
was determined by analysts that 30 percent of the victims had
no direct connection to SolarWinds, but were still targets of
the broader campaign. Can you share, you know, what methods
were used to arrive at this understanding and, I guess, why
they weren't targeted in a separate effort, why they were
targeted using the SolarWinds access?
Mr. Ramakrishna. That is not a study that we conducted, so
I don't really have the specifics as it relates to the numbers.
But the way I would describe this is, as I engage with national
defenders across the world--for instance, we have spoken to the
U.K. Cybersecurity Center--and as we were discussing other
matters with them, they said they are actively investigating
other supply chain attacks within the U.K. and other places. A
few days ago, a French company reported a supply chain attack
as well, so the point here being, multiple different vectors
are being used. SolarWinds was one of them, but there are many
different ways that threat actors are coming into various
systems.
Earlier in the conversation today, I described the
intruders as behaving like Transformer toys where they are
changing their personalities and personas constantly, and that
is the reason why I am urging all of us to share information as
quickly as possible so we can together thwart these attacks.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. My time has
expired.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired. I thank him
for his questions. Mr. Gimenez of Florida.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. I hope everybody can hear me now.
Thank you so much. I have got a couple of questions. Mr.
Ramakrishna, you said that you are an American-based company
and you talk about the supply chain. When you are developing
software, especially
[inaudible], is it a bunch of people in a room developing
the software, or do you, you know, sub that out to other parts
of your supply chain, many of which could be offshore?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, in this particular context,
when we refer to supply chain, these are employees of ours that
may be globally deployed. So, like many American companies, we
have a global work force, and we have employees all over the
world that contribute to the development of our software, which
essentially is part of a supply chain that we deliver.
Mr. Gimenez. Where in the supply chain was this malware
embedded?
Mr. Ramakrishna. It was on a platform which we call the
Orion platform. That is a product of ours.
Mr. Gimenez. No, I understand that, but where exactly? You
said this software is developed from all around the world.
Where was this malware embedded? Where did it come from?
Mr. Ramakrishna. It is difficult for me to pinpoint a
location, Congressman. This particular software is built in a
combination of our various development centers, including in
the U.S. and in non-U.S. locations.
Mr. Gimenez. So, somebody got access to your software
development platform?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Basically, what has happened is somebody
got access to one of our build servers and hid a piece of
malware on it that was observing when products were being
built. And as products were being built, in one particular
file, they were able to replace that and keep it in the
building process.
Mr. Gimenez. Did you run the software through security
checks before you introduced it into the general public?
Mr. Ramakrishna. There are secured development practices
that we had been adopting that were part of our standard
software development processes, Congressman, which we have
since learned on what else we can do. So, that is the
initiative that I was describing earlier called Secure by
Design.
Mr. Gimenez. Mr. Smith, you said that everybody should
adhere to best practices. Are you saying that those Federal
agencies that were infected do not adhere to best practices?
Mr. Smith. I don't want to speak to any specific Federal
agency. I will say that across 60 customers, you know, we saw
typically a failure in one area or another to adhere to best
practices. You know, we saw, for example, that, you know,
passwords or keys were not kept in a secure location. We saw
that there wasn't a practice called-least privileged access
where you really try to give an individual access to only a
limited part of the network. We saw instances, you know, for
example, where there might not have been the use of multi-
factor authentication. We definitely saw lapses which could
have prevented the impact among certain customers of what
happened.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. I appreciate that. Would it be fair
to say that China, Russia, North Korea, Iran are the major
players in this cyberwar that we are engaged in?
Mr. Smith. Well, at Microsoft, we publish what we call a
security defense report--I am forgetting the precise name; it
came out in September--and we catalogued all the nation-states,
and all, except one nation-state actor, was from those four
countries.
Mr. Gimenez. From those four countries, right?
Mr. Smith. Yes, that is right.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. How would you gauge our United States
offensive capabilities in cyberwarfare?
Mr. Smith. I am definitely not the expert on that.
Mr. Gimenez. Fair enough. OK. And, sir, at Microsoft, are
you in China? Are you in Russia?
Mr. Smith. We do have personnel in both countries, yes.
Mr. Gimenez. In the Chinese subsidiary, are there Chinese
interests that have an ownership stake in Microsoft?
Mr. Smith. Not that I am aware of. We do certain work with
joint ventures, but we operate through Microsoft Corporation
and we operate through wholly owned subsidiaries. I am not
aware of any other kind of structure.
Mr. Gimenez. Because, I mean, I have been made aware that
if you are doing business in China, they need to have 51
percent ownership to do business in China. That doesn't apply
to you?
Mr. Smith. It certainly doesn't apply to Microsoft. I would
want to go back. You know, it is a big company, and there are
other companies we have acquired in recent years, and I would
want to go back and look specifically at the ownership
structure for each of those. We run through our own company.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman----
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Madam Chair. I know my time is up,
and I yield my time.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentleman for his questions. Next
would be Mr. Johnson of Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Norton. You may be muted, Mr. Johnson.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. Mr. Johnson, can you hear me?
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. He may be having bandwidth problems. We may
have to go on to another member while we wait for Mr. Johnson
of Georgia, but just a moment, please, until I see who is next.
Witnesses are in and out with votes, so it is difficult to know
who is available. Just a moment, please.
[Pause.]
Ms. Norton. Let us take a five-minute recess to see if
there are members available. I apologize to our witnesses, but
with the rolling votes, we are having this difficulty seeing
who is available, but we will back in five minutes. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Ms. Norton. I believe Ms. Porter of California is
available. Ms. Porter, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you so much, Ms. Norton, but I don't see
Mr. Smith in the hearing. Is he available?
Ms. Norton. There he is.
Ms. Porter. Thank you so much, Mr. Smith. I see you now. It
seems like one of the takeaways from this hearing is that
successful cyberattacks are really a matter of when, not if.
When investigating a cyber breach, it is helpful for companies
to have comprehensive logs to review so that they know who
accessed what, what settings were changed, and so on. Is that
right? Those logs can be helpful.
Mr. Smith. Generally, logs can be helpful. That is correct.
Ms. Porter. And it is the cloud companies like Microsoft
who keep those logs. The attacker who first got into
SolarWinds' network did so in September 2019. How long does
Microsoft keep network logs for?
Mr. Smith. Well, logs are kept in a variety of
circumstances, and they are kept by all kinds of companies, and
they are kept by IT administrators, so I cannot give you a
specific----
Ms. Porter. Mr. Smith, how long do you keep logs for at
Microsoft?
Mr. Smith. I don't know. I would have to go ask, you know,
and it would depend on which service and the like.
Ms. Porter. So, based on my information, what I understand
is that the range is fairly short, something between seven days
and 60 days, and it depends, as you just said yourself, on what
services the client has purchased, they can purchase to keep
the logs more as part of a package. Everyone on this panel has
said that successful attacks are basically inevitable, but you
didn't sell the DOD the logs that they would need to be able to
fully assess the damage?
Mr. Smith. Well, I think the premise of that question is a
little bit off, to be honest. First of all, there was no
indication, to my knowledge, that the DOD was attacked. Second,
I don't know what the DOD has purchased, you know, from us.
Third, I don't know how long the logs would go back, you know,
for services that we do provide to the DOD.
Ms. Porter. Mr. Smith, do you own a toaster?
Mr. Smith. I sure do. I own one.
Ms. Porter. When you use that toaster, do you expect it to
catch fire?
Mr. Smith. I sure as heck don't. No, I do not.
Ms. Porter. So, imagine you were selling toasters, Mr.
Smith, and you knew that toasters you were selling were going
to explode 1 day. It was a matter of when, not if, but you sold
those toasters anyway. What would happen to the company that
you were running that sold those toasters?
Mr. Smith. Well, look, we are not in the toaster business
and we are not talking about toasters, but I would not want to
work at a toaster company that had toasters that they knew were
going to explode 1 day.
Ms. Porter. Toaster companies are held--You are lawyers.
You know the standard of strict liability. They are legally
liable if they sell a product knowing that there is a
likelihood that it will become defective or not work, if it
doesn't have all the necessary safety features, for example.
Why should Microsoft, or should Microsoft, let me ask you, be
held to a similar liability standard, maybe not strict
liability, but at least negligence, if you are selling server
services and not selling sufficient logs as part of that in
order to really do the work of stopping and identifying
cyberbreaches?
Mr. Smith. Well, let's separate two things. One, the
specific, what logs are we providing, et cetera, that is a
factual question that neither you nor I right now have the
information about. I do take your broader question, and I think
it is basically this: should companies be held to a duty of
care? Should they be obliged to follow reasonable cybersecurity
practices? Yes, we do, and I think it is important to recognize
that every one of these hacks didn't take place in the cloud.
They took place on premise, on the networks, in the server
rooms of these customers. They were the ones that had the logs,
not us, for those intrusions.
Ms. Porter. OK. So, you would agree that we need a national
breach law, some kind of standard that sets out what the
standard of care is, and that if you don't follow the standard
of care, you could be held liable.
Mr. Smith. Well, I would separate that from what I actually
think is the most important issue in this hearing, which is,
for certain companies, first responders, critical
infrastructure providers, to let the government know whenever
there is an attack. This is more like letting 9-1-1 know that
someone has broken into a house. It doesn't matter whether a
duty of care was followed or not. There is a burglar in the
house. We need to go, you know, send the police to get them
out.
Ms. Porter. So, but, Mr. Smith, reclaiming my time. If we
want people to do that notification, to make that 9-1-1 call,
do you support whistleblower protection for employees who make
those disclosures?
Mr. Smith. Look, I haven't thought about that. I would be
happy to think about it. I don't think you need whistleblower
protection. We just need to create a system that puts the
obligation on the companies themselves that have this
information, and I think if that obligation is in place, other
companies will follow. Look, we at Microsoft have been
reporting this kind of information sharing. We have been
publishing blogs without any legal duty to do so.
Ms. Norton. The gentlelady's time has expired. I believe
she was able to speak again because somebody yielded her time
to speak again. I want people to understand that. I call on Mr.
Garbarino of New York. You have five minutes, Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. To
the two witnesses from SolarWinds, the committee is concerned
that many of the current governmental procurement certification
regimes are only check-the-box exercises and don't actually buy
down risk. Can you discuss the various certification regimes
that SolarWinds products were required to meet in order to be
to be put on the GSA scale and made available to government
agencies? Either Mr. Thompson or Mr. Ramakrishna.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Sorry. Go ahead----
Mr. Thompson. No, go ahead, Sudhakar.
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, we comply to the standards
that we have to comply to to ensure that the Federal Government
can deploy our products. For instance, the FIPS certifications
are required by the government and we comply to those. So, as
it relates to Federal agencies, their compliance requirements,
we have conformance working with our partners and directly with
our customers themselves across the board. If you would like a
full list of our compliance certificates, I am happy to furnish
them to you as well.
Mr. Garbarino. Well, what were you required to do? What was
SolarWinds required to go through in order to be put on the
list? What is GSA requiring? You know, is it enough? Should
they require more before something can be made available to
government agencies?
Mr. Ramakrishna. To the best of my understanding, it is not
so much a set of requirements that need to be added. Coming
back to the issue at hand, I would doubt if more specification
may have helped this particular case as much as an
understanding of how these supply chain attacks are evolving,
and for us as the private sector to take corrective steps and
learnings from this experience and implement them and obviously
pass that on from a software development and a secure
development standpoint as well. To me, it does not appear to be
a requirements thing at this point.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. Mr. Thompson, anything additional?
Mr. Thompson. The only thing I would add is that different
areas of the Federal Government require different levels of
certification, and in every area of the Federal Government
where we were allowed to sell, we had the required
certifications. Whether that was COE, whether that was APL,
Common Criteria, we had the required certifications. But I
would agree with Sudhakar. Some of those certifications, while
they do have security testing requirements that our products
went through, and I think that that helps to ensure the
security of the products, I think as you think about this
particular breach and what happened, I don't think those
certification requirements are designed to capture something
like this.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. So, is it fair to say we should now
update to try to address it so this doesn't again or so other
things don't happen again?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, I think that is a good question for CISA
to ask them in terms of what could be done because I don't
really have all the answers there. But I do think we have to
think about together, private and public sector, how we do we
work together more closely to make sure products are secure.
And a lot of the panelists have talked about how do we share
information very, very quickly so we can address issues as they
occur, because nation-states will come up with new vectors of
attack. They will come up with a new one tomorrow, and they
will come up with a new one the day after, and the only way to
protect ourselves is to let everyone know what those vectors
are so that we can respond to them.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. Thank you. Mr. Smith, a
question for you. Can you help the committee understand
Microsoft's statement: ``We found no evidence of access to
production services or customer data. The investigation also
found no indications that our systems at Microsoft were used to
attack others.'' What exactly are you saying here? Can you help
us understand what did and didn't happen in your view? In your
testimony on Tuesday, you mentioned that some Office 365
accounts were compromised through simple password guesses and
sprays. How were the other accounts compromised?
Mr. Smith. Sure. Well, what that statement says is three
things. It says that our build systems were secure and they
were not penetrated in any way, that we had no customer data
that was touched in any way, and that we found no evidence that
any of our services or products were used as a vector of attack
to launch an attack against anyone else. What we did find in
certain instances was once this intruder was inside a network
of, say, a customer, you know, say a Federal agency, one of the
things it was able to do was get access to an account that had
what we call elevated privileges, like an IT administrator. It
was able to find the password or get the key to get into that
account. When it was in that account, they found that that
individual had access, say, to the Office 365 email of a
portion or all of several customers. And so once they were
there, then they went into the Office 365 cloud service and
that is when we identified their presence.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman----
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired. I thank him
for his questions. I recognize Mr. Johnson of Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Can you hear me now, Madam Chair?
Ms. Norton. I can, and you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Technology advancements have
created a world that looks unrecognizable compared to our lives
just 30 short years ago, but Americans have grown accustomed to
these changes. They have adapted. The average person not only
may not understand the nuts and bolts of technology, but they
do understand the risk of not being careful with it. Many of us
use two-point authentication for our email, a third of
Americans change their passwords annually, and we all know
better than to make our passwords ``JohnSmith123.'' Companies
that work with millions of individuals' personally identifiable
information should be held to a high standard that at least
reflects what ordinary people employ in their day-to-day
affairs using technology.
The SolarWinds preparedness and response to this hack were,
at best, incredibly negligent and, at worst, criminal. And
unfortunately we have seen a lot of data breaches that have
dealt with the lack of protection for sensitive data.
Hospitals, governments, county and local governments have been
held hostage, hospitals, even government agencies. I believe
eight or nine government agencies using SolarWinds software
were able to be hacked into. Mr. Mandia, why was the SolarWinds
breach so dangerous to our national security?
Mr. Mandia. Well, that is a great question. First, I would
like to comment that even if you are compliant, and almost
every one of the 1,000 victims we respond to every year are, I
am not convinced compliance in any standard regulation or
legislation is going to stop a Russian foreign intelligence
service from successfully breaching an organization, which is
what happened here. The reason that the breach that we are
describing was so entrenched is the fact that it was
surreptitious and clandestine for nine months, and the threat
actor behind it looks to be a foreign intelligence service.
That is why. I don't think it impacts the general consumer that
goes home every day. They are not thinking about this, but the
government agencies that were impacted and the companies
impacted are thinking about it. So, I think----
Mr. Johnson. Well, what can our enemies who hacked into our
national data base, what can they do with the information that
they obtained, or what is possible that they could do with that
information?
Mr. Mandia. That is going to be one of the most complex
questions to answer in this, sir, is that emails and documents
were taken, and, quite frankly, the people targeted, all that
information that was taken, I believe the threat actor is still
learning how they can use that information. It is going to
emerge over years, and it is going to take months and months
for organizations to get their arms around all the possible
uses of the stolen documents. You know, this breach, to me,
from what I can observe, and I was a first-hand victim of it,
wasn't about stealing the information of consumers' PII. This
is about stealing documents that were relevant to the
collection requirements of another nation.
Mr. Johnson. Well, it is national security secrets that can
affect the lives and indeed the freedom of Americans and the
safety of Americans, the physical well-being of Americans.
Isn't that correct?
Mr. Mandia. What can happen from this breach is yet to be
told. Each victim had a different----
Mr. Johnson. A lot of damage to our national security could
have been done and probably was done as a result of this
breach. What standard should we build for our most precious
infrastructure, like our voting systems, our hospitals, our
electricity grids, our government secrets? What kind of
national standards should there be in place to protect those
secrets and guard against successful attacks like this one that
are bound to occur in the future?
Mr. Mandia. That is the question for me. You know, when you
think about modern cyberdefense, first and foremost, every
airplane has a data flight recorder. Overall, if you capture
everything all the time, which is very hard to do, mind you,
with encryption and other things, but it is always good to have
something there that recorded everything in case something gets
missed. Modern cyberdefense is going to take learning systems--
AI--and it is going to take machine learning, and it is going
to take expertise on the frontlines constantly being automated
by systems. We are going through that transformation, sir, now
in the industry. The bottom line is we can't have stagnant
defense. We have to have defense that evolves at computer
speed, not the signatures of yesterday, but the AI of tomorrow.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired. I thank him
for his questions. Mrs. Cammack of Florida.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Good
afternoon. Thank you to our witnesses for hanging in there. I
know it has been a lengthy day, but I do appreciate your candid
comments and your patience as we work through this. Just a few
weeks ago, the Homeland Security hearing that we had, we looked
at cybersecurity threats facing our Nation today and how we
must improve our resilience in this area. The SolarWinds attack
was one of the issues discussed in that hearing, so I am very
glad that you are all with us here today to discuss this again.
As you all know, cybersecurity is only growing in
importance for our national security as more of our everyday
lives move into a cyber world, such as committee hearings.
Normal operations for areas ranging from critical
infrastructure to consumer products are all moving to
cyberspace, especially in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This shift simultaneously exposes all of these operations to
greater cybersecurity threats. So, I want to focus now on the
relationship between the Federal Government and the private
sector with regards to cybersecurity. In this area,
cybersecurity is a unique landscape for private/public
partnerships in information sharing and collaboration, which
depends on mutual coordination. All levels of government and
the private sector are targets now for our adversaries, non-
state actors, and several of you have touched on the need for a
national strategy to share intelligence between government and
U.S. businesses.
So, I want to open this up to the panel. You all have
touched on the importance of intelligence sharing between the
public and private sector moving forward and the barriers in
this area. So, in short, how can we make this information
sharing easier for businesses, but also for government? What
concrete steps can we take as legislators to facilitate this
process? And I will start with Mr. Brad Smith with Microsoft.
Mr. Smith. No, it is a really important question, and I
think, to some degree, it starts with identifying who needs to
report, what they need to report, to whom they need to report
it, and how. I do think one thing that is worth touching upon
that we really haven't perhaps talked about at this hearing is
the critical need to enable people who have this information to
report it easily and in a streamlined manner, because we are
acting as the first responders. And, in a sense, when an
incident is unfolding, you know, we are fighting a fire, and
you don't want to take people away from the fire so they are
filling out a lot of forms and doing things that are going to
detract from their ability to respond. So, I would hope that
one design principle that would be built into this would be the
need to do it simply, efficiently, and in a manner that is
sensitive to the work that is needed while an incident is
unfolding.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Smith. And as you
know, government is not known for their efficiency or their
ability for data bases across agencies to talk to one another,
so I appreciate your comments and actually would love to
followup with you at a later time, but I am short on time. So,
Kevin, can you elaborate on that a bit?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, I think Mr. Smith got it right. I would
add to it the confidentiality of it. If it is not confidential
threat intelligence sharing, people are going to be worried
about the liabilities to it, period. And, by the way, whether
you did everything right on security or everything wrong,
everybody's security program, to some extent, is a Maginot
Line, period. And what we have learned with this one is hacking
the supply chain was the blitzkrieg around the Maginot Line in
the United States, so we will widen the line. We will broaden
it. We will create our learning systems. Tech is getting better
every single day. But whether somebody deserves to be
compromised or not, however people interpret that, it takes
time to figure out what you lost, so that confidentiality of
the threat intelligence data sharing is critical.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent. Thank you. I have got about a
minute remaining, so really quickly, and again, I will open
this up to the panel. What specific supply chain
vulnerabilities should be addressed to limit exposure to these
threats that we are seeing in cyberspace? Total free-for-all.
Go for it.
Mr. Ramakrishna. I would be happy to start on this one
because we are in a unique position to apply our learnings to
the broader industry here. And we have defined some very
specific things that need to be done in the context of secure
software development as it relates to the supply chain issues
that we discussed in this hearing, and we plan to publish those
as well. It is not one specific thing that may impact the
supply chain, and we need to look at it holistically across the
build environments, and also stress test our methodologies to
date of delivering integrity in software and improve those. I
am happy to share the details of those. We have published
those, but we will share more details with you offline.
Mrs. Cammack. I appreciate that. Thank you so much. And I
know I am out of time, so with that, I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. I thank the gentlelady for her questions. Ms.
Barragan of California.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for holding this
very important hearing. Mr. Smith, Microsoft has stated that it
has spent over $1 billion in security investments annually, but
you recently also stated in an interview with the New York
Times that you first learned of the attack when you were
contacted by FireEye. How did Microsoft miss this attack, and
how can customers like the U.S. Government trust Microsoft to
uncover future vulnerabilities when Microsoft missed the worst
intrusion of U.S. Government agencies, as quoted by Reuters?
Mr. Smith. Well, I think to put it in its simplest terms,
all 60 of the Microsoft customers who were attacked had their
networks penetrated on premise, meaning in their server room in
their building. It was not in our cloud services. It is like,
you know, if someone broke into your house, but not my house, I
would not know until you told me, or, in this case, what they
did was they went into your house, they found the keys, the
passwords, so that they could go into the service in the cloud.
Once they got that, once they stole your keys, once they
entered our cloud service, we saw them, and then we called you,
and we said, ``Did you know that they are in your house? Did
you know that they have stolen your keys? Did you know that
they have now entered the service that we can see, and did you
know that, unlike AWS, unlike even, I think, Google, at
Microsoft we let you know as soon as we find out that someone
has penetrated your network?'' And it doesn't matter whether it
had anything to do with our service.
Ms. Barragan. Well then, Mr. Smith, if it had nothing to do
with Microsoft, what did the billion dollars that you spent go
to?
Mr. Smith. Oh, it goes to better technology to protect the
Microsoft products that you use. It goes to the Microsoft
Threat Intelligence Center so that we can find these kinds of
services. It goes to the Microsoft Detection and Response Team.
It goes to the Microsoft Digital Crimes Unit. It goes to all
the work that we do to protect the cybersecurity of our
customers, of this country, and of the other countries that we
support. And believe me, the billion dollars a year, that is
just scratching the surface. We spend more than that every
year.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you, Mr. Smith. You know, I represent
the Port of Los Angeles, and cybersecurity is very important,
and one disturbing fact from this breach is that Microsoft and
FireEye products and services exist in most organizations. This
breach and security could happen to the many thousands of other
entities that utilize the software. Mr. Smith, you are now
saying, ``It wasn't us, it was somebody else,'' and so it kind
of begs the question, you know, what have Microsoft and FireEye
done to ensure that source codes are not compromised?
Mr. Smith. Well, we do work every day to protect every
aspect of cybersecurity. The first thing I would say is,
fundamentally, cybersecurity today does not turn on the secrecy
of source code. Most source code is published. It is in open-
source form, and even when a company like ours uses source code
that isn't published publicly, we make it widely available, so
there are a wide variety of other practices that are critical
for cybersecurity. And I think the message for the Port of Los
Angeles----
Ms. Barragan. OK. Mr. Smith, I don't want to interrupt you.
I do want to give a chance for Mr. Mandia to chime in here. Has
FireEye done any anything to ensure that the source codes are
not compromised? Given Mr. Smith's answer, I don't think I got
one to the source code question. Do you have anything to add on
this?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, in our intrusion, the primary focus from
this attacker was all about the documents and the
communications of folks that did work for the U.S. Government,
and our red team tools, which do proactive security
assessments. We, like many companies, do everything we can to
safeguard all our information, not just our source code, but
our email and everything else.
And I would like to remind folks that this was a foreign
intelligence service that hacked into 17,000 different
organizations. I would ask the Members of Congress to think, is
it reasonable for our companies to defend themselves from a
foreign intelligence services, is that the bar that we want to
set for this Nation's private sector?
Ms. Barragan. Well, thank you. It is important that we find
out what happened, and where the issue is, and what we can do
because, as Congress, we need to ensure that we are finding out
that information to say, hey, something needs to be fixed,
something needs to be done better. Sure, we are going to have
those outside threats, but we also need to look to see where it
went wrong. And I appreciate the discussion today and look
forward to working with everybody to make sure we are able to
secure, you know, the software and our agency data. With that,
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Norton. The gentlelady's time has expired. Ms. Pfluger
of Texas. I recognize Ms. Pfluger of Texas for five minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thanks for the--
--
Ms. Norton. I am sorry. Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. That is OK. I don't take offense to that right
at this second. Thank you very much. You know, thank you all
for a good discussion on this. As a military officer for two
decades, you know, protecting every single piece of your
architecture obviously is very, very difficult. I do want to
talk a little bit, however, about our national strategy, and
specifically I want to take it back to my own home district
where we have a Cyber Center of Excellence that is in
development at one of the universities, Angelo State
University, led by a former general officer in the Air Force,
Ronnie Hawkins, who is doing amazing things in a Hispanic-
serving institution, minority-serving institution in a very
rural part of our country. So, I would like you from the
corporate side to comment on what role education plays in our
national strategy to make sure that we have the right people
that are learning the skills that they need to learn to enter
the work force and be a part of cybersecurity. So, we will just
go down the line and start with Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say two things. First, I think the
kind of initiative that you have recently pursued at Angelo
State points the way for the role that a number of colleges and
universities and community colleges can play, you know. So,
what you have been doing there around the cybersecurity
intelligence program, I think it can be built and expanded and
help us get the cybersecurity work force the Nation needs. The
other thing I would point to is this extraordinary resource
that we have as a Nation in terms of veterans coming out of the
military every year. You know, every year there are about
200,000 people who leave the military. They enter the private
work force.
One of the things that we have done at Microsoft is create,
in partnership with the Department of Defense, what we call the
Microsoft Software and Systems Academy. And so it has already
worked with more than 2,000 individuals leaving the military.
We have worked with partners across the industry. We provide
education in the last couple of months, say, of somebody's tour
of duty, and it guarantees an individual a job interview, a job
interview with one of 600 partners that we have brought
together. So, that is another way, I think, to add to the
cybersecurity work force of the country.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you very much. Mr. Ramakrishna, do you
have any thoughts on whether or not you believe that our
college graduates, are we resource limited right now on the
number of graduates who have the requisite skills?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman Pfluger, first of all, I hope
everyone in your family and your community is safe given the
events in Texas. Related to your question, I would say that
looking at only college grads in this context is restrictive. I
was mentioning earlier that the internet has to be made more
available to every child, every person that is interested in
learning and accessing, especially focused on inner-city kids
and socioeconomically backward populations, because there is a
lot of talent in those circles that need to be unleashed and
exposed to these types of topics so that we can have a more
aware and a more diverse work force and a set of people that
can be brought into society at a higher level from a capability
and contribution perspective. I think that is our contribution
or our responsibility as private sectors as well.
One specific thing that I would like to offer up there is
that as the government facilitates those, as part of the
private sector, we could have a buddy system that we could
provide to some of those young children to give them better
exposure to these technologies and techniques, get them into
internships and potentially into employment as well, and not
hold the degree requirements on them because not everybody may
be able to, or be able to afford afford, to go to colleges.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you very much. I appreciate that, and I
also want to make sure that we acknowledge the fact that access
to internet in the form of rural broadband is extremely
important in communities like mine that may not have that
ability. Very quickly, 30 seconds, Mr. Thompson, your thoughts
on this issue?
Mr. Thompson. One of the challenges that we have had in the
past, we have tried to work with colleges and universities on
different programs to provide skill sets that we are in
shortage of in the technology field in the United States. I
think one of the challenges we had is just the speed at which
colleges and universities can move. Getting them to add a new
program because of the bureaucracy they have to go through is
quite a lengthy process. So, I think if we can find a way to
accelerate that and let them develop a cybersecurity training
program or a data intelligence program, we need to do that
quickly to be able to get more sophisticated workers in the
work force to help solve these problems.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you very much, and with that, I yield
back. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired. I thank him
for his questions. Next would be Ms. Bush of Missouri.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, Chairs Maloney and Thompson, for
convening this hearing, and I want to start off. So, the number
of SolarWinds customers who were potentially affected in this
attack, it is extremely concerning. At least 18,000 customers
downloaded this malicious update to the SolarWinds product that
infiltrated their devices. One concern coming out of the
SolarWinds hack is that the attackers could use the foothold
that they gained inside these companies and these agencies to
then access other companies and, in turn, people. As we have
been discussing, the risk is not theoretical. Mr. Mandia, as I
understand it, FireEye first disclosed the breach. Chairman
Thompson and others have mentioned that cyberbreach
notification legislation is urgently needed, and we see that,
but I want to be sure I understand. Were you required by law to
do so, to disclose?
Mr. Mandia. Right now, ma'am, most of the disclosure laws
protect the personal identifiable information of American
citizens, which is not something that we lost. So by law, we
weren't, but I just want folks to know that literally within
the first 36 to 48 hours, we were telling our government
customers we have got a challenge here. We call it Ring Zero.
Who do you go to first when you know there is something? As I
was first briefed on the intrusion into FireEye, I recognized I
doubt we were the first pick. And, in fact, the number in my
head was we are probably the 40th organization compromised by
this group, so who else is at risk. We did go to the intel
communities. We did go to the DOD. We did go to CISA. Long
before we went public with public disclosure, we were working
with the U.S. Government.
Ms. Bush. So, do you think that you should be required by
law to do so?
Mr. Mandia. I think if you are a first responder, like we
are, to intrusions, because we recognized right away, you know,
we are set up for this sort of thing, and it happened to us.
You know, I took the oath to defend the Constitution of United
States, you know, I think 30 years ago. It just hits you. I
didn't even want the government to communicate with me at that
point. I didn't know the scope and scale of this. But I think
for first responders, absolutely getting the threat
intelligence, because at the time we were telling people about
it, ma'am, we really didn't know what had happened other than
something had happened. But that was enough that we had to tell
the government entities that we work with.
Ms. Bush. So, the answer is no basically. So, would you
say----
Mr. Mandia. Yes, we didn't have a legal disclosure to, but
we felt an obligation to.
Ms. Bush. OK. So now, would you say anything has changed
since the hack that would make us trust private companies like
SolarWinds more now?
Mr. Mandia. Well, I think when you see a breach like this,
you don't want the attacker to win twice once they broke in.
Well, actually, it would be three times. They broke into
SolarWinds. They had what looks to be a very successful deep
blast zone type of cyberespionage campaign, and then they
harmed American companies both in shareholder lawsuits,
liabilities, and investigations. It is like a trifecta for the
adversary against us.
Ms. Bush. Yes.
Mr. Mandia. So, we got to think of a way where we play team
ball as a Nation where we all come together. And I do believe
the fastest thing we can do, we have been talking about a lot
today, ma'am, get the threat intelligence into an agency in the
government, and then from there it gets pushed out to the
security community so we can go shields-up a lot faster. Best
we can do, ma'am, is maybe somebody is a victim, but we are all
as secure as the very last victim in cybercrime.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Given that this hack has been traced
back from many months, it may be possible that other companies
knew about this and didn't tell anyone because they didn't have
to. So, Mr. Smith, are you aware of any other companies that
may have known about this breach and did not report it?
Mr. Smith. We notified 60 Microsoft customers, and we have
said that 50 percent of those, so call it 30, are
communications and technology firms. And we provided that
information first to them, so we told them, and we have shared
that information to the government. But most of those companies
have not disclosed publicly that they were attacked in this
way. And, in fact, you have other companies, some of the
largest companies in our industry, that are well known to have
been involved in this that still have not spoken publicly about
what they know. There is no indication that they even informed
customers, and I am worried that, to some degree, some other
customers or some other companies, some of our competitors even
just didn't look very hard. If you don't look, you won't find,
and you will go to bed every night being blissfully ignorant
thinking you don't have a problem when, in fact, you do.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Norton. The gentlewoman's time has expired. I am
passing it over now to Ms. Porter to continue to chair the
committee.
Ms. Porter. Thank you, Ms. Norton. I am going to hand it
back to you. I believe we have no more members to recognize.
Does anyone else wish to be recognized?
Ms. Norton. Well, we have been here for a long time, and
unless someone speaks up with this double hearing, of this
hearing involving two committees, I am about to sign off and
thank our witnesses for testifying. I find members who had to
come back and forth, but it looks like we have reached the
limit of members who wish to testify. I want to thank the
witnesses again, and at this point----
Ms. Porter. Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Yes? Yes, indeed, Ms. Porter.
Ms. Porter. I see that my colleague, Mr. Torres, has
joined.
Ms. Norton. Ms. Porter, will you take over the hearing from
here?
Ms. Porter. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. All right.
Ms. Porter. [Presiding.] Mr. Torres, the gentleman from New
York, is now recognized.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a question for
the new CEO of SolarWinds. Has your company conducted a post-
mortem of what went wrong, the mistakes that your company might
have made, and the lessons learned from those mistakes?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, thank you for the questions.
As I came into the company, given my cybersecurity experience
from previous companies and having had to deal with cyber
incidents in the past, I had to first look at our cyber hygiene
and cybersecurity posture as well as our cybersecurity
investments. As Mr. Thompson highlighted previously, this did
not appear to be or does not appear to be an investment issue.
We spent enough on cybersecurity, in fact, more than the
average company----
Mr. Torres. Just in the interest of time constraints, so
you have done a post-mortem, but in your judgments, do you
believe your company made mistakes? Yes or no.
Mr. Ramakrishna. I think there are opportunities to
improve, Congressman.
Mr. Torres. It is a straightforward question. I am a
straightforward person. It is a straightforward question. Did
you make mistakes? Yes or no. You can say no, but----
Mr. Ramakrishna. We all make mistakes and----
Mr. Torres. OK. You made mistakes. Tell me, what mistakes
did you make?
Mr. Ramakrishna. As I look at what we have done in the
past, and I am looking at it from the standpoint of where we go
from here. I haven't looked at specifically----
Mr. Torres. We have to learn from past mistakes in order to
know how to move forward so----
Mr. Ramakrishna. Yes.
Mr. Torres. We want to concrete examples. Is it true that
SolarWinds had no chief information security officer in the
lead-up to the SolarWinds breach?
Mr. Ramakrishna. So, the way we have organized ourselves is
that instead of calling the person a chief information security
officer, we call him a VP of security for a very specific
reason. Instead of looking at only infrastructure security,
that person is also responsible for looking at product
security. That way we are able to get the best of both worlds
and help us all build products as well as take care of our
infrastructure. So, it is a----
Mr. Torres. So, I just want to be clear, you had a VP for
security in the lead-up to the SolarWinds breach?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Absolutely, and we have had it since 2017.
Mr. Torres. You know, so here is the concern I have. The
cybersecurity failure of SolarWinds led to a supply chain
breach that compromised nine Federal agencies. It is arguably
the greatest cybersecurity failure in the history of the United
States, and your company is at the heart of it. Given the
seismic nature of that cybersecurity failure, can your company
be trusted to ever do business with the Federal Government?
Mr. Ramakrishna. Congressman, we take the security and
protection of our customers very, very seriously. This
particular issue was much more than just SolarWinds. It was a
very sophisticated nation-state attack, as we have been
discussing here. It has got very little relevance to a security
hygiene of a particular company or the security investments of
a particular company. It was a coordinated, patient, persistent
attack that neither one company, no matter large it is or how
many resources it is deploying, or one Federal Government
agency is able to coordinate it, which is the subject of
today's hearing that we came here to apply our learnings and
contribute our learning.
Mr. Torres. I am going to move on. So, I have a question
for FireEye. FireEye managed to do something that the entire
cybersecurity apparatus of the Federal Government failed to do.
You detected SolarWinds. So, my question for the CEO of
FireEye, what does the Federal Government need to do to be more
effective at detecting breaches like SolarWinds?
Mr. Mandia. Well, I think, first, it is team ball. You
know, we had talked about the area of responsibility for some
of the best capabilities we have, like the NSA's, outside of
the Nation. All the fingerprints of this attack actually were
inside the Nation. So, you have to expect that the government
is going to detect some things, the private sector is going to
detect some things, hence, all the dialog, sir, to bring it to
one entity that has got purview into both sides of the fence.
I think the government was catching a whiff of it. They
were seeing streams of smoke because when I started talking to
government agencies, no one was surprised. They were starting
to go, oh, I get it. We were all piecing together the same
crime scene, but we all had different pieces of evidence. It
took us finding the SolarWinds implant and Microsoft's help
from the top down, cloud down, looking to start scoping this
thing.
Mr. Torres. I just want to squeeze this in because we have
the EINSTEIN system, which operates on a data base of known
cyber threats, right?
Mr. Mandia. Yes, right.
Mr. Torres. Do you have technology that is effective at
detecting anomalous threats that could benefit the Federal
Government----
Mr. Mandia. We do, and there is a lot of other technologies
that do as well, but the problem was, you have to have a little
bit more visibility than that. So, there were blips on the
radar sir, but nobody could tell what they meant without more
context. The implant, when we found that, that was kind of the
homerun for context and everybody went ``aha.'' That was the
eureka moment.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Porter. Thank you, sir. With that, I want to thank our
panelists for their remarks, and I want to commend my
colleagues for participating in this important hearing.
With that, without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses to the chair, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response. I ask our
witnesses to please respond as promptly as you are able.
Ms. Porter. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:01 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
