- THE URGENT NEED TO ADDRESS THE GUN VIOLENCE EPIDEMIC

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE URGENT NEED TO ADDRESS

THE GUN VIOLENCE EPIDEMIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 8, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-84

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-803             WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Vacancy
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Greta Gao, Chief Oversight Counsel
Elisa LaNier, Director of Operations and Chief Clerk
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 8, 2022.....................................     1

Witnesses

Panel 1

Zeneta Everhart, Mother of Zaire Goodman, Buffalo, New York
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Roy Guerrero, M.D., Pediatrician, Uvalde, Texas
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Miah Cerrillo, Fourth Grade Student at Robb Elementary School,
Uvalde, Texas
Oral Statement...................................................    10

Felix Rubio and Kimberly Rubio, Parents of Lexi Rubio, Uvalde,
Texas
Oral Statement...................................................    11

Lucretia Hughes Klucken (minority witness), DC Project, Women for
Gun Rights
Oral Statement...................................................    12

Panel 2

The Honorable Eric Adams, Mayor, New York, New York
Oral Statement...................................................    14

Greg Jackson, Jr., Executive Director, Community Justice Action
Fund
Oral Statement...................................................    16

Becky Pringle, President, National Education Association
Oral Statement...................................................    17

Joseph Gramaglia, Police Commissioner, Buffalo, New York
Oral Statement...................................................    18

Nick Suplina, Senior Vice President for Law & Policy, Everytown
for Gun Safety
Oral Statement...................................................    20

Amy Swearer (minority witness), Legal Fellow, The Heritage
Foundation
Oral Statement...................................................    22

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

The documents entered into the record are listed below.

* New York Times article regarding mass shootings; submitted by
Rep. Lynch.

* Christian Science Monitor Weekly article; submitted by Rep.
Sessions.

* FiveThirtyEight article; submitted by Rep. Sessions.

* Fox News article, ``West Virginia Woman With Pistol Shoots,
Kills Man at Graduation Party: `Saved Several Lives',''
submitted by Rep. Clyde.

* Wall Street Journal article, ``Why `Do Something' Won't
Work,'' submitted by Rep. Foxx.

* Testimony of Stephen Willeford from a May 25, 2022 Senate
Judiciary Committee Hearing; submitted by Rep. Biggs.

* John Lott of Crime Research Prevention Center Report;
submitted by Rep. Biggs.

* Washington Examiner article regarding the Buffalo shooter;
submitted by Rep. Biggs.

* New York Times article, ``The Mass Shootings Where Stricter
Gun Laws Might Have Made A Difference,'' submitted by Rep.
Tlaib.

* Article regarding Uvalde shooter; submitted by Rep. Speier.

* A 2015 Study, ``Preventing School Violence, Assessing Armed
Guardians, School Policy and Context;'' submitted by Rep.
Pressley.

* A 2019 report, ``Cops and No Counselors,'' submitted by Rep.
Pressley.

* Letters from the Federal School Discipline and Climate Group
and other community-based organizations regarding mass policing
and trauma-informed services; submitted by Rep. Pressley.

The documents listed are available at docs.house.gov.

THE URGENT NEED TO ADDRESS

THE GUN VIOLENCE EPIDEMIC

----------

Wednesday, June 8, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom; the
Hon. Carolyn Maloney [chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Lynch, Connolly,
Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Khanna, Mfume, Ocasio-Cortez, Tlaib,
Porter, Bush, Brown, Davis, Wasserman Schultz, Welch, Johnson,
Sarbanes, Speier, Kelly, Lawrence, DeSaulnier, Pressley, Comer,
Jordan, Foxx, Hice, Grothman, Cloud, Gibbs, Higgins, Norman,
Sessions, Keller, Biggs, Clyde, Franklin, LaTurner, Fallon,
Herrell, and Donalds.
Also present: Higgins of New York and Jackson Lee of Texas.
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today we will examine the destruction and heartbreak that
gun violence is causing across our country. I want to express
my deep gratitude to each of our witnesses for being here
today. I am particularly grateful to our witnesses who will be
discussing the loss of their loved ones and their personal
experiences from recent mass shootings in Uvalde, Texas, and
Buffalo, New York.
Despite their pain, these witnesses expressed their strong
desire to share their stories with this committee and the
public. I know that I speak for every member of this committee
when I say that we are inspired by your bravery. For a parent,
there is no greater pain than the loss of a child. But across
the country, this gun violence is claiming the lives of our
children and loved ones in places where they should be safe:
our schools, our supermarkets, even our churches and our
synagogues.
Gun violence is the leading cause of death for children in
our country. As a society, we are failing our children and we
are failing each other. This out-of-control gun violence is a
uniquely American tragedy.
[Chart]
Chairwoman Maloney. As you can see in this chart, in 2019,
the United States suffered 17 times more gun deaths than the
next highest G7 country. We stand alone in mass shootings.
Other countries pass sensible gun safety laws and protect their
children, and no other country comes close to the number of
school shootings we have.
Between 2009 and 2018, the U.S. had 288--288--school
shootings. All other G7 countries combined had just five. Some
of my colleagues across the aisle have blamed the violence on
mental illness. They have blamed violent video games. They have
blamed family values. They have even blamed open doors. They
have blamed everything, but guns, but we know the United States
does not have a monopoly on mental illness, video games or any
other excuse. What America does have is widespread access to
guns. That includes assault weapons, which were designed to
kill as many enemy soldiers on the battlefield as possible, as
quickly as possible. Yet in many states, these weapons of war
can be purchased by an 18-year-old just by walking into a
store.
Assault weapons were used in the recent massacres, in
Buffalo, Texas, and Tulsa, just as they were in Parkland,
Newtown, San Bernardino, Orlando, Las Vegas, and so many other
mass shootings. These weapons have no place in our communities.
No civilian needs an assault rifle, and the Second Amendment
does not protect the right to own a weapon of war. It is time
that we banned assault rifles from our streets, from our
communities, from our homes. But if we are going to truly
address the gun crisis, we need to be honest about why our
country has failed to act sooner.
The truth is the gun industry is making billions of dollars
selling the weapons that are killing our children, and they are
fighting tooth and nail to keep doing it. That is why I have
launched an investigation into five leading gun manufacturers
that sell assault weapons used in mass shootings. We need to
know why these communities are marketing military weapons to
civilians and how much they are profiting from the death of our
children.
Of course, mass shootings are just one part of this crisis.
We can't forget that gun violence is a steady drumbeat in so
many of our towns and cities, especially in marginalized
communities. Black men make up more than half of all gun
victims in the United States, despite making up less than six
percent of the population. Latinos are twice as likely to be
killed by a gun and four times as likely to be wounded by a gun
as white Americans. We need transparency into how guns are
reaching the hands of criminals, which is why this committee
has been working to identify the gun dealers that are selling
the most guns used in crimes, including across state lines.
Today, the House is voting to pass commonsense gun safety
legislation, which is a crucial first step in addressing this
crisis. I am particularly grateful this bill will include key
provisions similar to a bipartisan bill I first introduced more
than 10 years ago, with the strong support of former chairman,
Elijah Cummings. My bill will make gun trafficking a Federal
felony and strengthen penalties for straw purchasers, which
will help stop the flow of guns into the hands of criminals.
My goal for today's hearing is simple. I am asking every
member of this committee to listen with an open heart to the
brave witnesses who have come forward to tell their stories
about how gun violence has impacted their lives. Our witnesses
today have endured pain and loss, yet they are displaying
incredible courage by coming here to ask us to do our jobs. Let
us hear their voices. Let us honor their courage. Let us find
the same courage to pass commonsense laws to protect our
children.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr.
Comer, for an opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney. All of our hearts
go out to the victims and the families in Uvalde, Texas, and
Buffalo, New York. To those who are testifying before us today,
there are no words to describe the horror you have faced and
the deep anguish you feel. The American people grieve with you.
As elected representatives in Congress, it is our
obligation to work to ensure that these violent crimes and
tragedies never happen again. Americans of all backgrounds
should be empowered to defend themselves against rising
violence. The increased violence we have witnessed since the
summer of 2020 is unacceptable. Murders and aggravated assaults
are all up. This is a trend we must reverse. We have recently
witnessed several high-profile senseless acts of murder and
mayhem that have impacted all Americans, including, tragically,
our defenseless and innocent schoolchildren. We must respond to
those heinous acts and provide justice for the families.
At the same time, we recognize that violence occurs in many
of our communities on a daily basis, impacting Americans across
the United States from every background. Too often tragedies
are politicized for partisan gain. And we have seen many seek
to leverage these crimes and their victims to push for radical
left-wing policies or to buttress their campaigns to get
elected. Instead of rushing to score political points at the
expense of our justice system working properly, we must learn
from these senseless acts of violence and take concrete action
to reduce violence in the future. We owe it to the families of
the victims. They deserve justice, and we owe it to the
American people. We must and can prevent similar tragedies.
We all want to live in a country where we can achieve our
American Dream without the threat of violence in our
communities. We must work together to deliver sensible
solutions to secure our schools, protect our most vulnerable
among us, and bring to justice those responsible for these
heinous crimes. Our local officials cannot defund our police,
and our prosecutors cannot be soft on crime. I believe that we
must carefully consider the security posture of vulnerable
targets sought out by evil people. We must ensure that every
American has a safe environment in which to live their lives in
peace. And that requires thinking creatively about solutions to
harden our infrastructure, enforce our existing laws, and work
to foster a culture that values conflict resolution and dialog
over violence.
I strongly believe that there is an important place for
law-abiding gun owners to serve in protecting themselves, their
families, and their communities from violence. Our Second
Amendment is an important tool in securing our individual
rights to self-defense. Knee-jerk reactions to impose gun
control policies that seek to curtail our constitutional right
to bear arms are not the answer. Gun ownership is on the rise
in America. People want to protect themselves and their
families. We should commend all law-abiding gun owners who
safely use, store, and carry those firearms, not vilify them
for blatantly political purposes. I also believe we must
continue to empower our law enforcement professionals to serve
and protect our communities honorably. As I said before, defund
the police and soft on crime prosecution policies have been a
failure across the board.
Efforts to divert violent criminals out of the criminal
justice system have failed, leading to the victimization of the
very communities those policies were promised to help. Violent
criminals should be in jail, not back on the streets to
reoffend and terrorize. We must recommit ourselves to pursuing
justice and keeping violent criminals off our street.
Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. I want to
clarify that I support the Second Amendment. I support law-
abiding gun owners. I don't support lax gun laws that allow
guns to get into the hands of criminals and unstable people.
I now recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms. Porter,
for an opening statement.
Ms. Porter. I represent a community in mourning. Less than
one month ago in Laguna Woods, a gunman locked the doors to the
Geneva Presbyterian Church and opened fire on my community's
tight-knit Taiwanese congregation. This shooting was an
undeniable tragedy, but under different circumstances, it could
have been an unimaginable massacre. Unlike the shooters
involved in Buffalo, the shooter in Laguna Woods did not carry
an assault rifle equipped with high-capacity magazines. He was
armed with nine-millimeter handguns that forced him to reload.
That difference gave a hero, Dr. John Chang, a chance to stop
the carnage. He sacrificed his life to stop the shooter, and
his bravery was remarkable, but we cannot depend on a hero's
bravery to save lives. Law enforcement has determined that the
gunman was ready to kill every person in the church. Had he
been armed with a military-style assault rifle, he may have
done so. There is no telling how many more lives would have
been lost.
Shootings involving assault weapons are six times as deadly
as shootings involving handguns, and when assault weapons are
equipped with high-capacity magazines or bump stocks, the death
toll rises even further. California has banned these weapons
for years. Our laws have saved lives, including members of
Geneva Presbyterian Church. Congress must follow California's
lead.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The lady yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, for an opening
statement.
Mr. Higgins of Louisiana. Thank you, Madam Chair. It is a
sober day in Congress as we reflect upon the challenges our
Nation faces. In 2005, as a young cop, I was dispatched to
reports of a man down in the street in a part of the city that
was crime ridden and dangerous. I found a victim, a teenager,
and I held the mortal wound in the back of his head, whispered
prayer into his ear as his life flowed from his body. He died
there in my arms on the street. He was killed by an axe handle.
I am prayerful for America, I am prayerful for healing, and
I am prayerful for discernment amongst this body and my
colleagues. As a law enforcement officer, I know what it means
to swear an oath to protect and serve my community and my
Nation and the importance of bringing justice to the families
of those who suffer at the hands of evil. And it is essential
that the fundamental freedoms--First Amendment, Second
Amendment, Fourth Amendment--are always protected and preserved
by this body.
I was sworn as a man, I swore an oath to uphold the
Constitution of the United States, and I will never back down
from defending that Constitution, including the rights of law-
abiding Americans to keep and bear arms.
Madam Chair, I thank you for this hearing today, and I
yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields. Now we will
introduce our witnesses. I would like to turn it over to the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Higgins, to introduce our first
witness.
Without objection, Mr. Higgins is authorized to participate
in today's hearing. He represents Buffalo. And you are now
recognized, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins of New York. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Ranking Member, the honorable members of the Oversight and
Reform Committee.
The Greek tragic poet, Aeschylus, says that we suffer our
way to wisdom. He says we suffer our way to wisdom. To live is
to suffer. To endure the suffering is to give meaning to the
suffering. We have a problem in this country, and unless we
learn from the tragic events of the last three weeks, who are
we as a people? In this brave group of panelists from two
cities that were devastated, the destruction beyond human
comprehension, we have to find a way to deal with this.
In Buffalo, the shooting started at 2:30 in the afternoon
and was concluded in two minutes and three seconds. One
shooter, a semiautomatic weapon, 13 people shot, 10 dead, one
shooter. If you look for a common denominator in all of these,
it is typically someone that should never have had a gun with a
high-capacity weapon to kill as many as people--as many
people--as quickly as possible.
Zeneta Everhart is here. She is a friend and a proud
citizen of the city of Buffalo. Zeneta is with us today as the
mother of the Buffalo mass shooting survivor, Zaire Goodman.
Zaire was working at the Tops Friendly Market that was targeted
by a white supremacist racist, deranged gunman. Zaire is also a
colleague in government. She is the director of diversity and
inclusion for my friend and colleague, New York State Senator,
Tim Kennedy. Zeneta's story is both tragic and magic, and with
that it gives me great honor to present to the committee,
Zeneta Everhart.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. And after Ms. Everhart, we
will hear from Dr. Roy Guerrero, who is a pediatrician in
Uvalde, Texas. Then we will hear from Miah Cerrillo, who is a
4th grader at Robb Elementary School in Texas. Miah will be
sharing her experience in a pre-recorded video. Her father,
Miguel, is with us in the room today and will be making brief
remarks after his daughter's video, then he will excuse
himself. Next we will hear from Felix and Kimberly Rubio, who
are the parents of Lexi Rubio, who tragically lost her life in
the Texas shooting.
I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, to
introduce our last witness on this panel.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Madam Chair. It is my honor to
recognize Lucretia Hughes. She is part of my constituency, an
incredibly bright light in our 10th District, and she has an
extremely compelling story. I just wanted to publicly recognize
Lucretia. I want to thank you for being here today. I know it
is hard to share the story that you come to us with, but we are
grateful that you are here. Madam Chair, I want to say thank
you for just these few seconds to recognize Lucretia Hughes and
welcome her here.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The witnesses will be
unmuted, so we can swear them in. Please raise your right hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you.
And without objection, your written statements will be made
part of the record.
With that, Ms. Everhart, you are now recognized for your
testimony. Please testify, Ms. Everhart.

STATEMENT OF ZENETA EVERHART, MOTHER OF ZAIRE GOODMAN, BUFFALO,
NEW YORK

Ms. Everhart. Thank you, Chairwoman. Zaire Mysaun Goodman,
my son, or, as I like to call him, ``The Kid,'' was shot and
injured by a domestic terrorist on Saturday, May 14, 2022, at
the Tops grocery store where he was an employee in a
historically Black community on Jefferson Avenue in Buffalo,
New York. Zaire, ``The Kid,'' is now a 21-year-old man. He is
pure joy. He is everything that is good in this world. And as I
sit here before you today, I can hear my son telling me to stop
being extra and get to the point. I was going to tell you all a
bunch of fluffy funny stories about Zaire, but I have a
message, so I will get to the point.
As director of diversity and inclusion with New York State
Senator Tim Kennedy's office, stories of gun violence and
racism are all too familiar, but now these stories are Zaire's
stories. These problems literally knocked on my front door.
These are issues that as a country we do not like to openly
discuss. Domestic terrorism exists in this country for three
reasons. America is inherently violent. This is who we are as a
Nation. The very existence of this country was founded on
violence, hate, and racism with the near annihilation of my
native brothers and sisters. My ancestors brought to America
through the slave trade were the first currency of America. Let
me say that again for the people in the back. My ancestors, the
first currency of America, were stripped off their heritage and
culture, separated from their families, bargained for on
auction blocks, sold, beaten, raped, and lynched. Yet I
continuously hear after every mass shooting that this is not
who we are as Americans and as a Nation. Hear me clearly. This
is exactly who we are.
Education. The majority of what I have learned about
African-American history, I did not learn until I went to
college and I had to choose those classes. Why is that? Why is
African-American history not a part of American history?
African-Americans built this country from the ground up. My
ancestors' blood is embedded in the soil. We have to change the
curriculum in schools across the country so that we may
adequately educate our children. Reading about history is
crucial to the future of this country. Learning about other
cultures, ethnicities, and religions in school should not be
something that is up for debate. We cannot continue to
whitewash education, creating generations of children to
believe that one race of people are better than the other. Our
differences should make us curious, not angry. At the end of
the day, I bleed, you bleed. We are all human. That awful day
that will now be a part of the history books, hopefully. Let us
not forget to add that horrific day to the curriculum that we
teach our children.
Guns. The 18-year-old terrorist who stormed into my
community armed with an AR-15, killing 10 people and injuring
three others, received the shotgun from his parents for his
16th birthday. For Zaire's 16th birthday I bought him a few
video games, some headphones, a pizza, and a cake. We are not
the same.
How and why and what in the world is wrong with this
country? Children should not be armed with weapons. Parents who
provide their children with guns should be held accountable.
Lawmakers who continuously allow these mass shootings to
continue by not passing stricter gun laws should be voted out.
To the lawmakers who feel that we do not need stricter gun
laws, let me paint a picture for you. My son, Zaire, has a hole
in the right side of his neck, two on his back, and another on
his left leg caused by an exploding bullet from an AR-15. As I
cleaned his wounds, I can feel pieces of that bullet in his
back. Shrapnel will be left inside of his body for the rest of
his life.
Now I want you to picture that exact scenario for one of
your children. This should not be your story or mine's. As an
elected official, it is your duty to draft legislation that
protects Zaire and all of the children and citizens in this
country. Commonsense gun laws are not about your personal
feelings or beliefs. You are elected because you have been
chosen and are trusted to protect us, but let me say to you
here today, I do not feel protected.
No citizen needs an AR-15. These weapons are designed to do
the most harm in the least amount of time. And on Saturday, May
14, it took a domestic terrorist just two minutes to shoot and
kill 10 people and injure three others. If after hearing from
me and the other people testifying here today does not move you
to act on gun laws, I invite you to my home to help me clean
Zaire's wounds so that you may see up close the damage that has
been caused to my son and to my community.
To the families of Ruth Whitfield, Pearl Young, Katherine
Massey, Heyward Patterson, Celestine Chaney, Geraldine Talley,
Aaron Salter, Andre Mackneil, Margus Morrison, and Roberta
Drury, I promise that their deaths will not be in vain. Zaire
and I promise to use our voice to lift their names, and we will
carry their spirit with us as we embark on this journey to
create change. I know that their collective souls watched out
for Zaire that day, and I am eternally grateful to them for
that.
To the east side of Buffalo, I love you. I am speaking
directly to my people, to my hood. From Bailey, to Broadway, to
Kensington, to Fillmore, to Delavan, to Jefferson, and every
street in between, just like the potholes that we want filled
in--yes, I keep it real--together we will continue to fill
those streets with love. No matter what people say about the
East Side of Buffalo, we will not be broken. I was born there,
raised there. I raised my son there. I still live there, and I
do the majority of my professional work on the East Side of
Buffalo. I vow to you today that everywhere I go, I will make
sure that the people hear the real stories of our people. For
too long, our community has been neglected and starved of the
resources that we so greatly need. I promise that I will not
stop pushing for more resources to be funneled into the East
Side of Buffalo. Each and every person that lives within that
community, we are family, not a perfect community, but I know
that we are love.
To the greater Buffalo area, to everyone from around the
country and the world who have reached out and loved on us, on
behalf of Zaire, Zaire's father, Damien Goodman, my mother, my
father, my sisters, my brothers, and myself, we thank you. We
thank you for all of your thoughts and your prayers. Thank you
for all of the love and support you have shown us during this
difficult time. But I also say to you today with a heart full
from the outpouring of love that you also freely gave us, your
thoughts and prayers are not enough. We need you to stand with
us in the days, weeks, months, and years to come and be ready
to go to work and help us to create the change that this
country so desperately needs.
And I will end with a quote from Charles Blow in his book
The Devil You Know: ``Race, as we have come to understand it,
is a fiction, but racism, as we have come to live it, is a
fact.'' The point here is not to impose a new racial hierarchy,
but to remove an existing one. After centuries of waiting for
white majorities to overturn white supremacy, it is clear to me
that it has fallen to Black people to do it themselves, and I
stand at the ready.
Zaire, this is for you, Kid. Happy birthday.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Dr. Guerrero, you are now
recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ROY GUERRERO, PEDIATRICIAN, UVALDE, TEXAS

Dr. Guerrero. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman. My name is
Dr. Roy Guerrero. I am a Board-certified pediatrician and was
present at Uvalde Memorial Hospital, the day of the massacre on
May 24, 2022, at Robb Elementary School. I was called here
today as a witness, but I showed up because I am a doctor
because many years ago I swore an oath, an oath to do no harm.
After witnessing firsthand the carnage in my hometown of
Uvalde, to stay silent would have betrayed that oath. Inaction
is harm. Passivity is harm. Delay is harm. So, here I am, not
to plead, not to beg or convince you of anything, but to do my
job and hope that by doing so, it inspires the members of this
House to do theirs.
I have lived in Uvalde my whole life. In fact, I attended
Robb Elementary School myself as a kid. As often is the case
with us grownups, we remember a lot of the good and not so much
of the bad, so I don't recall homework or detention. I remember
how much I loved going to school. What a joyful time it was.
Back then were able to run between classrooms with ease to
visit our friends, and I remember the way the cafeteria smelled
at lunchtime on hamburger Thursdays.
It was right around lunchtime on a Tuesday that a gunman
entered the school through a main door without restriction,
massacred 19 students and two teachers, and changed the way
that every student at Robb and their families will remember
that school forever. I doubt they will remember the smell of
the cafeteria or the laughter ringing in the hallways. Instead,
they will be haunted by the memory of screams and bloodshed,
panic and chaos, police shouting, parents wailing. I know I
will never forget what I saw that day.
For me that day started like any typical Tuesday in our
pediatric clinic: moms calling for coughs, boogers, sports
physicals right before the summer rush. School was out in two
days, then summer camps would guarantee some grazes and ankle
sprains. Injuries that could be patched up and fixed with a
Mickey Mouse sticker as a reward. Then at 12:30, business as
usual stopped, and with it, my heart. A colleague from the San
Antonio Trauma Center texted me and said, ``Why are pediatric
surgeons and anesthesiologists on call for a mass shooting in
Uvalde?'' I raced to the hospital to find parents outside
yelling children's names in desperation and sobbing as they
begged for any news related to their child. Those mothers'
cries I will never get out of my head.
As I entered the chaos of the ER, the first casualty I came
across was Miah Cerrillo. She was sitting in the hallway, her
face was still clearly in shock, but her whole body was shaking
from the adrenaline coursing through it. The white Lilo and
Stitch shirt that she wore was covered in blood and her
shoulder was bleeding from the shrapnel injury. Sweet Miah, I
have known her my whole life. As a baby, she survived major
liver surgeries against all odds, and once again, she is here
as a survivor, inspiring us with her story today and her
bravery. When I saw Miah sitting there, I remember having seen
her parents outside. So, after quickly examining two other
patients of mine in the hallway with minor injuries, I raced
outside to let them know that Miah was alive. I wasn't ready
for their next urgent and desperate question: ``where is
Elena?''
Elena is Miah's eight-year-old sister who was also at Robb
at the time of the shooting. I had heard from some of the
nurses that there were two dead children who had been moved to
the surgical area of the hospital. As I made my way there, I
prayed that I wouldn't find her. I didn't find Elena, but what
I did find was something no prayer will ever relieve: two
children whose bodies had been pulverized by bullets fired at
them, decapitated, whose flesh had been ripped apart, that the
only clue as to their identities was blood-spattered cartoon
cloths still clinging to them, clinging for life and finding
none.
I could only hope these two bodies were a tragic exception
to the list of survivors, but as I waited there with my fellow
Uvalde doctors, nurses, first responders, and hospital staff
for other casualties we hoped to save, they never arrived. All
that remained was the bodies of 17 more children and the two
teachers who cared for them, who dedicated their careers to
nurturing and respecting the awesome potential every single
one, just as we doctors do.
I will tell you why I became a pediatrician, because I knew
that children were the best patients. They accept the situation
as it is explained to them. You don't have to coax them into
changing their lifestyles in order to get better or plead them
to modify their behavior as you do with adults. No matter how
hard you try to help an adult, their path to healing is always
determined by how willing they are to take action. Adults are
stubborn. We are resistant to change even when the change will
make things better for ourselves, but especially when we think
we are immune to the fallout. Why else would there have been
such little progress made in Congress to stop gun violence?
Innocent children all over the country today are dead
because laws and policy allows people to buy weapons before
they are legally old enough to even buy a pack of beer. They
are dead because restrictions have been allowed to lapse. They
are dead because there are no rules about where guns are kept,
because no one is paying attention to who is buying them. The
thing I can't figure out is whether our politicians are failing
us out of stubbornness, passivity, or both.
I said before that as grownups, we have a convenient habit
of remembering the good and forgetting the bad, never more so
that when it comes to our guns. Once the blood is rinsed away
from the bodies of our loved ones and scrubbed off the floors
of the schools, and supermarkets, and churches, the carnage
from each scene is erased from our collective conscience, and
we return again to nostalgia, to the rose-tinted view of our
Second Amendment as a perfect instrument of American life, no
matter how many lives are lost.
I chose to be a pediatrician. I chose to take care of
children. Keeping them safe from preventable diseases, I can
do. Keeping them safe from bacterial and brittle bones, I can
do. But making sure our children are safe from guns, that is
the job of our politicians and leaders. In this case, you are
the doctors and our country is the patient. We are lying on the
operating table riddled with bullets, like the children of Robb
Elementary and so many other schools. We are bleeding out, and
you are not there.
My oath as a doctor means that I signed up to save lives. I
do my job, and I guess it turns out that I am here to plead, to
beg, to please, please do yours.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. We will now play the video
from Miah.
[Video shown.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Cerrillo, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF MIGUEL CERRILLO, FATHER OF MIAH CERRILLO

Mr. Cerrillo. Hello. Today I come because that girl was my
baby girl, but she is not the same little girl that I used to
play with, and run with, and do everything because she was
daddy's little girl. I have five kids, and she is middle child.
I don't know what to do because I think I would have lost my
baby girl. My baby girl is the world because not only once, but
twice she came back to us. She is everything, not only for me,
but her siblings and her mother.
I thank you all for letting me be here and speak out, but I
wish something will change not only for our kids, but every
single kid in the world because schools are not safe anymore.
Something needs to really change. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you for your testimony, and I
understand you are now leaving. We thank you for sharing your
story. Thank you.
And Mr. and Mrs. Rubio, you are now recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF FELIX RUBIO AND KIMBERLY RUBIO, PARENTS OF LEXI
RUBIO, UVALDE, TEXAS

Ms. Rubio. I am Kimberly Rubio. This is Felix Rubio. We are
the parents of Alexandria Aniyah, best known as Lexi Rubio, and
five other children who all attended Uvalde Public Schools
during the 2021-2022 school year: Kalisa, who completed high
school this year; Isaiah, who attends Uvalde High School;
David, Morales Junior High; Jahleela, Flores Elementary; and
our two youngest children, Julian, 8 and Lexi, 10, who were at
Robb Elementary.
On the morning of May 24, 2022, I dropped Lexi and Julian
off at school a little after 7 a.m. My husband and I returned
to campus at 8 a.m. for Julian's award ceremony and again at
10:30 a.m. for Lexi's award ceremony. Lexi received the good
citizen award and was also recognized for receiving all A's. At
the conclusion of the ceremony, we took photos with her before
asking her to pose for a picture with her teacher, Mr. Reyes.
That photo, her last photo ever, was taken at approximately
10:54 a.m. To celebrate, we promised to get her ice cream that
evening. We told her we loved her and we would pick her up
after school. I can still see her walking with us toward the
exit. In the reel that keeps scrolling across my memories, she
turns her head and smiles back at us to acknowledge my promise,
and then we left. I left my daughter at that school, and that
decision will haunt me for the rest of my life.
Afterward, Felix dropped me off at my office, the Uvalde
Leader-News and returned home because it was a rare day off for
him between normal shifts and security gigs he takes to help
make ends meet. I got situated at my desk and began writing
about a new business in town when the news office started
hearing commotion on the police scanner, a shooting on Diaz
Street near Robb Elementary. It wasn't long before we received
word from my son's teacher that they were safe, secure in the
classroom. Once evacuated from campus, the children reunited
with parents and guardians at the Civic Center. My dad picked
up Julian from the Civic Center and took him to my
grandmother's house. One of our Robb kids was safe.
We focused on finding Lexi. Bus after bus arrived, but she
wasn't on board. We heard there were children at the local
hospital, so we drove over to provide her description. She
wasn't there. My dad drove an hour and a half to San Antonio to
check with the University Hospital. At this point, some part of
me must have realized that she was gone in the midst of chaos.
I had the urge to return to Robb. We didn't have our car at
this point, and traffic was everywhere. So I ran. I ran
barefoot with my flimsy sandals in my hand. I ran a mile to the
school, my husband with me. We sat outside for a while before
it became clear we wouldn't receive an answer from law
enforcement on scene. A San Antonio firefighter eventually gave
us a ride back to the Civic Center where the district was
asking all families who had not been reunited with their
children to gather. Soon after we received the news that our
daughter was among the 19 students and two teachers that died
as a result of gun violence.
We don't want you to think of Lexi as just a number. She
was intelligent, compassionate, and athletic. She was quiet,
shy unless she had a point to make. When she knew she was
right, as she so often was, she stood her ground. She was firm,
direct, voice unwavering. So today, we stand for Lexi, and as
her voice, we demand action. We seek a ban on assault rifles
and high-capacity magazines. We understand that for some
reason, to some people, to people with money, to people who
fund political campaigns, that guns are more important than
children. So, at this moment we ask for progress. We seek to
raise the age to purchase these weapons from 18 to 21 years of
age. We seek red flag laws, stronger background checks. We also
want to repeal gun manufacturers' liability immunity.
You have all seen glimpses of who Lexi was, but I also want
to tell you a little bit about who she would have been. If
given the opportunity, Lexi would have made a positive change
in this world. She wanted to attend St. Mary's University in
San Antonio, Texas on a softball scholarship. She wanted to
major in math and go on to attend law school. That opportunity
was taken from her. She was taken from us.
I am a reporter, a student, a mom, a runner. I have read to
my children since they were in the womb. My husband is a law
enforcement officer, an Iraq War veteran. He loves fishing and
our babies. Somewhere out there, there is a mom listening to
our testimony, thinking, ``I can't even imagine their pain,''
not knowing that our reality will one day be hers unless we act
now.
Thank you for your time.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Hughes, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF LUCRETIA HUGHES KLUCKEN, DC PROJECT, WOMEN FOR GUN
RIGHTS

Ms. Hughes Klucken. Honorable Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking
Member Comer, distinguished members of the committee, thank you
for allowing me to be here today to address the violence in our
country. My name is Lucretia Hughes Klucken. I have four
children and nine grandchildren. On the night of April 2, 2016,
my family got a phone call that would change our lives forever.
My ex-husband answered the phone and let a blood curdling
scream, a scream of pain from the depths of his soul. He
screamed, he cried, ``He is gone. He is gone.''
Our 19-year-old son Emmanuel went to a party early that
night. After we got the call, we were frantic. We called his
phone. No one answered. We called even the police. I went to
Facebook and I had to ask, ``Is my son dead?'' I found out that
he was shot point-blank in the head and killed while playing
dominos. No one spoke up for weeks, and the killer was on the
run. No one was going to snitch, but that is the street life.
Words can't describe how hard it is to bury a child, I ache
for anyone and all who have done the same. My son's death was a
result of a criminal with an evil heart and a justice system
failing to hold him accountable for the laws he had already
broken. You see, a convicted felon killed my son with an
illegally obtained gun. Our gun control lobbyists and
politicians claim that their policies will save lives and
reduce violence. Well, those policies did not save my son. The
laws being discussed are already implemented in cities across
this country. We have decades of evidence proving they do not
work. St. Louis, New York, Chicago, Washington, Atlanta are gun
control utopias, and they are plagued with the most violence.
Ten more laws, 20 more laws, 1,000 more won't make what is
already illegal more wrong or stop criminals from committing
these crimes.
And you all are delusional if you think it is going to keep
us safe. I am a walking testimony of how the criminal justice
system and the gun control laws, which is steeped in racism, by
the way, have failed the Black community. By the age of 25, I
had already went to 18 young Black men's funeral at the age of
25. I have one Black man in jail, one Black man in the grave,
and my young grandson going to be raised without a father. And
it is a curse on the Black community and everyone else's.
Something has to change. Thoughts and prayers and calls for
more gun control isn't enough. How about letting me defend
myself from evil? You don't think that I am capable and
trustworthy to handle a firearm. You don't think that the
Second Amendment doesn't apply to people that look like me? Who
and you who would call for more gun controls are the same ones
that are calling to defund the police? Who is supposed to
protect us? We must prepare to be our own first responders to
protect ourselves and our loved ones. I am a legal, law-abiding
citizen, and I don't need the government to save me.
I teach people how to use a firearm. I empower others to
look at me to understand that Second Amendment is their right.
I am a proud member of the D.C. Project, Women for Gun Rights.
We believe that education is the safety, not ineffective
legislation. We support meaningful solutions that will actually
save lives. We support the Safe Student Act, H.R. 7415, which
would immediately make school safer in hindsight of Parkland.
We saw failure of the government at every level, failing the
students. Students saw something and they said something, and
the school did not act. Police were called to his residence
over 30 times, and they did not act, and finally the police did
not go into the school that fateful day and failed to protect
those kids. We need to secure our schools, and we got to secure
this building like you all do. What is the difference?
We call on Congress to ban gun-free zones, fund nonpartisan
firearm education programs, like KidSafe Foundation, and non-
governmental mental health organizations like Hold My Guns. And
in closing, I claim that nothing in these bills do anything to
make us safer or address the mental health crisis in this
country. Despite living with the heartache of losing my son on
a daily basis, I believe it is our God-given right to defend
ourselves from any act of violence. Making it more difficult or
even more expensive for me, and people that look like me, and
other law-abiding citizens will not make us safer. It will
embolden the criminals. Gun owners are not the enemies, and
these gun control policies are not the solution.
Thank you. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Thank you all for your
powerful and meaningful and gut wrenching testimony.
You are excused, and we will pause while we seek the next
panel for their testimony.
[Pause.]
Chairwoman Maloney. The meeting will resume. We are now
ready for our second panel, and I would like to introduce our
witnesses. The first witness is the Honorable Eric Adams, who
is the mayor of the city of New York. Then we will hear from
Greg Jackson, who is the executive director of the Community
Justice Action Fund. Next, we will hear from Becky Pringle, who
is the president of the National Education Association. Next,
we will hear from Joseph Gramaglia, who is the police
commissioner of Buffalo, New York. Then we will hear from Nick
Suplina, who is the senior vice president for law and policy at
Everytown for Gun Safety. Finally, we will hear from Amy
Swearer, who is the legal fellow at the Edwin Meese Center for
Legal and Judicial Studies in the Heritage Foundation.
The witnesses will be unmuted so that we may swear them in.
Please raise your right hand.
Do you swear to affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you.
Without objection, your written statements will be made
part of the record.
With that, Mayor Adams, you are now recognized for your
testimony. Thank you for coming.
[No response.]
Mr. Adams.
[Inaudible.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Turn on your mic.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ERIC ADAMS, MAYOR, NEW YORK, NEW
YORK

Mr. Adams. Thank you. Thank you very much. Again, I want to
thank you, Madam Chairwoman Maloney, for the invitation to
testify today. I also want to thank all the members of the
House Committee on Oversight and Reform, members from the New
York City congressional delegation, and everyone who has
testified today, especially those who have so bravely shared
their stories of losing loved ones to gun violence. I was
particularly touched by hearing the husband and wife that lost
their baby girl. As a father with one son, it was extremely
impactful to all of us.
I am Eric Adams, and I am honored to appear before you
today as the 110th mayor of the great city of New York to
discuss the ways we can protect public safety and prevent gun
violence.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is high noon in America, time for
every one of us to decide where we stand on the issue of gun
violence; time to decide if it is more important to protect the
profits of gun manufacturers or the lives of our children; time
to decide if we are going to be a Nation of laws or
confederation of chaos, and we must do it now. It is high noon
in America, our country, the country I love. The clock is
ticking every day, every minute toward another hour of death.
I am here today to ask every one of you and everyone in
this Congress to stand with all of us to end gun violence and
protect the lives of Americans. We are facing a crisis that is
killing more Americans than war, a crisis that is now the No. 1
cause of death for our young people, a crisis that is flooding
our cities with the illegal guns faster than we can take them
off the street. The New York City Police Department has taken
over 3,000 illegal guns off our streets this year alone, but
the guns just keep coming. This is a crisis that transcends
party lines and affects both rural and urban communities. I
know this firsthand as the co-chair of Everytown's non-partisan
Coalition on Mayors against Illegal Guns.
No matter what our party affiliations, we are united in our
mission to stop crime, save lives, and bring an end to gun
violence because this isn't about blue versus red. This is
about right versus wrong. Whether it is on the street wearing a
badge or in these chambers taking a vote, we must stand for
what is right.
First, we need Congress to take the handcuffs off the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, known as
ATF, and let them do their jobs. That means confirming
President Biden's nominee as soon as possible. We must work
together to dam all the rivers that lead this to the sea of
violence. Commonsense gun reform must become the law of the
land. I am pleased that today the House will vote on H.R. 7910,
the Protecting Our Kids Act, and I urge the passage of the gun
violence prevention package for consideration in the city. I
also urge the Senate to pass H.R. 8, the bipartisan Background
Checks Act of 2021, and H.R. 1446, the Enhanced Background
Checks Act of 2021. These are bipartisan gun safety bills that
will make our cities and our people safer.
I stand with President Joe Biden in calling on Congress to
act now to regulate or ban assault weapons in this country.
Even if we only raise the age required to buy one of these
weapons, lives will be saved. We need Congress to direct
Federal aid to localities and states that support not just law
enforcement and violence prevention, but also access to high-
quality healthcare, childcare, education, and housing. We must
build the society while youth on a path to fulfillment, not a
road to ruin.
As mayor, my greatest responsibility is protecting the
lives and the safety of the people of New York City. This is my
call, and my duty, and my life's work. I did it as a police
officer in a uniform and wearing the badge, and I do it now as
the elected leader of our largest American city, but I need
your help to further protect our people and to save lives. The
time is right now. It is high noon in America.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Jackson, you are now
recognized for your testimony. Mr. Jackson?

STATEMENT OF GREG JACKSON, JR., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COMMUNITY
JUSTICE ACTION FUND

Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member
Comer, and the rest of the committee for inviting me on this
really important topic. My name is Greg Jackson. I am the
executive director for the Community Justice Action Fund, the
only national gun violence advocacy organization led by
survivor of color, but I am not here by choice. I am here by
circumstance.
In 2013, just miles from this chamber, I was shot as an
innocent bystander while I was simply walking home, and when I
arrived at the hospital, I wasn't welcomed with nurses and
surgeons. No, I was met with investigators. They questioned me
as a suspect first and a patient second. I spent 21 day is in
the hospital, six months learning how to walk again. But what
was most terrifying and tragic was that when I turned on the
TV, I was watching Members of Congress have the same debates
that we are having right now. That was nine years ago.
Every year, over 110,000 people are shot or killed by gun
violence. So, that means nearly a million lives have been
directly devastated since I laid in that hospital, looked up at
that television and watched the members of this chamber debate
this topic. Most of the stories of those who have been impacted
by gun violence like mine will never make the headlines. You
know, just two miles from here, Makiyah Wilson was shot, 10
years old while going to get ice cream. Karon Brown, one of my
mentees, who hosted his own Stop the Violence event in this
neighborhood, was shot down that same summer and killed in
front of a McDonald's. And Pamela Thomas, here in D.C., who was
so afraid of gun violence in her community that she wrote her
own eulogy, just to be shot by a stray bullet in front of her
son.
These stats are not stats. These are stories of real
people, real people that are dying in our streets every single
day. Every day, 110 Americans are killed with guns and 200 are
shot and wounded. And we have talked a lot about this being the
No. 1 cause of death for all youth, surpassing car accidents,
drug overdoses and COVID-19. But amid this pandemic, we have
also seen a 35-percent increase in homicides, and this still
remains the No. 1 cause of death for Black men, the No. 2 cause
of death for Latino men, and the No. 2 cause of death for Black
women. We are here because we cannot and let's not hide from
the harsh truth. Gun violence is destroying communities around
the country, and every day, families experience firsthand the
devastation gunfire brings. To eliminate gun violence, we must
swiftly recognize that this is a public health crisis that
deserves a public health response.
At Community Justice, we address gun violence by focusing
on those who have been most impacted by the crisis, and we urge
Congress to invest in community-based solutions that we know
can address those public health risk factors, that can reduce
the risk factors of those impacted by gun violence, but also
address the root causes. But we also strongly urge that any
supply side approach not only focus on the shooter, but on the
supplier and the source of firearms that are flooding into our
communities.
In moments of crisis, Congress has proven to be as
resilient as the American people and take action. When
coronavirus struck our country, Congress authorized bipartisan
legislation to provide resources and regulations to save lives.
When Ukraine was in crisis, Congress sprang into action and
mobilized bipartisan authorization to authorize immediate aid,
economic investments, mental health resources, and other
services to support those communities. But I am here to say
that we are in crisis in America today. Each time we did the
hard thing because it was the right thing to do, and this
crisis is no different. This crisis now has taken away
grandparents in Buffalo, elementary kids in Uvalde, fathers in
Chicago, mothers in Atlanta, nephews in Chicago, even pastors
in Charleston, and we are here still asking for action.
There are three direct things that we know can be done.
First, we must acknowledge this as a public health crisis and
craft policies to combat it as such. Second, we must advance
commonsense legislation that not only addresses the hardware,
but promotes community-based solutions to end gun violence,
such as the Break the Cycle of Violence Act. And last, I urge
you to create a select committee on the gun violence crisis to
investigate the health impacts of gun violence and its
disproportionate impact on Black and brown communities across
the country.
Now is the time to take action before another person loses
their life, before another child opens his last textbook,
before another parent hugs that child for the last time, and
also before someone like me isn't alive to ask you to do so.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Ms. Pringle, you are now
recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF BECKY PRINGLE, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL EDUCATION
ASSOCIATION

Ms. Pringle. Good morning, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking
Member Comer, and committee members. I appreciate the
opportunity to offer testimony on behalf of the 3 million
members of the National Education Association and all devoted
educators who teach and nurture and protect our students.
As a teacher with three decades of experience, I am
frustrated, I am heartbroken, I am angry that this is where we
are 23 years after Columbine. On April 20, 1999, I had been a
middle school science teacher in Pennsylvania for 23 years. No
experience or training had prepared me for the questions my
middle-level learners asked me as I joined my fellow teachers
in shock and disbelief of the carnage that ended the lives of
12 students and one teacher. The only thing that comforted us
was the belief that this society would never let it happen
again. But the list continued to grow, didn't it? Virginia
Tech, Sandy Hook, Marjory Stoneman Douglas, and now Robb
Elementary: kids were celebrating at the end of a successful
school year. For dying teen children and two teachers, it would
be the last day of their lives.
These massacres occurring in suburban, urban, and rural
schools are not isolated incidents. Tallying up the number of
killed or wounded children does not begin to tell the full
horrific story. Camille, a student who survived Sandy Hook,
experienced severe panic attacks for years. She is one of the
more than 311,000 students exposed to gun violence since
Columbine. Their trauma will likely endure for the rest of
their lives. Students across our country are writing goodbye
notes and wills just in case. Unfortunately, their fear is
perfectly rational.
Here in America, we are 25 times more likely to die by gun
than people in other developed nations. So, the question we
must ask: is this who we are? Is it? Our country has already
experienced nearly 240 mass shootings in 2022 alone, but that
number does not begin to capture the scope of this epidemic.
Every day, gun violence kills 111 people. That means that we
can expect 22,255 more deaths by guns this year. Inaction
equals acceptance of the unacceptable, and this crisis is worse
in Black and Latino communities where 78 percent of adults or
their loved ones who are victims of gun violence. The evidence
is clear. Where there are more guns, more people are killed by
guns every single day.
The politicians who fail to take action ignore the majority
of Americans who want stricter gun laws. You tell our children
protecting them matters less than protecting the status quo. A
high school teacher in Arlington, Texas, survived a workplace
shooting in a corporate setting only to experience school
shootings himself and countless lockdowns. He is now leaving
our profession with these words: ``As much as I love teaching,
I can't fully represent and protect my students. I am not going
to be the educator they need.'' Enough with so-called solutions
that do not address the problem. We cannot place enough armed
guards at every school building in America to protect our
babies. We cannot ask educators to carry weapons and wear body
armor while teaching and nurturing our students because by the
time someone has shown up with a military weapon, it is already
too late. We need for our students more resources, not more
revolvers.
You can help us to not only heal, but to hope. Pass
commonsense gun control legislation so that not one more
community is shattered and not one more anguished parent, like
we heard today, has to lay a precious child to rest. Our
children deserve the chance to grow and to thrive to live into
their brilliance.
Thank you for what I know you will do for our babies.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Commissioner Gramaglia, you
are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH GRAMAGLIA, POLICE COMMISSIONER, BUFFALO,
NEW YORK

Mr. Gramaglia. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to participate in today's hearing. I appear before
you today as a police commissioner in Buffalo, New York. It is
also my privilege to testify on behalf of the Major Cities
Chiefs Association. We are here today to discuss gun violence
epidemic plaguing our Nation. This hearing comes in the
aftermath of multiple mass shootings that have devastated
communities throughout the country, including my home city and
Buffalo. Our communities are hurting, and we must continue to
support them, the loved ones of the victims, and our brave
first responders.
On May 14, 2022, an 18-year-old white supremacist invaded
our city and inflicted terror on the Black community in a way
never seen in Buffalo's history. He legally purchased a
military-style weapon and body armor and then spent months
practicing his shooting skills. He entered the Tops Supermarket
and opened fire on civilians, striking 13 and killing 10. He
livestreamed this with a GoPro he had affixed to his helmet.
Retired Buffalo Police Officer, Aaron Salter Jr., who I
posthumously promoted to lieutenant and issued the department's
highest honor, the Medal of Honor, was working Tops security
that day. Aaron was helping an elderly shopper leave with her
groceries when the shooting began. He did his best to warn
customers while in a completely defensive position. He engaged
the shooter as he entered, hitting him with at least one shot.
It is often said that a good guy with a gun will stop a bad guy
with a gun. Aaron was the good guy and was no match for what he
went up against, a legal AR-15 with multiple high-capacity
magazines. He had no chance.
Assault weapons like the AR-15 are known for three things:
how many rounds they fire, the speed at which they fire those
rounds, and body counts. This radicalized 18-year-old adult
should have never been able to have access to the weapons he
used to perpetrate this attack, and laws needs to be enacted to
ensure it never happens again.
Buffalo Police Officers responded to Tops and were able to
take the shooter into custody within minutes. I have no doubt
in my mind that their swift response time and handling of the
situation saved lives. I would like to publicly thank them and
the rest of the Buffalo Police Department for the heroism they
showed on that day. Buffalo is known as the city of good
neighbors. We are a resilient, culturally diverse community. We
came together after this horrific tragedy, and we will continue
to heal together. However, no city should have to go through
this, and it is time to make changes to a system that is
leaving blood on the sidewalks of our communities every day.
In 2018, the MCCA adopted a firearms violence policy that
would help mitigate the threat of gun violence without
infringing on the constitutional rights or weakening due
process. These reforms include requiring universal background
checks, strengthening NICS definitions and improving access to
records, supporting the use of extreme risk protection orders,
aggressively prosecuting straw purchasers and prohibited
possessors, and banning assault weapons and high-capacity
magazines. Polling shows the majority of Americans support
these commonsense reforms, and Congress must act immediately to
close the loopholes in our current system and the gaps that
allow easy access to military-style weapons.
Events like the Buffalo massacre, the shooting in Uvalde
that took 21 lives, including 19 children, and the mass
shootings in Laguna Woods and Tulsa are the situations that
capture headlines. However, we must remember that gun violence
epidemic extends well beyond these events. The grim reality is
that shootings have become a daily occurrence in American
cities. Emerging trends, like ghost guns and guns modified with
switches, continue to pose a challenge for law enforcement.
Congress must update our laws to account for these new threats
and carnage that has accompanied them. It will be nearly
impossible to address the gun violence epidemic without first
addressing the underlying violent crime problem. Unfortunately,
the proactive policing to help drive down violent crime has
become a luxury for many departments. Law enforcement needs
additional resources to bolster its response to violent crime,
and overall lack of accountability for violent offenders is
contributing to rising gun violence. In some major cities DAs
are not prosecuting serial firearm offenders, and judges
continue to release offenders on low or no bond. To address
these challenges, Congress must provide resources for U.S.
attorney's offices to support additional Federal prosecutions
as appropriate.
Police chiefs see the horror of gun violence every day.
Members of Congress share our solemn duty to protect the
public. The MCCA will continue to call on elected
representatives to issue politics and take the necessary steps
to address the gun violence epidemic. Your leadership is needed
now more than ever. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Suplina, you are now recognized for
your testimony.
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Turn on your mic, please.

STATEMENT OF NICK SUPLINA, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR LAW &
POLICY, EVERYTOWN FOR GUN SAFETY

Mr. Suplina. Good morning, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking
Member Comer, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. My
name is Nick Suplina. I am senior vice president for law and
policy at Everytown for Gun Safety. We are the largest gun
violence prevention organization in the country. I am honored
to be here today and grateful for the spotlight you are shining
on America's gun violence crisis.
Once again, we are grieving. Frequent public mass shootings
terrorize the country and are a uniquely American problem. Mass
shootings often focus the public's attention and our grief, and
with good reason, but they represent a small fraction of all
gun deaths in this country, which include other homicides,
suicides, and unintentional shootings. Every single day, some
110 Americans are killed with a gun and 200 more physically
wounded. We estimate that one-half of all Americans have been
touched by gun violence, either directly or someone they care
for. In other words, we are a Nation of gun violence survivors.
To be clear, this burden has not been borne equally.
Talking about our children, guns are now the leading cause of
death for children and teens. I am talking about people of
color. Black Americans experienced 10 times the homicides of
their white counterparts. Clearly, we are in the middle of a
serious public health crisis, one that is crying out for
sensible gun policy solutions, especially at the Federal level.
And while gun deaths are hitting all-time highs, the gun
industry is breaking profit records year after year. The gun
industry uses fear to sell guns, and it believes that mass
shootings are great for gun sales. They are making money on
these tragedies right now.
So, when we talk about the shootings in Uvalde and Buffalo,
when we talk about the toll of gun violence on our children,
when we talk about the disproportionate impact on Black
Americans, when we talk about how gun violence costs taxpayers,
survivors' families, employers, and communities--$280 billion a
year--we need to also talk about how the $9 billion civilian
firearms industry is shielded from the scrutiny and
accountability that has led other industries to better and
safer practices.
The gun industry, for its part, has innovated not to make
guns or us safer, but to make them more dangerous, more likely
to evade regulation, more profitable. Instead of designing
firearms that can't be fired if stolen, or that make it easy
for law enforcement to trace, gun makers have created
modifications to mimic automatic fire. They have created
impossible-to-trace ghost guns that help circumvent background
checks, and they have designed AR-15s that can be modified in
minutes to bypass the state's assault weapons law as we saw in
Buffalo. And now in a crowded field, gun manufacturers are
trying to market in increasingly brazen ways, often touting the
deadliness of products, glorifying combat, and attempting to
appeal to younger and younger audiences.
Finally, let's not forget the industry has done almost
nothing to take steps to prevent diversion of guns into the
criminal market and to gun traffickers. Between 2016 and 2020,
over 1 million of the industry's firearms were recovered by law
enforcement in connection to crimes. More and more of these
guns carry the telltale signs that they were purchased with the
intent to traffic or illegally use them, yet the industry is
rarely held accountable. This committee's investigation found a
dealer in Georgia where 10 percent of the guns that sold ended
up on crime scenes--10 percent. And we wonder why it is so easy
for criminals to get guns.
So, why is no one holding the gun industry accountable for
its dangerous practices? In 2005, at the behest of the NRA,
Congress passed the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act,
which insulates the industry from most legal threats. And
again, at the behest of the NRA, Congress passed the Tiahrt
Amendment, a budget rider that purports to limit sharing of
data about guns used in crimes, which keeps the industry out of
the conversation about how criminals get armed. These laws have
to go.
In spite of these barriers, I am heartened that public and
private actors in legislatures, city halls, courts across the
country are taking action to reveal the gun industry's role in
gun violence, and I am grateful to this committee's
investigation into gun trafficking and its recent letters to
gun manufacturers. I hope you have the CEOs appear here for
testimony because America hears every day from the families who
have lost loved ones to gun violence, and our country deserves
to hear from the CEOs who are profiting off of their loss and
pain.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. And, Mrs. Swearer, you are
now recognized for your testimony.
Ms. Swearer. Madam Chairwoman and distinguished member----
Chairwoman Maloney. We can't hear your mic.
Ms. Swearer. Madam Chairwoman and distinguished members.
Chairwoman Maloney. We still can't hear you. Turn your mic
on. Pull it closer to----
Ms. Swearer. It says it is on.
Chairwoman Maloney. It is not on.
Ms. Swearer. The green light is on. I will try to speak a
little bit louder.

STATEMENT OF AMY SWEARER, LEGAL FELLOW, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Ms. Swearer. Madam Chairwoman and distinguished Members of
Congress, my name is Amy Swearer, and I am a legal fellow at
the Heritage Foundation where my scholarship focuses on the
Second Amendment and gun violence prevention. I have testified
before various legislatures after several mass shootings:
Parkland, Virginia Beach, El Paso, and unfortunately, too many
others, and I hope to God this is the last time I ever have to
testify before a legislative body after a mass shooting again.
I fear that it won't be. My fear that it won't be is
because the conversation has become predictable. An unspeakably
horrific event, like Uvalde or Buffalo, happens, reflexively,
almost compulsively, calls for Congress to pass a whole host of
gun control measures, largely targeting peaceable law-abiding
citizens. Should anyone dare question the constitutionality,
practicality, or even the effectiveness of any of these
policies, their opposition is immediately framed as callous
obstructionism, and their legitimate concerns are brushed aside
as ``bullshit.'' Any viable alternatives are deemed frivolous
without so much as a passing thought to their usefulness. And
so, I will once again run through all of the serious problems
with commonly proposed gun control measures. It is all detailed
in my written submission, which I hope you read.
Semi-automatic rifles are the type of firearm least often
used to commit acts of gun violence. Pistol grips and barrel
shrouds don't make them any more or less deadly in the context
of mass shootings. While these features can and do make a
difference in the context of lawful self-defense for civilians,
which is why millions of peaceable Americans own them, standard
capacity magazines are commonly possessed by law-abiding
citizens for lawful purposes. The few rigorous studies on their
prohibition have found that the evidence for their success at
lowering rates of gun violence is inconclusive at best.
The context in which mass public shootings occur renders
magazine limits effectively useless at saving lives. Eighteen-
to 20-year-olds are legal adults, otherwise endowed with all of
the rights and duties of citizenship, including the right to
keep and bear arms. Even if it were constitutionally
appropriate to punish a mass of responsible young adults
because a handful of them committed atrocities, the vast
majority of mass public shooters are 21 or older.
And then I will repeat the same viable alternatives that
would be far more effective in a far more immediate way, again,
detailed in the written submission that I hope you read. Take
violent crime seriously under existing Federal laws and
encourage your state and local counterparts to do the same.
Authorized schools to shift the over $100 billion in unused
COVID relief funds to physical security improvements, the
hiring of arm trained staff and the hiring of licensed mental
health professionals; promote responsible gun ownership without
simultaneously imposing financial burdens on gun owners or
hindering their ability to immediately respond to violent
threats; invest in the Nation's mental health infrastructure to
combat the two-thirds of gun deaths that are suicides, and the
list goes on.
Now Congressmen, I am fully aware that when you are burying
your child, nuanced policy discussions are irrelevant. It
shouldn't matter to a 4th grader hiding under her desk,
covering herself in her dead classmate's blood, whether the
real problem here is a barrel shroud or the several dozen
missed opportunities to intervene along the way. But it should
matter to you because you are the ones making public policy
decisions. Many of you are the ones implying that a lot of
victims would be alive today but for a mass shooter's pistol
grip and a background check that he already passed. Many of you
are the same ones mocking anybody for ``talking about doors,''
when a single locked door in Uvalde would likely have saved 21
lives, and when all of us just walked in here today into this
building with its limited public access points, its one-way
locking security doors, and its plethora of armed officers.
What happened in Uvalde and in Buffalo is horrific? It is
horrifying. No one should ever have to experience that type of
unfathomable trauma, and I cannot even begin to imagine what
those families are going through right now. Everybody with a
soul has it shattered over acts like this, and we have seen it
shattered every single time from Columbine to Parkland to
Uvalde. This didn't get easier for us. We did not grow numb
somewhere along the way to the reality of this. It is not as
though our family members don't also teach 4th graders or we
don't also send our kids to school. It is not as though we
don't also shop in grocery stores, or go to country music
festivals, or work in hospitals, as though we don't also feel
the tremendous, horrible weight of these tragedies somewhere
deep inside of our souls because we do.
Now we oppose these policies precisely because the lives of
these victims matter, because the grief of their loved ones is
real, because we all want thriving communities with families
flourishing instead of burying their children. The opposition
has always been and is still today a genuine concern that these
policies suffer from serious constitutional and practical
defects, that they will not have the impact and promise people
they will. And we have always proposed alternatives that would
be more effective and less constitutionally suspect. We have
rarely been met with our open ears, and I hope for the Nation's
sake that today is different, because I would really love to
never testify after a mass shooting again.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank all of you for your very
important testimony. I now recognize myself for questions.
As a mother, it is hard to find words to express the grief
and outrage I feel, and others feel in this room, listening to
the stories from our witnesses today. No child should be cut
down by a gun. Lexi Rubio should have been able to grow up,
live her dreams, become a lawyer, major in math, visit
Australia. Eleven-year-old Miah should not have been forced to
cower in fear as she watched her teachers and friends
massacred. And the close-knit, vibrant Jefferson Avenue
community in Buffalo, many of whom came today to stand with us,
should not be forced to reckon with the violent death of
friends and loved ones gunned down by a racist with an assault
weapon. We are in a crisis, but we are not powerless. Congress
just needs to find the courage to act, and I hope we find it
today when we pass on the sensible and vote on these sensible
gun reform bills.
Let's start with assault weapons. The shooters in Uvalde
and Buffalo were too young to buy alcohol, but they both
purchased assault weapons legally. Ms. Pringle, as an educator,
your organization represents millions of teachers, some of whom
have witnessed horrific gun violence, some of whom have been
murdered and its aftermath. Would banning assault weapons save
the lives of teachers and students?
Ms. Pringle. It absolutely would.
Chairwoman Maloney. There are many other commonsense steps
that we can take. We can strengthen background checks, raise
the minimum age to buy a gun, require waiting periods.
Commissioner Gramaglia, you are on the frontlines against gun
violence every day in Buffalo. Would these commonsense measures
save the lives of police officers and others in your community?
Mr. Gramaglia. It absolutely would.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mayor Adams, New York City already has
adopted many gun safety measures, and you have moved quickly to
take further action. But guns from other states lacks gun laws
keep flowing into New York. Why is it so important that we pass
Federal gun safety laws?
Mr. Adams. As we indicated, we removed 3,000 guns off our
streets, but in addition to that, we have witnessed an over 240
percent increase in what is called ghost guns. If we don't have
a combined effort with the intervention items we are putting in
place, the prevention, and also stop the flow, many of the guns
that we are witnessing are purchased or stolen from outside our
state. One gun in particular, a suspect was found with a gun,
and it was stolen on July 27, 2020. It was used in six acts of
violence, individual cases, individuals shooting into a random
crowd. The gun found its way on the streets of New York. So, it
is more than what we do locally. We need assistance with the
partnership with the Federal Government to stop the flow of
guns in our cities.
Chairwoman Maloney. Other countries have taken commonsense
steps to keep guns away from criminals, and they have succeeded
in saving countless lives. We stand alone in the world with the
number of mass shootings and deaths from guns. And as you can
see in this chart, the American people overwhelmingly support
gun safety reform. So, Mr. Suplina, in your view, why has
Congress failed to adopt these commonsense measures that most
Americans and most countries in the world have adopted?
Mr. Suplina. Well, to put it bluntly, Chairwoman, the gun
lobby presents a formidable obstacle in this country.
Oftentimes, and you have heard it already today, the Second
Amendment is used as a reason to not advance commonsense gun
reforms, even while the Court has not said that the very
reforms that you are proposing would violate. Quite the
opposite, the courts have upheld over and over and over again.
So, the lobby ceases its job to make every gun law one step
closer to confiscation, which is a lie; conspiracies abound
about the government coming to take your guns, and that gets
into the head of well-meaning lawmakers who are afraid that,
you know, people will believe that those myths are true. They
are not true. We can do an awful lot to save American lives by
passing these laws.
Chairwoman Maloney. We have lost too many lives to gun
violence. It is long past time for Congress to act.
I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney and Ranking Member
Comer, for holding this hearing today so we can highlight the
need for additional school security to protect our children. I
joined the Nation in mourning for the 19 children and two
adults who senselessly lost their lives due to an evil act
committed about two weeks ago. While every loss of life is a
tragedy, no one should weaponize or politicize the abhorrent
act to punish law-abiding citizens.
For almost 250 years, since the founding of our Nation,
countless hundreds of thousands of men and women have
sacrificed their lives to provide the freedoms we enjoy today.
Indeed, those freedoms were bought at a very high price and
must be guarded continuously so they can be passed on to future
generations. If we allow emotion to drive our actions, actions
that have Constitution-altering consequences, we will destroy
the very foundation of our country and break faith with those
who gave everything that we would be free. Evil deeds do not
transcend constitutional rights. It is the other way around.
Constitutional rights are the ones that transcend evil deeds.
What occurred in Uvalde and other communities like Sandy
Hook and Parkland was nothing short of heartbreaking tragedies
and evil deeds, heartbreaking and evil for the loss of innocent
life, but also because, from what I have seen in the news about
Uvalde, I believe it was mostly preventable. We don't know all
the facts yet because the investigation is still ongoing. But I
hope that this hearing is truly looking for legitimate,
functional, and effective answers and not just a bunch of left-
wing talking points to fill the ``do something, do anything''
mentality that I have heard coming from the Biden
administration.
The White House Press Secretary, Ms. Jean-Pierre, said on
Tuesday, May 31, that President Biden is uninterested in
pursuing tighter security at schools in the aftermath of the
Uvalde tragedy: ``I know there has been conversation about
hardening schools. That is not something that he believes in,''
said Ms. Jean-Pierre. One of the things I have learned during
my three overseas tours of military combat was that the harder
the target you are, the less likely you will be engaged by the
enemy. That is a proven fact and just commonsense that applies
across multiple aspects of life. For that to not be a part of
the administration's focus just shows how seriously out of
touch the Democrat leadership is with reality.
You know, I want to echo Ms. Hughes' remarks from the
previous panel. Schools should be hard targets. Violent
criminals should never, ever have been able to gain access to
the inside of the schools. That means schools across the Nation
should implement sensible security measures, like keeping doors
locked, a single point of entry, better security technology,
and a volunteer force of well-trained and armed staff, in
addition to a school resource officer. And where a school staff
person has additional responsibility, they should receive
additional compensation.
A retired military officer from my district, an Army
colonel, sent me an email a few days ago, and I want to read a
short section of it. ``I am absolutely convinced that the
single most effective method to eliminate school shootings is
to take away all the signs that declare all schools are gun
free zones and do away with all laws that require such
postings.'' Replace those signs with signs using these words or
similar words. ``We love our children and will do anything to
protect them. Accordingly, selected teachers and staff are
armed and trained to protect our children. Proceed at your own
peril. You will be stalked.'' The rationale for this dramatic
change in policy is really quite simple. Gun free zone signs
don't protect anyone. They take away the law-abiding citizens'
capability to be a force in helping to protect the children,
and they protect the would-be a shooter because they believe
they will be unopposed.
From June 1950 through June 2019, 94 percent of mass
shootings occurred in gun free zones. If a would-be school
shooter doesn't know who is armed and who is not, they would
likely move to a more vulnerable target. Most potential school
shooters are coward at heart. They do not want to face a
challenge to what they are trying to do. They want to be in
control with no opposition. They do not like to be confronted
by someone who has to face off against them because that
confrontation would preclude a school shooter wannabe from
being able to take any unopposed action.
For those who say that teachers or staff will likely not
take up arms to protect their students, I say they will. There
have been too many documented cases where teachers have
heroically given their lives to protect their students. It is
time to give them the tools and help them to better protect
those children so they have a fighting chance to survive an
encounter with someone who is bent on harming them. And for the
record, if someone is intent on harming someone else, they will
use whatever is available to do the job, be it a hammer, a
knife, or whatever. There is a lot of insight in the words of
this Army colonel. He also knows the difference between a hard
target and a soft, easy target, and he knows the advantage of
that difference.
Ms. Swearer, you were involved in Heritage Foundation
School Safety Initiative, which was developed after the 2018
Parkland shooting, correct?
Ms. Swearer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Clyde. In your opinion, what do you believe should be
done to secure our schools from violent criminals to ensure
that our students have a safe place to learn?
Ms. Swearer. Well, I think, as I mentioned in my testimony,
and then again in my written submission, there are several
avenues that can be taken, including physical security
improvements. You know, again, it has become popular to mock
people for talking about doors and those sorts of things, but
these are basic security components of the rest of our everyday
lives. We see them in apartment complexes. We see them in the
building we walked into today. We see them in most corporate
buildings that we walk into on any given day.
You know, in terms of having a quicker armed response, I
think schools should have the flexibility to decide how that
happens. If you look in my written submission, any footnote,
there are, just from the last couple of years, a good number of
examples. And it is just a smattering of them because I didn't
want the footnote to be 12 pages of armed responses saving
lives whether from school resource officers, or from including,
in one case, from an armed staff member who stopped a
kidnapping and then prevented an armed individual from entering
the school where other children were. And I think, again, a key
component of this is not just looking at physical security, but
also, you know, I've mentioned having the adequate mental
health resources. We are not talking about blaming mental
illness, but we are talking about when you look at one, what it
means for humans.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Swearer. I would end by saying looking at licensed
mental health professionals in schools.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
this hearing. I want to thank the panel of distinguished
witnesses. Thank you for coming before this committee to help
us with our work. I also want to thank the previous panel. The
families of the victims who had the courage and selflessness, I
think, to, despite their pain, come here with the sole purpose
of preventing other families from suffering a similar loss, so
I thank them.
Madam Chair, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
submit for the record a report and analysis conducted by
Quoctrung Bui, Alicia Parlapiano, and Margot Sanger-Katz over
at The New York Times. It is an analysis of 106 mass shootings
since Columbine in this country.
And I want to read an excerpt that describes best what they
found.
To quote this report, ``If the key gun control proposals
now being considered in Congress had been law since 1999, four
gunmen younger than 21 would have been blocked from legally
buying the rifles they used in mass shootings. At least four
other assailants would have been subject to a required
background check instead of slipping through a loophole. Ten
others might have been unable to steal their weapons because of
the efforts required to encourage safer gun storage, and 20
individuals might not have been allowed to legally purchase the
large-capacity magazines that they use to upgrade their guns,
helping them to kill on average 16 people each.'' Taken
together, those four measures might have changed the course of
at least 35 of those 106 mass shootings, a third of such
episodes in the United States since the massacre at Columbine
High School in Colorado, that New York Times analysis has
found, and those 35 shootings killed 446 Americans.
Mr. Suplina, there has been references made to the fact
that someone could cause damage with a hammer or a knife. I
would wonder if you could talk about AR-15 style firearms and
their ammunition and how different they are and the greater
vulnerability in creation in society. I know you have written
on this in the past, and if you could go over that for a bit
just to educate people who are not familiar with that type of
weapon.
Mr. Suplina. So, this type of weapon, which is derived from
a military-style, a military weapon, presents increased risk,
as I believe the commissioner said earlier, because of their
speed of bullet, their handling, their ability to accept high-
capacity magazines, and they are designed and are advertised to
be able to inflict mass amount of damage in a short period of
time. They are also unique in the damage that is done to the
human body when you use one of these. A handgun, even at a
sometimes larger caliber, won't do the damage to human tissue.
I am not a physician, but you did hear from one earlier who
described in great detail what a semiautomatic rifle with
multiple rounds can do.
So, these are unique threats. There is a reason why they
are used in mass shootings because those shooters want to
inflict maximum damage.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. I do want to add a quote from a
trauma surgeon at the University of Arizona, who agrees with
your assessment. He said that the damage from an AR-15 on the
body ``looks like a grenade went off in there.''
Madam Chair, I am so sorrowful for the loss of Lexi Rubio
and so many others, and so many we have heard in previous mass
shootings. You know, I will support the package of restrictions
that we will consider in the next couple of days here in
Congress to restrict the use of assault weapons and high-
capacity magazines, and I will vote for the background checks
that I think are necessary. And I respect my colleagues' rights
to defend the Second Amendment, but I will note when in
defending the Second Amendment you have to go to military
experts and battlefield commanders for advice on how to protect
our kids while they are in school, we got a problem. We have
got a problem. Think about that, that you are going to military
battlefield commanders, combat veterans for advice on how to
protect our kids while they are sitting in school trying to
learn.
I just urge my colleagues to think hard on this and
consider supporting the package of bills that we have before
the Congress this week. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, is now recognized.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairman, thank you very much, and I
want to thank the gentleman from Kentucky, the ranking member,
for really what I think is the thoughtful opportunity for us to
handle what is a difficult circumstance.
I am a Texan and I was about some 100 miles from Uvalde. I
know Uvalde very well. I spent a good bit of time in San
Antonio growing up. As soon as I heard about what happened, I
immediately went about convening some 10 counties worth of
superintendents, mayors, county judges, law enforcement people,
sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, school resource officers. I did not
sit back and wait to find out what this hearing might develop.
I did not wait to find out what someone else thinks is a good
idea. I tend to think that, back home, people have the best
answers. I say differently. I think Texans have answers for
Texas problems.
Madam Chairwoman, I do not want to chastise anybody today.
I want to thank each of our people who have showed up, not only
from Buffalo, but from New York City and others who have taken
time to be here today. I do not wish to challenge anyone. But,
Madam Chairwoman, I would like to insert into the record an
article from the Christian Science Monitor Weekly, June 11, and
also an article which I have provided to you from
FiveThirtyEight, which is a website that they present
information. For the panel, the FiveThirtyEight article said,
``We have known how to protect, prevent a school shooting for
more than 20 years.''
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you, Madam Chairman. In fact, as I went
about looking at this, which I had not previously, I did a good
bit of review myself, and I found out that there is the
National Center for School Safety. It is at the University of
Michigan in the School of Public Health. And they state this
before and still, the information that we do have access to
these studies, seem to be saying that, yes, by developing a
positive school climate, by educating students on how to say
something, and speak up or find a trusted adult is having a
positive effect, not just on attitudes, but also self-
efficiency, something we need to approach as we talk about
behavior.
We learned at my meeting that I had in Waco, Texas, that
this is not a decision that the shooters, by and large, make.
That is a snap judgment. They go about this planning effort and
plan these school shootings out. They happen to be people who
have become isolated in school, had been picked on, been made
fun of, had been bullied, and these people go off into, by and
large, a deep hole where they are not able to effectively
balance their lives. This is a public issue problem in our
schools of mental health issues.
I go to schools probably every two weeks, and my
observations that I have publicly stated, are that I have seen
our schools. There are a lot of children, a lot of young
adults, who are tested in ways where I think they are reaching
out for help. I think one of the things that we should go to is
looking at the studies that have been out here, and I would
hope our schools and our experts that are on these panels
today, including you, Chief, and including you, Mayor, would
include these studies and go back to the schools, and let's
identify in our schools where there is something we can make
better. This article also says our work on projects is in
progress, and it talks about how talking to students. Every day
when I grew up, we would recite the Pledge of Allegiance to the
flag, taking a few minutes.
Now, I know we have heard testimony that everything about
America is racist, but I think that in our classrooms, we need
to talk about our Nation, our rights and our responsibilities,
but taking time every day to be nice to each other, leaving
notes knowing each other and then listening to people who
emanate and identifying people who have problems. It is my
hope, Madam Chairwoman and our ranking member, that instead of
taking to the floor this immediate action, we would really
listen to you and other experts.
Madam Chairwoman, I would like to see if we would call
Justin Heinze, who is director of National Center for School
Safety, assistant professor at the University of Michigan
School of Public Health, I believe we need professionals who
have studied these things. I say this as an opportunity to each
one of you. I want to thank you. We listen to you and I hope
you will hear us back. Thank you very much, and may God bless
the people of Uvalde, Texas who are struggling through this at
this time in our Nation.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Krishnamoorthi is
recognized.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Madam Chair. Commissioner
Gramaglia, thank you for your service to the people of Buffalo.
I was born in India, and I immigrated first to Buffalo, New
York, and so the fact that you said that it is the city of good
neighbors is very poignant for me. I am very sorry for the loss
of all those lives in Buffalo.
The shooter in Uvalde used a what is called a Daniel
Defense DDM V7 rifle. It is a style of AR-15 rifle. It markets
that rifle as ``a perfect rifle for everybody.'' This
particular picture comes from their Twitter account on May 16,
2022. Now, Commissioner, guns are the leading cause of death
among young people aged 24 and under. Guns kill far more kids
than cigarettes, but we don't let cigarette companies market to
children. Sir, you don't think it is appropriate for Daniel
Defense or any manufacturer to market AR-15-style rifles, or
handguns, or any other weapons to children, correct?
Mr. Gramaglia. I think that picture behind you is very
disturbing is what it I, and, no, I don't believe that that
should be the case.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And why do you find that picture
disturbing?
Mr. Gramaglia. Many children in our country, because of a
lack of safe storage on weapons, have either accidentally taken
their own lives or somebody else in that household or another
friend within that house who is there visiting. It is
disturbing.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Shortly after the Daniel Defense rifle
was used in the Uvalde shooting, this picture was taken down
from their Twitter account, and indeed their Twitter account
was made private. I think they had second thoughts about
advertising in this manner as well.
Ms. Swearer, in 2019, while testifying before the House
Judiciary Committee, you went viral. In a viral video talking
about the lethality of AR-15s, you said your mother ``struggled
to hit a stationary target from 6 yards out under ideal
conditions, and then she picked up an AR-15 and I watched my
mother put a fist-sized grouping of lead in the center mass of
the target 20 yards out. When accuracy and stopping power
matter, they are simply better.'' You said that, correct, Ms.
Swearer?
Ms. Swearer. Yes, I did.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. This is a picture of the 19 children
and two teachers who died in Uvalde, Ms. Swearer. You mentioned
the AR-15 stopping power, but I got to believe these little
children were not the ones you were talking about stopping,
correct?
Ms. Swearer. No, I was talking about stopping the
individual who showed up to shoot them, who did show up to
shoot them----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And the----
Ms. Swearer. Who did show up to shoot that individual was a
bunch of law enforcement officers with an AR-15.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And Ms. Swearer, your mic is not on,
but----
Ms. Swearer. The green light is on.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I can hear you, Ms. Swearer. It is
good. I can hear Ms. Swearer.
Mr. Connolly. [Presiding.] Perhaps you could switch with
Mr. Suplina for a minute if his mic is working.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Can you please suspend the time?
Mr. Connolly. The witness needs to be heard.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Restore the time, please.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Ms. Swearer. Congressman----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Can I repeat the question and then you
can say the answer?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, and if we could just stop the clock for
a minute because we lost some time there.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Could we change the placards to----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Krishnamoorthi, do you want to repeat the
question?
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Yes. Ms. Swearer, when you talked about
the stopping power of these AR-15s, it wasn't these children
that you were talking about stopping, obviously.
Ms. Swearer. No, I was referring to individuals like the
one who went into that building and spent 78 minutes shooting
them. And I hope, as was the case in Uvalde, that the people
who show up to stop shooters like that have the AR-15 precisely
for its stopping power, and that is exactly what happened in
Uvalde. That is why cops are routinely exempt from these
prohibitions and these threats in a civilian context----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Ms. Swearer, this man legally purchased
these AR-15 rifles, correct? In this particular case, the
shooter had legally purchased these AR-15 rifles and was able
to stop and obviously end these lives forever.
Ms. Swearer.
[Inaudible].
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Now, Commissioner Gramaglia, I want to
address you again, Commissioner. You know, guns are often
billed as essential to maintaining the freedoms we enjoy in
America. They are an iconic part of America to a lot of people,
but cars have long been central to American life as well. And
what we have seen interestingly is that, here is a picture of
traffic deaths versus deaths from firearms, and at one time
traffic deaths far exceeded firearms in 1950, but over time,
traffic deaths have gone down, while firearm deaths have
remained relatively constant. Now, of course, with regard to
the right to bear arms, that is in the Constitution, but it is
not an absolute right. That is why we outlaw machine guns and
we regulate firearms in other ways.
Sir, with regard to traffic deaths and cars, the imposition
of rules, and regulations, and laws, along with private
industry adapting safer ways to drive and devices to make them
safer, have led to a reduction in traffic deaths, but the same
cannot be said for firearms. Isn't that right?
Mr. Gramaglia. I believe you are correct, yes. In looking
at the traffic deaths going down, regulations, both in vehicle
safety, airbags, speed enforcement, other things of that
nature, have led to safer roads.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And what would that lead you to believe
should happen with regard to firearms?
Mr. Gramaglia. Some sensible regulations to limit the
carnage that is happening on our streets.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Commissioner.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. The gentlelady from North
Carolina, Ms. Foxx, is recognized for her five minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The horrific and
heartbreaking tragedies that occurred in Uvalde and Buffalo has
shaken the Nation. We are all made in God's image, and I
continue to pray for our society and for the families of the
men, and women, and children who were senselessly murdered. We
must be thoughtful in how we discuss and address this issue.
When the Federal Government acts in haste, the room for error
is exponentially compounded. This problem should be diagnosed
in its entirety before we endeavor to place proposals on the
table. The simple truth is that top-down legislative actions
from Washington do not provide the states the due deference
they deserve. The latitude of the states to make decisions that
best suit their constituencies must be respected.
The Second Amendment was intended both to empower
individuals and also to shield them from the Federal Government
exerting undue influence. Unfortunately, over time, the
underlying principle of the Second Amendment has been distorted
and misconstrued by Washington bureaucrats who simply want it
stripped away from law-abiding citizens. This cannot be allowed
to happen.
I now yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Clyde, who has a tremendous amount of experience
with these issues.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much, Virginia. I would like to
ask Mr. Gramaglia. In your sworn testimony, you say of a
retired Buffalo police officer, Aaron Salter, Jr., his service
weapon was no match for the military-style weapons and armor
the perpetrator was equipped with. Yet your Buffalo police
officers responded to Tops a minute after receiving the 9-1-1
call and were able to take the shooter into custody within a
minute of arriving at the scene. That is impressive. That is
very impressive that your officers were able to do that, and
this gentleman armed with an AR-15 style rifle. What is the
Buffalo officer's standard service weapon?
Mr. Gramaglia. A Glock 40-caliber.
Mr. Clyde. A Glock 40-caliber pistol.
Mr. Gramaglia. Yes.
Mr. Clyde. So, they responded with a Glock 40-caliber
pistol and were able to subdue this gentleman in one minute.
Mr. Gramaglia. They were able to do that because as he
exited the store, he had the AR-15 pointed up underneath his
chin, and then through what I thought was very calm de-
escalation language, he surrendered his weapon and put it down.
Had he pointed it at the officers, we think we would have had a
different scenario here.
Mr. Clyde. OK. But that 40-caliber weapon is completely
capable of stopping someone with an AR-15, correct?
Mr. Gramaglia. Well, he had military-style body armor and a
tactical helmet on. He was shot at least one time that we had
uncovered through our evidence and that had no effect on him. I
also watched the video, both the store surveillance video that
has not been released and the GoPro video that was downloaded,
which showed the confrontation between----
Mr. Clyde. But the 40-caliber pistol that the officers
carry is plenty enough to stop an armed shooter, correct? It is
all about shot placement, isn't it?
Mr. Gramaglia. It is and it isn't.
Mr. Clyde. All right. Thank you. I appreciate that. Ms.
Swearer, actually, have mass shootings or school shootings been
carried out with other weapons other than AR-15s?
Ms. Swearer. Yes, Congressman, they have.
Mr. Clyde. OK. What other weapons, and what is the primary
weapon, if you will?
Ms. Swearer. So, the primary weapon is actually a
plurality, are handguns alone. Another, you know, sort of
larger segment are several variations of firearms, some
combination of rifles, handguns, shotguns, and then a smaller
percentage are rifles alone.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you very much. So, handguns are still
very, very potent firearms. Madam Chairwoman, I would like to
introduce this article into the record and I request unanimous
consent. It is a Fox News article, May the 28, 2022, and it is
entitled, ``West Virginia Woman With Pistol Shoots, Kills Man
at Graduation Party: 'Saved Several Lives.'"
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Clyde. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Clyde. You know, what happened in Uvalde was an
incredible tragedy, and it had a very terrible ending. But
something very similar happened the very next day, that
Wednesday in Charleston, West Virginia, and a particular woman
in West Virginia fatally shot a man who had begun firing an AR-
15 rifle into a crowd of dozens. The woman was attending a West
Virginia party, she drew her pistol, and fired on the convicted
felon. No one at the party was injured, and the gentleman
obtained his weapon illegally. Criminals will obtain their
weapons however they want. They will get them illegally. More
gun laws are not going to stop that, not in any way, shape or
form, because criminals simply do not obey the law.
Chairwoman Maloney. [Presiding.] The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Clyde. I yield back.
Ms. Foxx. Madam Chair, I would like to ask permission to
insert into the record an article, ``Why 'Do Something' Won't
Work,'' from The Wall Street Journal, Thursday, June 2, 2022.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly, is now recognized.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair, and I thank our witnesses
for being here today.
I was the chairman of Fairfax County when the Virginia Tech
massacre occurred. At that point in American history, that was
the worst gun massacre in our history. I buried six young
children, students that week--six. I am still in touch with
many of the families years later, and the emptiness in their
hearts and souls cannot be filled. It is a tragedy that lives
with them forever. Those children were killed by a mentally ill
person who should not have had access to weapons but did. He
wasn't a criminal. He was mentally ill.
We hear excuse after excuse that gun laws don't work. The
Australian experience would suggest otherwise. After a series
of massacres in their country, Australia adopted some strict
gun laws. They don't have the massacres weekly we do. It
changed behavior because it changed access to weapons and
ammunition. We have heard the answer is arm our teachers, that
be the solution. Ms. Pringle, you deal with teachers? Would
that be a good solution from your point of view?
Ms. Pringle. Absolutely not. We know that the majority of
not only our teachers, but our parents, do not believe that
arming teachers would in any way prevent the carnage that we
have seen for over 23 years. I just want you to imagine, I was
a middle school teacher. My responsibility was to ensure that
every student was nurtured and that they could learn, come to
school ready to learn every day. And now the suggestion that I,
as a teacher, would be responsible for carrying a weapon and
making a split decision, split-moment decision about whether I
was going to shoot someone or not, whether that responsibility
would be mine to bear, that is a distraction from what we know
we need to do in this country, which is to pass comprehensive
gun control laws, something we have never done. In the short
time that we did ban assault rifles, assault weapons, we saw
that carnage go down, didn't we? Yes, we did. But we have never
passed comprehensive gun legislation in this country, and we
need to do it now.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Mayor Adams, welcome.
Mr. Adams. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Mayor Adams, you are the mayor of, I think,
the largest city in the United States?
Mr. Adams. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be a good idea, from your point of
view, as the mayor of that city and your commitment to reducing
crime in that city, to arm our teachers in all of your schools
in New York City? Would that be a solution from your point of
view?
Mr. Adams. No, and I think the facts show that. Between
1996 to 2010, one study found that police officers were three
times more likely to die from gun violence with a heavy flow of
guns in their city. So, it is harmful to the law enforcement
community, it is harmful to our civilians, and it is harmful to
our children.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Gramaglia, police commissioner, would
arming teachers help your force? Would it have made a
difference in your community in Buffalo?
Mr. Gramaglia. I think what we have to be careful on is to
not militarize our schools and make students feel like they are
in a system where they are surrounded by weapons in an
institution where they are supposed to be learning. I certainly
agree with hardening our targets, making sure our schools are
safe buildings, having a strong school resource program where
school resource officers are engaging with their students, are
building trust within their students. But I think we have to
caution against over-weaponizing our schools. It causes fear in
our students, and I think we need to engage our students in
these conversations.
Mr. Connolly. And just real quickly, and Ms. Pringle's
point, the use of weapons and the decision to use them for law
enforcement could be a split-second judgment, and that requires
careful training, does it not?
Mr. Gramaglia. It is a considerable amount of training for
absolute split-second decisions that are second-guessed for
years on.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, is recognized for
five minutes. Mr. Hice?
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just for the record, from
what I can research and understand, there are some 300,000 or
so crimes committed every year of violent crimes in which guns
are a part of the situation. There are between 500,000 and 3
million incidences a year where guns prevent violent crimes
from taking place.
So, let us clarify here, the issue is not gun violence.
Guns are not the issue. We have a people violence problem who
misuse guns and other means whenever they intend to harm
individuals. And the answer to this situation when you have
violent people, the answer is not defunding the police. The
answer is not pitting one group of Americans against another,
which we see far too often these days. The answer is not
ignoring the rule of law. The answer is not releasing criminals
into our streets or allowing them into our country. The answer
is not a lack of consequences for those who commit crimes and
being soft on crime, for those who commit violent crimes. We
have got to look at the problem, which is violent people. And
at some point in this country we have got to recognize that
there is great value in upholding the rule of law. We have got
to recognize and teach that there is a such thing as moral
absolutes, not the least of which is respecting one another,
respecting life. We have got to, in the midst of this
conversation, I believe, embrace religious beliefs.
Look, there are risks that come with a free society. We all
understand that. But we have a moral and a spiritual crisis in
this country right now, and that is reflected in violent people
that we see more and more. But it is impossible for us to have
a system of government which we have in this country where we
have limited government and maximum freedom if we do not have a
citizenry that is capable of self-governing their own lives
with an authentic understanding of right and wrong. And so for
us to take out of the equation any mention of moral absolutes
or the role that our founders mentioned and described as
indispensable supports to our system of government, which is
religion and morality, then I believe we are making a mistake
in all of this discussion. These things cannot be ignored.
Mayor Adams, let me real quickly begin with you, and if we
can go quickly, New York City is certainly one of the leading
examples of gun restrictions and gun restrictive measures in
the United States. ``Yes'' or ``no?''
Mr. Adam. Yes.
Mr. Hice. Your mic was off.
Mr. Adam. Yes. I am sorry. Yes.
Mr. Hice. And yet, we all know New York has continued in
recent years to see a rise in crime. ``Yes'' or ``no?''
Mr. Adams. Yes.
Mr. Hice. OK. In January of this year you released in a
press statement regarding your blueprint to end gun violence in
New York City, you had in that a quote that says this, ``It is
illegal to carry a gun in our city, yet police officers take
them off the streets every day in record numbers.'' You made
that statement, correct?
Mr. Adams. Yes, it mainly comes from Georgia.
Mr. Hice. Right. And so here we still have in a city that
has a greatest among the greatest gun restriction laws in the
country, a rise in crime and guns being carried off the streets
in record numbers every day. It doesn't appear that the
attempts that are produced by the gun restrictions are having
any effect of keeping bad people from getting guns, and taking
the constitutional rights away from American citizens only
helps criminals is I guess what I am getting to.
And Ms. Swearer, let me come to you. If we continue down
this path of restricting gun rights from American citizens,
making it easier for criminals to have targets, knowing that
there will not be guns by legal citizens there to defend
themselves, what kind of impact will that have in the long run?
Ms. Swearer. First, I want to make sure. Is my mic still
not on?
Mr. Hice. Can we put a pause?
Chairwoman Maloney. Use your neighbor's mic. Use your
neighbor's mic. Maybe that will work better.
Ms. Swearer. My apologies. I was told the issue had been
taken care of.
Congressman, to answer your question. Criminals are
rational actors. You know, you look at the studies on this and
the way in which criminals operate. Obviously, they don't want
to confront someone with a firearm any more than we would want
to if we were criminals. They are rational actors. You know,
you mentioned the statistics on defensive gun uses. I think
that is important to point out. I would also note how much
lower that is, you know, considering there are a number of
states that essentially do not allow ordinary law-abiding
citizens to protect themselves with firearms in public and/or
who make it far more difficult for individuals to keep and bear
arms even inside their own homes. And so that could be
considerably higher under different circumstances. You know,
that said, again, I appreciate you pointing that out, but,
again, criminals are rational actors. To pretend otherwise is
borderline silly. So, of course----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Hice. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin, is now recognized.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Buffalo, Uvalde, Sandy
Hook, Tree of Life, Mother Emanuel Church, El Paso, Walmart,
Pulse nightclub, Las Vegas, Columbine, the bloodbath continues.
In the history of our species, a number of civilizations have
practiced or allowed human sacrifice, including the sacrifice
of children: the Carthaginians, the Mesopotamians, the Incas,
the Aztecs. Will we be recorded as such a society that accepts
the sacrifice of innocents?
Gun violence is the No. 1 cause of death of children in the
United States of America today, which makes us globally unique.
We have rates of gun violence and gun death 20 times higher
than other industrialized nations like France, the United
Kingdom, Israel, Norway, Sweden, Japan. No other Nation comes
close to what we see here even though we have comparable levels
of mental health problems and mental illness. Will we continue
to accept the slaughter of innocents, including innocent
children, as acceptable collateral damage for loyalty to a
completely bogus and distorted misreading of the Second
Amendment and what the Supreme Court has said about it?
Justice Scalia in the Heller decision was emphatic that
reasonable gun safety regulation is perfectly consistent with
the Second Amendment rights. Justice Scalia said he
specifically rejected the view advanced by a number of our
colleagues today, saying that the right of gun ownership is not
unlimited. No, Justice Scalia stated, the Second Amendment
right is ``not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever
in any manner whatsoever, and for whatever purpose.'' He
enumerated a partial list of reasonable regulations, including
a ban on carrying concealed weapons, the possession of firearms
by felons, the mentally ill, and other dangerous people, laws
forbidding the carrying of firearms into schools and government
buildings and other public places, laws imposing the conditions
and qualifications on the sale of firearms, such as background
checks. All of these things, he said, are perfectly consistent
with the Second Amendment right.
It is not different from other rights we have, like the
First Amendment where you have an absolute right to speak but
you don't have a right to set up a demonstration with
loudspeaker system in front of the White House at 2 o'clock in
the morning and keep the President's family up. We accept
reasonable time, place, manner regulations with respect to all
rights. Now, our colleagues invite us to believe the Second
Amendment is some kind of policy straitjacket, but they won't
read or quote the decision by Justice Scalia himself, who wrote
the most elaborate defense and explication of the majority's
view of the Second Amendment in D.C. v. Heller in 2008.
Mr. Suplina, in 2005, Congress gave the gun industry
unprecedented and unique immunity from civil lawsuits for
crimes committed with their products. No other industry has got
anything like that. Could you explain what that immunity
protection means for the gun industry and how it has blocked
commonsense laws to end gun violence in our country?
Mr. Suplina. Yes, Congressman, thank you. The law, PLCAA,
which you cite, has given near-blanket-immunity to the gun
industry. And the result has really had a profound impact on
what we know about the gun industry's role in gun violence, as
well as any accountability for the industry. So, acts that
would have led to either litigation that would have exposed
truths, like happened with the tobacco industry with
accountability, like happened in the automobile industry,
safety practices that would have improved at these
manufacturers because there was a risk of doing nothing, just
simply does not exist with the gun industry----
Mr. Raskin. Well, what reckless marketing and sales
practices has the gun industry engaged in because of this
blanket of immunity that has been bestowed upon them?
Mr. Suplina. Well, you know, there are several, and the
marketing is getting increasingly reckless, increasingly
desperate as the field gets more crowded. But also in terms of
distribution practices, I have heard several times today about
how easy it is for criminals to get guns as if that is some act
of magic, but these guns are all starting with gun
manufacturers and gun sellers. We know that certain gun
manufacturers are fueling gun shops that are selling
disproportionately into illegal markets. And the gun industry
is protected by PLCAA because they say, oh, we are following
the law. Well, the numbers speak for themselves.
Mr. Raskin. OK. And then finally, Chief, you were
interrupted before. Well, what do you make of this claim that
we shouldn't have laws governing, for example, a universal
criminal background check because criminals don't follow the
law? Is that an argument against having any law against murder,
rape, assault, because criminals by definition don't follow the
law?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the gentleman may answer.
Mr. Gramaglia. So, the universal background checks is a
simple process that is going to have those that want to legally
obtain their guns with their constitutional rights to obtain
those guns. Criminals absolutely are not going to follow that.
The more guns that we keep flooding in without background
checks, without proper adherence to get those guns through
straw purchases and other manners, that is how we are flooding
the market so that criminals can obtain those guns.
Mr. Raskin. And Justice Scalia emphasized that there could
be regulations for commercial sale----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Fallon,
is now recognized.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Madam Chair. We hold hearings on all
sorts of topics for all sorts of reasons, sometimes for
political reasons, or even worse, sometimes for political
theater aimed at attaining political currency, currency which
will then be spent on winning an upcoming election. Other times
hearings are held to actually solve a problem.
We are here today because of the tragedies in Buffalo and
the horrific loss of life in my home state of Texas, in Uvalde,
a beautiful American community ripped apart by a troubled and
evil coward. And when lives are lost and innocence is stolen,
particularly when children are the victims, it is natural to
want to assess and focus blame, who did this and how did this
happen. And I am no different than any American. I am
heartbroken and I am furious. Those innocent children are gone,
and the indescribable suffering in the families is beyond
words. We have a President that says continually that he must
do something, we must do something. Many Democrats are arguing
that: we must do something. Now we need to do something
effective that will keep our children safer.
As I mentioned, when a senseless tragedy like this happens,
blame is thrown around. Some people want to blame guns, some
people want to blame gun manufacturers, some people want to
blame, believe it or not, the Constitution. Some people want to
blame an entire political party, and all this couldn't be more
misplaced. The shooter is the only one to blame. So, when the
President and many Democrats are claiming that guns are the
problem and their readily available supply is the culprit,
well, the more guns in America, the argument goes, the more
dangerous America becomes, but the actual facts belie this
thinking. In 1969, so about 50 years ago, there were 180
million firearms in this country. Today it is about double.
Twenty-nineteen it was about 365 million. Yet the murder rate
back then was 9.6 per 100,000, the murder rate in 2019 anyway
was 5 per 100,000, so twice the number of guns, and yet the
murder rate was cut in half. The truth is that guns have always
been readily available in this country, but mass shootings and,
particularly, mass shootings of schools, were non-existent or
at least extremely rare until they became a grisly recent
phenomenon.
So, what has changed in the last 50 years? There has been a
noticeable breakdown of the family, there has been an erosion
of faith, and there has been a seismic drop in social
interactions in large measure due to the overuse of these dang
smartphones and the proliferation of social media, which is
probably better described as antisocial media. Senseless mass
shootings are not committed by well-adjusted, successful,
socially polished people. They are committed by disturbed,
unstable loners with mental disease.
[Inaudible background noise.]
Mr. Fallon. Madam Chair, can I get my time back?
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you.
[Inaudible background noise.]
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. Senseless mass shootings are
committed by unstable, disturbed loners with mental disease.
Refusing to address better mental health services, especially
for young people, is to do a disservice at best, and it is a
dereliction of duty at worst. The focus, sadly, by the
Democrats is to restrict guns or prohibit their legal
possession entirely. A Democratic Member of Congress in a
committee hearing just recently said, ``We will not rest until
we have taken weapons of war out of circulation in our
communities.''
So, do restrictive gun laws or prohibitions work? The most
dangerous nations on the planet, according to the World Bank
and the United Nations, are El Salvador, Jamaica, Venezuela,
and Honduras. And what else do they have in common? It is also
nearly impossible for an average citizen to own a firearm, and
yet they are terribly perilous places to be. Believe it or not,
some Democratic-controlled cities in our country with
restrictive gun laws are even more dangerous than the
aforementioned countries. St. Louis has a higher murder rate
than El Salvador. Baltimore does as well, and Detroit is a more
lethal and dangerous place to go and visit or live than
Venezuela.
So, passing prohibitions, I mean it just simply didn't
work. Doing something doesn't work. Doing something effective
is a path that we should and must take. History has shown us
when you disarm law-abiding citizens, you create not more
safety but more peril. The inconvenient truth for some on this
committee and in this chamber is that more firearms in the
hands of law-abiding citizens make us all safer. So, let us
talk some real solutions.
We must harden our schools with controlled access and
single point of entry with tiered entry procedures. The main
office should be located directly by the front door, which is
single-access entry. Classroom doors should automatically shut
and locked like hotel room doors do. Let's support and foster a
robust school marshal program where qualified and volunteer
teachers and staff go through proper training to be armed on
campus. Let's increase the number of SROs in our schools. Let's
leverage technology by putting cameras in schools much like
Frisco, Texas did 15 years ago when I was on a city council,
and they had a command center and a mobile command center, and
any threat could be immediately detected, tracked, and
eliminated forthwith. We need a rapid response plan and a rapid
response force to be trained to world-class standards. And also
law enforcement doctrine must change so when there is a threat,
the schools aren't besieged, but, rather, our heroes in blue
advance using honed techniques, and teamwork, and technology,
and eliminate the threat as soon as possible.
Our goal should be to protect our children. No parent,
educator, citizen, legislature, or Nation has a higher calling.
Let us look at real and effective solutions and shelve the
divisive rhetoric because American children deserve nothing
less. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Ro Khanna, is now
recognized.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Madam Chair. Like so many on this
committee and around the country, I was deeply moved, not as a
politician, as a father, by the testimony this morning of the
families of victims. Kimberly Rubio, who lost her precious
daughter, Lexi, cut through all the talking points, all the
debate, and asked the central question before our Congress and
our country. As she put it, what do we value more, children or
our guns? It is really that simple.
I want to talk about the commonsense reforms on guns, but
as the representative of Silicon Valley, I feel I also have a
duty to talk about some of the role of social media in this
massacre. With the Uvalde shooter on Instagram having a group
chat where there is conversation of school shootings, where
there is conversation of threats of violence, where he is
bragging about getting assault weapons, why is there no action?
And let us be very clear. These are minors. He was a minor when
he did this. It is not the same free speech rights. Mr.
Suplina, do you think companies like Instagram should have some
responsibility in group chats when minors are involved and you
have explicit discussion of school shootings, to do something?
Mr. Suplina. I think the role of social media companies is
an important one, and you are right to point it out
Congressman. Instagram, Facebook, these are often where we see
the earliest warning signs of a potential mass shooter, as well
as other social media platforms where these incidences are
discussed. There are often multiple people in the chat. And I
do want to also mention, with respect to the Buffalo shooter,
for instance, he cited YouTube for the videos that allowed him
to modify the firearm that he had to accept detachable
magazines which he used to deadly effect. So, social media
companies do have a role to play here.
Mr. Khanna. And just like my colleague, Mr. Raskin, said,
that the right of the Second Amendment is not absolute, it is
important to recognize that the right of the First Amendment is
not absolute. Under Brandenburg, you can't have things that
incite violence, and there are greater protections for minors.
I mean, it is crazy to me that you can have people under 18
talking about shootings and mass shootings, and these companies
are taking no action. So, we need to have regulation that gets
to the heart of this.
Mrs. Swearer, I am trying to understand your position, and
I just want to ask you some simple ``yes'' or ``no'' questions
to understand where you are coming from. Is it your view that
someone who has committed a violent felony should be able to
purchase a gun? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Ms. Swearer. No.
Mr. Khanna. Is it your view that someone who is a serial
rapist should be able to purchase a gun? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Ms. Swearer. Very clearly, no.
Mr. Khanna. Is it your view that someone who is a drug
trafficker should be able to purchase a gun? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Ms. Swearer. No, and these are becoming insulting.
Mr. Khanna. Well, I mean, so would you support any laws
that would make sure that violent felons, serial rapists, or
people who are drug traffickers will not get access to guns?
Ms. Swearer. If they are written and narrowly tailored to
approach that issue without burdening the rights of law-abiding
citizens or criminalizing low-risk transfers between
responsible citizens, yes, I am more than willing to look at
that law.
Mr. Khanna. That is exactly what the background checks do,
I mean, because right now what you have, a case is that the
background checks do not cover a lot of the sales to violent
felons, to serial rapists. And I just want to be clear. When
the Republican Party, their position, by opposing H.R. 8, is
they are for violent felons, serial rapists still being able to
purchase these guns.
Ms. Swearer. No, they are not.
Mr. Khanna. Yes, they are. This is----
Ms. Swearer. No, they are not. They are against low-risk
transfers being criminalized----
Mr. Khanna. Please, it is my, ma'am. It is my time. I am
reclaiming my time. This is----
Mr. Comer. Point of order, Madam Chair. The position of
Republicans is that valid criminals be in jail.
Mr. Khanna. Well, no, the position is----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Madam Chair, the gentleman has not
stated a valid point of order.
Mr. Khanna. The position, H.R. 8, all H.R. 8, at its core,
said is that violent felons are still getting these guns,
serial rapists are still getting these guns. And the law and
order party that has demagogued the issue of law enforcement
and policing, that party is saying we are OK with violent
felons still getting these guns, we are OK with serial rapists
still getting these guns, and all the Congress or the
Democratic side is trying to do is to close those loopholes. To
say that violent----
Ms. Swearer. I respectfully refer you to my testimony on
this very bill before the Senate Judiciary Committee last year
where I explained how that is a grotesque characterization of
our opposition to that bill.
Mr. Khanna. Ma'am, I am saying that we in this Congress----
Chairwoman Maloney. The time has expired.
Mr. Khanna. I am saying that there is not----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Khanna. Well, she kept interrupting me.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. All right, but then.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller, is now
recognized.
Mr. Keller. I would first like to take a moment to thank
all our panelists, this panel and the previous panel, for your
testimony.
We have seen some horrific acts in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. We saw a devastating shooting in Philadelphia on
Saturday, and I continue, and we all should, offer prayer for
the families across the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and across
our Nation that have been affected by these acts committed by
violent criminals, skyrocketing crime in our cities. That is
what we need to focus on. New York City saw a 16.2 percent
increase in violent criminals shooting others in March 2022.
That is up from a year before. San Francisco saw a 31 percent
rise in homicides. In Chicago, violent criminals were
responsible for shooting 47 people on Memorial Day weekend
alone.
There is a trend here. Crime is rising in cities that have
the most restrictive laws on firearms and have the least severe
criminal enforcement penalties on the books. And in fact,
cities that don't enforce the laws that are on the books. The
District Attorney in San Francisco has dismissed over 40
percent of felony convictions since 2020, and in Philadelphia,
homicides have increased 58 percent, during District Attorney
Larry Krasner's tenure. However, only 21 percent of crimes when
violent criminals shot another person since 2015 have led to
criminal charges, and less than one-tenth of those incidents
resulted in convictions. Philadelphia Police are making record
amounts of arrests for crimes committed by violent people with
guns, yet Krasner's office has dismissed or withdrawn more
violent cases every year he has been in office. The bottom line
is, when you fail to enforce the law and hold criminals
accountable, you get criminal behavior.
So, Ms. Swearer, how does failure to prosecute past or
current crime affect crime rates in the future?
Ms. Swearer. Well, it certainly emboldens criminals and
reasonably allows them to believe that there is a very little
chance that they will be punished or in any way held
accountable for their crimes.
Mr. Keller. Many of the proposals we are discussing today
are widely implemented across the municipalities where crime
spikes are happening. Would limiting law-abiding citizens'
right to own a firearm curb these disturbing trends?
Ms. Swearer. No, it would not. And I would also point out
the reality of most gun violence is not that it is being
perpetrated by people who lawfully purchase and possess their
firearms. It is largely perpetrated by individuals with long
histories of violence, who obtain their firearms already
through illegal and illegitimate channels that are not
addressed by universal background checks because they are
already circumventing the law regarding those background
checks. It is a very low-reward endeavor, even if it is like
100 percent enforceable.
Mr. Keller. OK. What measures should be taken to ensure
victims and their families are not legally ignored in favor of
defendants?
Ms. Swearer. I would again refer to some of my previous
testimony because I know our time is short. Previous testimony
that I have given before the Senate Judiciary Committee on gun
violence in Chicago, I think a lot of that is still applicable
to your question. You know, from a Federal perspective, as I
said, we continue to enforce Federal laws and hold criminals
accountable at a Federal level when possible and encourage
state and local counterparts, some of whom have done a horrific
job of this to do the same.
Mr. Keller. So, I just have a question. There is what's
called the NICS system, and when you purchase a firearm, I
don't know how many people in this room have ever gone through
a background check, but it does ask questions. I know it was
brought up earlier about criminals being able to purchase guns.
Is it not already illegal for rapists, and murderers, and
people who have done domestic violence and convicted of these
things, isn't it already illegal for them to purchase firearms?
Ms. Swearer. To purchase and to possess, assuming they are
felons and have not had their rights restored to them under
existing state or Federal processes. So, there is no process
under Federal law, so it would just be under the state.
Mr. Keller. OK. But the point is, we are not saying that
criminals should have laws. We are saying criminals should be
put in jail, and law-abiding citizens should be allowed to
lawfully possess firearms.
Ms. Swearer. That is certainly what I am saying, and that
is my understanding of what every member who was opposed H.R. 8
is saying as well.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Mfume, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, there is an
old saying that your pain is where your passion is, and so let
me just go back to where we started almost three hours ago at
the beginning of this hearing and talk for a second about the
pain that I felt, as I hope many of you did, listening
firsthand to the accounts of witnesses and victims from Uvalde
and from Buffalo.
Listening to them, I am still stunned and heartbroken. The
gun carnage that continues in schools, and supermarkets, and
movie theaters, in churches, on the streets of my Baltimore, in
the streets of cities all over this country is a cross, ladies
and gentlemen, that we all bear whether we want to or not. The
gun laws that we hope will be passed today, I hope are seen as
a beginning, not the end, only as a beginning. Otherwise, I
really believe that we are doomed in our fight against
murderers and their guns and the evil and the pain that they
spread.
I want to acknowledge and thank the gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, the commissioner from Buffalo, and the
mayor of New York, all of whom served in law enforcement and
saw firsthand how difficult it is to deal with the violence
perpetrated by guns, and particularly assault weapons. And I
want to associate my remarks with those of Mayor Adams when he
said let the ATF do its job in rounding up so many illegal guns
that are on our streets and to finally confirm a nominee.
Madam Chair, you will remember 1994. We were members of
this body. We worked for a whole year--a whole year--to put
together and pass an assault weapons ban. And the only reason
it wasn't permanent was because we weren't able to get enough
people, members on the other side of the aisle, unfortunately,
to go along with that. And so the compromise was a 10-year ban
on assault weapons, which expired in 2004. I am just shocked
that 18 years has gone by and this body does not move to
reestablish that.
In 1999, as a president of the NAACP, I filed suit against
the gun industry. It took us three years to get to court
because the NRA did everything they could to keep it from not
happening, and finally, in 2003, we went to court. I testified
in Brooklyn, New York, for over a week, but we didn't have the
weight we needed, and the NRA was a bigger force than we could
deal with, and so we lost that. But the Judge to his credit
said this does not prohibit the fact that there certainly will
be other lawsuits like this. The NRA heard those words and took
them to heart and spent the next 18 months putting in place an
absolute immunity on the gun industry and, unfortunately, was
able to get this Congress to pass it and signed into law. It is
just unbelievable that we will give absolute immunity to any
industry in this country, particularly when there is harm and
personal injury.
So, I think more than anything else, I was stunned a little
while ago in hearing the gentleman, my colleague on the other
side of the aisle, saying that he had sought out advice from a
military commander about how to protect schools and that the
advice was harden the target. And, Ms. Swearer, when you were
asked to comment on that, you said absolutely harden the
target. Well, that is fine except how do you harden a
supermarket? How do you harden a church? How do you find a way
to go out and harden movie theaters? If the only answer is
hardening the target, we have already capitulated.
And I am telling you, I am so glad that so many people are
focused on this hearing around the country so they can see
firsthand what is going on here. We have a problem that is not
going to go away. Every year it gets worse. And so until we are
prepared to do what we were sworn constitutionally to do, to
protect this country from enemies, foreign and domestic, we
would have failed.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, is now
recognized. Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins of Louisiana. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Commissioner Gramaglia, I am looking at your presented
statement, sir, say you support confiscating guns from
individuals determined to be a threat to themselves or others,
determined to be. So, by this legislation my colleagues are
putting forth, my understanding of the letter of that law,
which I 1,000 percent oppose, as would our founding fathers,
the letter that our law says an anonymous tip from a citizen,
so this was law. Commissioner, would you go to your neighbor's
home and confiscate his legally owned weapons? A man that was
not under criminal investigation, nor under arrest, would you
do it?
Mr. Gramaglia. The red flag laws would----
Mr. Higgins of Louisiana. That is a ``yes'' or ``no,''
brother. I got five minutes to make. I don't have a statement
here.
Mr. Gramaglia. It is more than a ``yes'' or ``no'' answer.
It would be----
Mr. Higgins of Louisiana. We will move on then. If you
cannot say, yes, you would confiscate weapons from an American
citizen that was subject to this law that my colleagues intend
to push through this Congress, and you said in your statement,
that you would confiscate those weapons if an American was
determined to be, your quote, a threat to themselves or others,
quoted in that law, determined to be, is defined by an
anonymous tip that an American citizen, a threat to themselves
or others. You are a police commissioner, a Thin Blue Line
brother, sworn to uphold the Constitution, and you are saying
you would seize those weapons. I see that as a problem.
I am going to bring us back in time to World War II:
America's population, 140 million. Fifteen million men came
home from World War II with deep scars and significant skills.
They bore the invisible wounds of war. There was weapons
everywhere. I talk about mental challenge. My father was one of
those men who was a Navy pilot in World War II. He came back
from the war and built his family. I am the 7th of his 8
children. I was born in 1961. We had guns everywhere. There was
virtually no regulation. Any child in the 1950's could buy a
weapon from any seller if daddy sent him with the money. We
didn't have mass shootings. It wasn't until 1968 in America
that serial numbers were even required on weapons sold in this
country. You ordered weapons through the Sears catalog by the
mail. In the 1970's I attended a high school, large rural
school. Virtually every vehicle in the parking lot was a pickup
truck, and almost everyone had a rifle or shotgun on the back
glass and a pistol under the seat, and we didn't have school
shootings.
1979, I began college. One of the jobs I had to work my way
through college was as a carpenter. We restored historical
buildings. We had to determine in the process of that work what
was the original cuts to these homes, residential homes built
75, 85, 100 years ago. You could tell by the saw cut if it was
a mechanical cut, an electric cut, or a hand cut. By such
observations, we knew exactly how that house was originally
built. And to my amazement, as a young man beginning college in
Louisiana, working, to my amazement, you know what I
discovered, Madam Chair? You know what these houses did not
have that were built 100 years ago in cities in America? You
know what they did not have, Commissioner? Locks. Locks.
Now I ask you all, what happened to that country, man, the
country where homes were built in cities with no locks, a
country where guns were everywhere and virtually not regulated
at all, where millions of Americans, 14 million Americans came
back? It is 11 percent of the population at the time after
World War II with incredible skills of war and weapons of war,
as you call them, everywhere, but we didn't have mass
shootings. And here we sit today where an entire once proud
Democratic Party is presenting unbelievably unconstitutional
laws to press upon our Nation. And we have a police
commissioner that says he would go home to home and confiscate
legally owned weapons if he got a tip.
Madam Chair, I yield my speech, but I will not yield my
opposition to these unconstitutional laws.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, is
recognized.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank
you to all of our witnesses. I apologize if I go quickly. We
have just got five minutes and a lot of work to do.
Let's talk facts here. There was a lot of discussion about
New York City. There is no discussion about gun violence in New
York City. Without discussing the iron pipeline that is
Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia,
Pennsylvania, and honorary mention to Ohio where 70 percent of
likely illegal trafficked guns found in New York City come
from. There is no discussion about gun violence in Chicago
without talking about Indiana because the violence and the
mothers that we have to comfort are losing children due to the
guns, and the carnage, and the lawlessness unleashed by those
states. I will move on.
Every week in recent memory, we have had at least one mass
shooting. Ms. Pringle, you are the president of the National
Education Association. You represent teachers. Between 2009 and
2018, how many school shootings did the United States have?
Ms. Pringle. Two hundred eighty-eight.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Two hundred eighty-eight. Now let's look
globally. Our G7 partners--Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, and the United Kingdom--combined, how many school
shootings did those countries have?
Ms. Pringle. Five, 50 times more.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Five in almost 10 years. Two hundred
eighty-eight versus five. This is not normal. Not only is it
not normal, it is internationally embarrassing and
delegitimizing to the United States because for all the
billions and trillions that this body authorizes in the name of
national security, we can't even keep our kids safe from their
schools being turned into a war zone.
Now let's talk about why. Let's talk about one thing, more
important to lobbyists and the gun industry than children, than
houses of faith, than human beings. Let's talk about profit.
Mr. Suplina in 2020, 22.8 million guns were sold, reflecting a
64 percent increase from 2019, correct?
Mr. Suplina. Correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. In one year. And across the board, gun
manufacturers and ammunition companies began to see record
profits. Is that right?
Mr. Suplina. That is correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Now, let's put that into context. In
2020 again, more than 45,000 Americans died by gunfire,
reflecting an almost threefold increase from 2015. Are those
statistics correct?
Mr. Suplina. That is accurate.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So, in your view, are you seeing a
correlation between gun profits and gun deaths in the United
States?
Mr. Suplina. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. This is about blood money. Between 2019
and 2021, two years, leading gun manufacturer Sturm and Ruger
saw gross profits double to almost $280 million. In fact,
during an earnings call, their CEO called the sales boom
``historic, ferocious,'' and that ``the future was bright.'' A
month after that, an AR-556 pistol murdered 10 people at a
supermarket in Boulder, Colorado. Those profit margin, $280
million, go to lobbying. Is that correct? Much of that goes to
lobbying, correct?
Mr. Suplina. Significant amounts go to lobbying, correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And can you remind us what the gun
industry is lobbying against when it deploys these lobbying
resources?
Mr. Suplina. They are lobbying against every law that would
regulate firearms.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And can you briefly tell us how gun
companies have poured extra profits directly into lobbying
against gun reform? And as an advocate in this space, what have
you seen? Just name rattle off some of the measures that they
have, just a few that they have lobbied against.
Mr. Suplina. Lobbied against, they have lobbied against
background checks on all gun sales, which would, in fact, as
was mentioned earlier, it would be criminal to obtain a firearm
from a law-abiding citizen without a background check. The
criminal would be breaking the law, but we could stop that.
They have lobbied against red flag laws, which would
temporarily deprive, after due process, a firearm from somebody
who poses a threat to their selves or others. That is a court
adjudication, everything.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you. Thank you very much. For
context, the NRA spent about $250 million in 2020 alone. That
is more than twice the entire salary of Congress combined in
one year, lobbying against gun safety laws. There is also this
discussion about do anything, but again, but that these are
about violent people, but yet we aren't doing anything about
addressing the actual root causes of misogyny where two-thirds
of mass shootings are connected to domestic violence or the
emergence of white supremacy radicalization, mass
incarceration, and poverty, and the connections between that
and mass shootings in our communities.
I yield my time. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you very much. The last couple of
weeks, I had a chance to go down to Mexico, and they brought up
an issue that I wasn't really expecting to hear, but a couple
of Border Patrol guys pointed out to me that the firearms were
very, very regulated in Mexico. And you do a little Google
search, and you find out in the recent article in The Wall
Street Journal, the first six or first nine months in 2019,
Mexico, with some wildly difficult laws, had a murder rate of
six times that in the United States. Not six percent more.
That's 60 percent more. But assuming you got it right, maybe he
was cherry picking the year, I don't know, six times as many
murders as in the United States. I assume the Mexican officials
who put these laws into effect, thought they were going to save
lives at the time, that they made it so difficult for law-
abiding Mexicans to get a hold of a firearm, but obviously the
results of their laws was not to make Mexico safer. There are
thousands, probably tens of thousands of people who have died
now in Mexico under the current rules connected to ownership of
guns.
We have also in this country had a dramatic increase in the
number of deaths from guns the last two years since kind of the
beginning or at least expansion of the I Hate Police Movement,
which I blame for all the young people and not so young people
who have died in the last two years in this massive increase of
murders that we have seen almost unprecedented.
First of all, I would like Ms. Swearer to comment a little
bit on the Mexican statistic and comment on the dramatic
increase in the number of homicides in this country in the last
two years, not because it is easier to own guns, but kind of
because a lot of the rhetoric coming out of this building of
this anti-police rhetoric.
Ms. Swearer. Congressman, I will respectfully refrain from
commenting on the statistics you pointed out from Mexico. I am
not overly familiar with any of the underlying causes. I will,
you know, to the greater point, say Mexico is, to my awareness,
one of the only other countries in the world with a right to
``keep and bear arms,'' which is sort of a misnomer in that
country, as you point out. So, it is a fundamentally different
understanding of what that means than clearly in our country. I
am sorry. Please remind me of the second aspect.
Mr. Grothman. Well, the massive increase in murders in this
country in the last few years.
Ms. Swearer. I think it is hard to pin that down to any,
like, one simplistic notion of what is causing that. Certainly,
I think problems with policing and calls to defund the police,
loss of trust between communities and police members, that all
plays a role, as I pointed out in my written submission.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Ms. Swearer. I think it is a number of things.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. I will give you another question then.
This week, I will be reintroducing something called the Student
and Teacher Safety Act, which will allow schools to use
existing grants they have, meant, in part, for improving school
conditions and learning to improve or boost school safety
following the evolving shooting. The White House press
secretary said that President Biden does not believe in
hardening schools to provide more security resources or law
enforcement officers. If these measures can be effective in
preventing another mass shooting, why do you think the
President is not open to hardening schools this way?
Ms. Swearer. I cannot read the President's mind, but my
guess is he would rather focus on other ways of addressing it.
I would also very quickly like to point out to reference
something Congressman Mfume said, to seem to infer that we only
care about or have only mentioned one aspect of a greater
issue, which is focusing on physical security. Congressman, I
respectfully don't know if you were not here for my opening
statement or have not read my written submission, but I
respectfully have pointed out roughly a dozen other issues as
well. This is comprehensive in nature. It is not one thing or
the other. It is both----
Mr. Mfume. I have been here for three hours since before
the hearing started. I heard your testimony. My reference was
to schools, and my reminder was the----
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, I think----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman is not recognized.
Mr. Mfume. Well, the witness addressed me, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK.
Mr. Grothman. Could you give me another few seconds back?
Someone jumped in there. Well, if President Biden is going to
stand between us and trying to improve the physical security in
school districts, can you give us other ideas that we can use
to prevent these tragedies?
Ms. Swearer. Sure. As I mentioned in both my written and
oral testimony, I think we can focus very clearly on building
up the Nation's mental health infrastructure, both specifically
in schools and generally across the board. We are talking about
two-thirds of gun deaths every year that are suicides, which
clearly plays into an aspect of mental health, which is
problematic. We are talking about with mass shootings,
individuals who clearly show signs of being a danger to
themselves or others, but who are otherwise, you know, not
felons yet and oftentimes cannot be involuntarily civilly
committed. So, looking at, you know, targeted interventions
with adequate means of due process and also just behavioral
risk assessment.
We talked about Instagram and threats on Instagram. What is
concerning to me is that so many people saw so many signs,
especially in Uvalde, and it appears that nobody reported them,
or knew to report them, or knew how to report them, or didn't
think anything would be done about it. And that----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
OK. The gentlelady from California, Ms. Porter, is now
recognized.
Ms. Porter. Ms. Swearer, in 2019, you testified on
Representative Cicilline's bill, the assault weapons ban,
before Congress. At the 2019 hearing, Representative Jim Jordan
asked you if law-abiding people will be less safe to protect
themselves if that bill was passed. Do you remember your
response?
Ms. Swearer. I have a general idea of what I would have
said under that circumstance, but, no, I don't remember my
specific words.
Ms. Porter. You said, ``I think worse than that, sir, you
will see millions of otherwise law-abiding citizens become
felons overnight''----
Ms. Swearer. Yes.
Ms. Porter [continuing]. ``for nothing more than having
scary looking features on firearms.''
Ms. Swearer. It is true.
Ms. Porter. I was quite surprised by your answer. You read
the bill before you came to Congress to testify against it,
yes?
Ms. Swearer. If we are referring to the ban on assault
weapons, correct, yes.
Ms. Porter. So, you knew that the bill would allow any gun
owner to maintain possession of any semiautomatic assault
weapon that was lawfully possessed before the bill became law?
Ms. Swearer. No. So, that is the case under that bill. The
problem is anytime that is transferred to anybody else----
Ms. Porter. Madam Chair, would you please instruct the
witness that the time belongs to me?
Ms. Swearer. If you don't want to hear an answer to my
question, I am not sure what is being asked.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady has reclaimed her time.
Ms. Porter. You said ``yes'' in response to my question
that you knew the bill would allow the gun owner to maintain
possession of any semiautomatic assault weapon that was
lawfully possessed before the bill becomes law. Ms. Swearer, I
respect that we have different opinions on Representative
Cicilline's assault weapons law, but we cannot have different
facts. We have a duty to debate the merits of proposal. You
falsely testified under oath for that bill----
Ms. Swearer. Would you like to hear the explanation of why
I said that?
Ms. Porter. No, I have not yielded, Ms. Swearer.
Chairwoman Maloney. Suspend.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, if she is going to ask questions,
shouldn't she let the witness have----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman is not recognized.
Ms. Porter. You falsely testified under oath----
Mr. Biggs. Point of order. Point of order.
Chairwoman Maloney. What is the gentleman's point of order?
Ms. Swearer. I have been accused of falsely testifying
under oath, and I would like address it.
Mr. Biggs. The gentlewoman has accused her of perjury. Is
she going to hold to that, or are you going to allow the
witness to respond to that accusation of criminal conduct?
Chairwoman Maloney. You have not come forward with a
significant point of order. Ms. Porter will continue.
Ms. Porter. I asked you if that bill was correct, if the
bill would allow any gun owner to maintain possession, and you
said ``yes,'' yet you testified that the bill would allow
people to become felons overnight. Earlier today you testified
that you hoped that this was the last time you testify before
Congress for the sake of our Nation and the integrity of this
Congress----
Ms. Swearer. I said Congress, after a mass shooting, trying
to figure out how to solve a problem, that we are all heavily
invested in solving----
Ms. Porter. Ms. Swearer, I have not asked the question.
Ms. Swearer. How dare you.
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time. How dare you misstate the
law----
Ms. Swearer. How dare you ask a question----
Ms. Porter [continuing]. as legislation----
Ms. Swearer [continuing]. that you do not even want an
answer to.
Ms. Porter. Ms. Swearer, I am moving on. I am a lifelong
consumer protection advocate. From 2015 to 2020, there were at
least 2,070 unintentional shootings by children. Seven hundred
sixty-five of those children died. A consumer product that
causes this much harm to the public, would normally be subject
to a recall. But Federal law prohibits the Consumer Product
Safety Commission, the agency responsible for protecting the
public from dangerous products, from regulating guns. This is
absurd. After one child died using a Peloton treadmill last
year, the Consumer Product Safety Commission intervened and
recalled the product, but when hundreds of children die using
guns, there is no Federal response. There is no Federal safety
standard for guns even though 40,000 Americans hurt or kill
themselves or other people in hundreds of accidents every year.
Instead of regulating guns like any other consumer product,
Federal law protects gun manufacturers.
A teenager can watch a video online and learn how to modify
a rifle to make it more deadly. And the gun industry avoids any
liability if that teenager uses that modified rifle to fire
repeatedly and rapidly at innocent people, even though their
products could be designed to prevent unsafe modifications. I
want to give an example. In 2001, a 13-year-old boy named Billy
accidentally shot his father's handgun and killed his friend,
Josh. Billy mistakenly thought that gun was unloaded because he
had removed the gun's magazine. Josh's family sued the gun
manufacturer for failing to warn Billy and other consumers that
their product could be fired without a magazine. It is a simple
case. It should have been decided by a jury as is provided
under the Constitution. Instead, because of the gun industry's
immunity, the gun manufacturer was able to dismiss the case
without a trial.
If a pharmaceutical company failed to warn customers about
the known risks of one of their drugs, they could face
thousands of lawsuits. But we allow the gun industry to sell
weapons without taking any precautions to protect children and
families from fatal accidents. Mr. Suplina, do you think the
gun industry would do more to protect children if Congress
ended their immunity?
Mr. Suplina. Absolutely.
Ms. Porter. Would ending the gun industry's immunity put
gun manufacturers out of business?
Mr. Suplina. No, it would not.
Ms. Porter. In the 1990's, lawsuits forced big tobacco to
pay for the harm they caused by marketing cigarettes. Just last
year, Big Pharma agreed to pay $26 billion for communities
devastated by opioids.
Mr. Higgins of Louisiana. Madam Chair, her time has
expired.
Ms. Porter. Victims of gun violence also deserve their day
in court. They deserve justice. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Madam Chair, I have a parliamentary
inquiry.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair. Madam Chair, I have point of order.
Madam Chair, point of order. Again, Ms. Porter accused our
witness of perjury. That is a very serious accusation, accused
her of lying.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Madam Chair, the gentleman has not
stated a proper point of order.
Mr. Comer. No, I am stating it.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. That is not a proper point of order.
Mr. Comer. My point of order is we just had a woman from
Congress accuse a witness of perjury and didn't give the
witness time to response.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Madam Chair, the gentleman is not
stating a proper point of order.
Chairwoman Maloney. So, the gentlelady will suspend.
Mr. Comer.[Inaudible].
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, is
recognized. Mr. Cloud, you are now recognized.
Mr. Cloud. I thank you all for being here. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and obviously this is a tragedy that is heartbreaking
for all of us. And naturally, coming out of this as we look for
solutions, emotions are naturally high because we are all
grieved by the fact that we see this in our Nation. There are
going to be 1,000 reasons why we are asking and the
investigations are ongoing, obviously. Even the conclusions we
could come up with well, of course, never answer the cry of a
parent who has lost a child. And I think any of us who have
children can understand that our hearts just break for what we
have seen.
As we move forward, we have to continue to figure out how
we propose solutions that actually create solutions. Very often
in this Congress, we do things out of a best of intent and have
the worst of results. There is a lot of data that points to the
fact that gun control leads not to more safer communities, but
to more dangerous communities. For example, one of the
proposals out there right now is to raise the age of being able
to own a rifle, and in our Federal society, we have many
states, and so we are able to kind of test these things out.
And as far as I know, the only peer-reviewed article study that
has been done on that, it was in the Journal of Law and
Economics. He talked about it and looked at it and said, if
anything, there was a six percent increase from states who
began to implement age requirements or raised age requirements.
So, we have to tread passionately, but very carefully as we
continue to address this from a policy perspective.
I would like to bring up a topic that I think needs to be
added to this conversation, and Representative Hice and Higgins
touched on this quite a bit, because a lot of times here in
Congress, well-measured politicians like to get away with
measuring our personal compassion. Usually, it is on a spending
bill. So, we will measure our personal compassion by how much
money of other people's money we spend, and generally, it is
the more money we spend, the more compassion we have, in a
sense. I have always found that absurd.
In the same way as we do this, it would be wrong for us,
just out of the sake of doing something, to measure our
personal compassion by how much of other people's
constitutional rights we take from them and give to the Federal
Government. And it is important to point out in history that
any time a Federal Government takes authority, it is always for
altruistic reasons. The danger comes when the next person in
charge is or what happens after that, and many times that power
is taken under good intentions and then used nefariously much,
much later, so we have to be very careful about that. We have
to keep history and context in mind in all of this.
And the other thing I would say is that we should not think
that any of this is monocausal. There is not one thing that
caused this. There are a lot of things. But one thing I would
like to throw into the mix of this, because if there is a
common denominator as we look across these, it is not age so
much. It is not the firearm used at the time or even how it was
required. As much as it is, we see when we look at crime in our
communities, when we look at the societal decline, we are in
decline as a Nation when it comes to the moral and societal
decline in our Nation. There is no doubt about it.
And one of the biggest factors that is a common denominator
across much of this is simply broken homes, fatherlessness. A
DOJ study from the Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
report said the most reliable indicator of violent crime in the
community is the proportion of fatherless homes. A 2019 meta
study in the Journal of Psychology, Crime and Law found that
growing up in single-parent families is associated with
elevated risk of involvement in crime by adolescents. A 2019
study from the Pew Research Center finds that the U.S. has the
world's highest rate of children living in single parent
households. The National Fatherhood Initiative has compiled
some data, and adolescents from fatherless homes are more
likely to commit crimes. They are more likely to end up in
prisons. They are more likely to end up in poverty, and so we
have to figure that out.
For a long time, our Government has subsidized even and
promoted policies that continue to break down the home, and we
have to do what we can to make sure we come back to this. And I
would just like to give whatever time remains to Ms. Swearer to
address the perjury charges that have been made against you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cloud. Oh, my apologies.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Wasserman Schultz, is now recognized.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Madam Chair. Gun
manufacturers didn't always market weapons to civilians, and,
until recently, trade shows didn't make military-style guns
available to the general public. Now gun makers aggressively
market AR-15-style weapons to civilians and actively tie them
to military and law enforcement weapons. Smith & Wesson,
America's largest gun manufacturer, even developed a name for
this marketing ploy, calling it the ``halo effect.'' Now I want
to draw your attention to the screen.
[Slide]
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Mr. Suplina, I want to ask you about
one advertisement that I find troubling. This one. This is an
ad for a Daniel Defense MK18, a high-speed military-style AR
similar to the Daniel Defense AR used at the Robb Elementary
School shooting in Uvalde. The ad states, ``use what they use''
and that the gun features ``military adopted technology.'' Mr.
Suplina, do you believe the associations made in this
advertisement are appropriate for a civilian?
Mr. Suplina. No, but they are very effective at selling
military-style weapons to the civilian population.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Reports on this gun indicate that it
is favored by special forces. I would like to ask Daniel
Defense why the same-style guns being used in war zones should
be marketed to everyday people. It is clear who gunmakers are
marketing to. Fred Guttenberg lost his 14-year-old daughter
Jamie in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School massacre in
my own community. Fred filed an FTC complaint alleging that
Smith & Wesson mimicked first-person shooter video games in its
advertising materials to attract adolescents and young adults.
A Smith & Wesson M&P 15 223-caliber rifle was used in the
Parkland massacre.
Mr. Suplina, what level of culpability should gun
manufacturers have when they market human killing machines to a
civilian customer base?
Mr. Suplina. Again, this is now unfortunately, increasingly
the norm among gun manufacturers to market using, you know,
video game style ads. Daniel Defense itself referenced popular
video games in its advertising and in its advertisements, and
they should be held accountable for this.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Commissioner Gramaglia, I
would like to turn to you next. I want to put another
advertisement on the screen.
[Slide]
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. This is an advertisement for a
Bushmaster XM-15. Is that the same gun that was used in the
mass shooting at the Tops supermarket on May 14?
Mr. Gramaglia. Yes, it was.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. This advertisement shows a soldier
with a Bushmaster, and it states, ``versatility on the range
during patrol.'' Your officers were actually on patrol that
day, and many of them responded to the active shooter scene
with far less advanced weaponry. How do you prepare officers to
protect themselves in the public from military-grade killing
machines every day? I know it was referenced that, you know, no
problem that they had, you know, adequate weapons to be able to
defend themselves, but is that the case?
Mr. Gramaglia. Against this weapon? No. We have active
shooter vests that we have in our patrol cars. You can't wear
them on a regular basis. They are far too heavy. It is
something that you would have to grab and put on if you have
the time to do it.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. President Pringle, I want
to turn to you. You have worked closely with teachers and
students for years on combating gun violence. Without
meaningful gun reform, students are forced to practice mass
shooting drills. Just this week, and I know we stood together
yesterday and you heard me talk about the high school students
from my children's high school alma mater, to mark the success
of their fundraising drive, to put Stop the Bleed kits in every
classroom in that high school campus. I mean, those are kits
that are meant to triage a bleeding wound. Students now prep
for the time that they have in school in the event that they
are facing an active shooter, and that they may bleed to death
from gunshot wounds. What kind of traumatic effect does
normalizing gun violence through these reactive measures have
on students?
Ms. Pringle. We have seen over the years an increase in
anxiety and increase in the number of students who are seeking
additional assistance from our mental health professionals. We
are seeing an increase in the amount of students who are coming
to our schools with all kinds of social and emotional learning
gaps because they have been subjective to overly aggressive
drills, and looking at social media and TV, and seeing other
students suffer and die at the hands of gun violence.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Marketing mass killing machines to a
civilian customer base by using imagery and words that suggests
that is the purpose of their product is gross and immoral, but
it is just what gun companies do now in order to profit from a
market beyond their older male customer base. The Second
Amendment does not absolve gun manufacturers the responsibility
to market their products responsibly. And children should not
be doing fundraisers for Stop the Bleed kits instead of making
sure that they can have a fun prom, doing car washes, baking,
having bake sales, to make sure that their life on campus as
students is improved, as opposed to their life on campus
doesn't end and they have to use a Stop the Bleed kit that they
have raised money for.
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. As previously was stated at the
beginning of the hearing, Mayor Adams has a hard stop at 1:30.
Mayor Adams, thank you so much for joining us here today, and
for your testimony, and for your service. You are excused.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Adams. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Biggs is now recognized. Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. You know, last week I
thought I had heard it all when one of the Democrats threatened
to end the filibuster, wanted to pack the Supreme Court, and
said that they would confiscate guns. In order to do that, they
would basically emasculate the Senate as an institution and
also emasculate the Supreme Court as well. I thought that was
interesting. It was pretty bad, but then we have here someone
actually accusing a witness, and actually taking out of
context, a witness who testified previously and accusing her of
perjury, following that, though. But I got to tell you, the
most egregious thing that the Democrats did today is they took
a person, a young person, little Miah, she was traumatized two
weeks ago, still suffering under obvious PTSD as she testified
in that video, and bringing that poor little girl to relive
this.
And we are going to hear about how traumatic, and I don't
say they are not traumatic, these raising money for Stop the
Bleed kits is, then it is particularly pernicious and
outrageous to take an 11-year-old child, who graphically
described how she spread a classmates' blood upon her and feign
her own death, to make her relive that. If we are talking about
PTSD, you just prolonged the agony of that little child. For
what? For your own political gain, your own political purpose.
That is despicable.
And over the course of more than nine hours last week, my
colleagues on the Judiciary Committee, my Democrat colleagues
made it clear that they don't believe any American should have
access to the means to protect themselves and their families.
Democrats opposed the Republican amendment that would allow
victims of domestic violence to purchase firearms. They opposed
the Republican amendment that would allow the spouses of active
duty and deployed military to purchase firearms. And again,
they promoted ending the filibuster, packing the Supreme Court,
and confiscating guns from law-abiding citizens.
And they gave their entire game away by making clear that
neither Congress nor the Supreme Court will stand in the way of
their radical mission. Their proposed solutions to the problem
of violent crime in this country is to make felons out of law-
abiding citizens under the age of 21, to make felons of law-
abiding citizens who own firearms in homes with children, and
to make felons of law-abiding citizens who own or purchase
magazines that hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition. The most
common fire in this country sells 15 round magazines. Their
proposed solutions are to force law enforcement officers to
ignore due process and restrict law-abiding citizens to have
the means to protect themselves and their families from
threats. And make no mistake: my Democratic colleagues intend
on total infringement on America's Second Amendment rights.
Ms. Swearer, before you answer the most pertinent question
I think that we are going to hear from you in just a second, I
want you to tell me, can you define ``defensive use?''
Ms. Swearer. Defensive use? And I am assuming you mean
lawful defensive.
Mr. Biggs. Yes.
Ms. Swearer. It would be a use of a firearm that is to
defend oneself lawfully against criminal actions by another.
Mr. Biggs. How often is lawful defensive use of firearms in
this country?
Ms. Swearer. According to a 2013 report by the CDC, almost
all, with very few exceptions, but the most rigorous studies
and almost all of them show that it is somewhere between
500,000 and 3 million times a year. I think it is roughly
probably around an average of a million, myself.
Mr. Biggs. Do you believe that is firearm use for self-
defense, defense of others, or for the protection of property
saves lives?
Ms. Swearer. Yes, it objectively saves lives.
Mr. Biggs. Now, you were accused by someone who took out of
context something you testified in 2019 of effectively
committing a crime and committing perjury before Congress.
Would you please like to respond to that?
Ms. Swearer. Congressman, respectfully, and I appreciate
the opportunity, but we have wasted enough time on political
games today. And I would like to get back to the merits of
actually talking about solutions.
Mr. Biggs. Very good. Now, I am going to go forward now,
and, Madam Chair, I am going to submit, please, the following
items for the record: the testimony of Stephen Willeford before
the Senate Judiciary Committee on May 25, 2021.
Mr. Willeford is a good guy with a gun, who heroically
confronted and stopped a mass shooter in Sutherland Springs,
Texas. I also submit a 2019 study by John Lott of the Crime
Research Prevention Center. His study examines data on the rate
of shootings and accidents in schools that allowed teachers to
carry firearms, which founds zero cases of someone being
wounded or killed from a public mass shooting at a school that
allows teachers to carry firearms. And third, an article by the
Washington Examiner that the Buffalo shooter was an eco-
socialist racist who hated Fox News and Ben Shapiro.
Mr. Biggs. With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection, the gentleman yields
back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, is now recognized.
And we have been called for votes, so after him, we will
recess.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing, and I would like to thank the witnesses, particularly
those on the first panel, for their testimony. I was very moved
by what each of them had to say.
Americans have grown weary, frustrated, and frightened by
the ever-intensifying cascade of gun violence afflicting our
country, and they are sick and tired of their elected leaders
continuing to do nothing to address the carnage. The fact of
the matter is that the gun lobby, led by the NRA and the gun
manufacturers that fund it, exert great influence on
politicians to support its policy, which is that the only way
to stop a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun. You
know, I mean, if that holds true then, you know, it just
doesn't make sense in a civilized society. And I would submit
to you that every person with a gun makes us unsafe as opposed
to more secure.
This stopping a bad guy with a good guy with a gun just has
not worked to allow the floodgates to remain open for gun
dealers to flood our streets with weapons that are more
powerful than what was available last week. That policy, Madam
Chair, has been a deadly failure, and if we continue the
unbridled flow of firearms flooding our Nation's streets, we
will continue to see rising rates of gun violence in America.
No other country has a problem like the gun violence problem
plaguing our country. And policymakers who stand in the way of
doing something to address the problem should be ashamed of
themselves, and they need to be voted out of office and
replaced with leaders who are willing to stand up to the NRA
and pass commonsense gun reform laws.
It is common sense to impose a ban on the manufacture and
sale to the public of military-assault weapons meant for use on
the battlefield. It is common sense to mandate universal
background checks by closing the gun show loophole, and it is
commonsense to raise the age the purchase of firearms from 18
to 21. But for some reason, my colleagues insist on doing
nothing to reverse what is a tide of a failed policy. It allows
greedy firearms manufacturers to maintain their ever-growing
profits by flooding our streets with weapons of war, and they
continue to ignore the impact of their inaction, hiding behind
the Second Amendment as if it were the Bible. They proclaim any
attempt to pass gun safety legislation infringes on their right
to carry. Well, what about the right to live of the 19 children
and two teachers killed in Uvalde? The 10 shoppers killed in
Buffalo, New York, what about their right to live? What about
the right to live with almost countless others who have died
from street gun violence? How much more blood should be shed
before we and Congress take action?
Madam Chair, the House has acted to pass laws on universal
background checks, but our legislation has stalled in the
Senate because of the filibuster, and Congress today will pass
commonsense gun legislation. I should say Democrats in Congress
will pass commonsense gun law today and pass it on to the
Senate where it will be met with the filibuster. The
overwhelming majority of Americans support the types of
commonsense gun safety reforms under consideration this week,
and failure to act is unconscionable. Failure is an insult to
the countless dead children and shattered families and
communities. Failure is an insult to the people we are here to
represent, and I join my colleagues in their fervent thoughts
and prayers, and beg my colleagues to match their thoughts and
prayers with equally fervent action.
Mr. Gramaglia, a paper released by the International
Association of Chiefs of Police noted that when the Biden
assault weapons ban was in place between 1994 and 2004, the
number of assault weapons traced to crimes fell by a dramatic
66 percent. Since the assault weapons are often used against
police officers and the IACP is supportive of the assault
weapons ban or the assault rifle ban, what message does it send
when Republicans who loudly proclaim their support for law
enforcement refuse to even discuss banning of assault weapons?
Mr. Gramaglia. You know, my issue here is that we need to
reduce the amount of bloodshed on our streets, and the damage
that these weapons cause will lead to more bloodshed on the
streets. It is more victims that are being struck, and it is
something that needs to be banned.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Donalds, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Madam Chair, and, Madam Chair,
also, thank you for the indulgence before we have to go vote. I
heard a lot today. I don't want to do too much speechifying
because we do that too often here.
Ms. Swearer, it has been referenced a lot today actually,
about the need for universal background checks and closing the
``gun show loophole.'' Can you actually explain in detail what
that policy actually means?
Ms. Swearer. Sure. So, universal background checks start
with this general conception of what could be, you know, at its
core, legitimate. Right now, most gun sales, whether it is
brick and mortar gun stores, whether it is a bought over the
internet, anything that occurs interstate, those require a
background check under existing law. The only exception is for
intrastate sales between private sellers, and that is largely
because they do not have access to the next system. They
cannot, like fossil fuels, call up the FBI and say, hey, can
you run a background check.
Mr. Donalds. Now, could that theoretically be a way, that
interstate sale for individuals who are otherwise prohibited,
to obtain firearms?
Ms. Swearer. Sure. As I point out, the problems with HRA
and all of those other bills is that this is a low-reward
endeavor. This is already not how most criminals are obtaining
their firearms. They are already obtaining them through the
black market, through informal channels that are not in any way
shape or form addressed by interstate private sales. And on top
of that, things like HRA would criminalize a whole host of
responsible, temporary, low-risk transfers between law-abiding
citizens. Like, if your buddy wants to borrow your hunting
rifle, or, you know, you are going on a month-long trip to
Europe and you want your guns to be secured in your friend's
safe next door, you would have to go through a background
check, legally transfer title of your guns to that individual,
and then legally transfer title back to yourself when you are
done. So, that is the problem.
Mr. Donalds. So, Ms. Swearer, real quick. So, the policy of
universal background checks, would that have stopped the
shooter in Uvalde from acquiring his weapon?
Ms. Swearer. It would not have stopped the shooter in
Uvalde.
Mr. Donalds. Well, would it have stopped the shooter in
Parkland from acquiring his weapon?
Ms. Swearer. It would not have stopped, with perhaps one
lone exception, a single mass public shooter in the last 20
years because they all either passed or were capable of passing
background checks, and that is the problem.
Mr. Donalds. The shooter in Sandy Hook, the Newtown
shooting, did that shooter kill his mother and take the guns?
Ms. Swearer. Yes, he did, and I forget his age, but he
otherwise did not have a disqualifying history.
Mr. Donalds. The shooter in Uvalde, did he actually shoot
his grandmother in the face before he went to perpetrate the
crimes in Uvalde?
Ms. Swearer. To my knowledge, yes.
Mr. Donalds. Folks, here is the deal. One of the things
that we have seen through all these mass shootings, I was a
member of the State Legislature during the Parkland shooting,
so I was in the legislature during that time period. The one
thing that is crystal clear is these mass shooters that target
our schools are all psychopaths. They are psychotic. In
Parkland, the red flags were there for everybody to see. The
school district did not act. That came out in the Parkland
report. The site itself was not secured. That came out in the
Parkland report. In Uvalde, the back door was open. It was
open, wide open. The perpetrator shot his grandmother in the
face. That is insane.
I know this bill, the proposed bill, today or tomorrow they
are talking about raising the age to buy rifles from 18 to 21.
Are we now going to say that a 19-year-old who is a legal adult
in the United States does not have the mental capacity to own a
shotgun or an AR-15, but they have the mental capacity to
enlist in the military? They have the mental capacity to
actually sign legal contracts, they have the mental capacity to
be treated as an adult by law enforcement, and they also have
the mental capacity to vote in the United States, but they
don't have the mental capacity to own a shotgun or to own a
rifle and not inflict harm on their fellow man?
Look man, I got three sons. Two of them are school age now.
When these shootings occur, man, they hurt me because I could
only imagine what it is as a parent. I am a parent, but I also
understand that I have a responsibility as a legislator to
actually defend the Constitution of the United States. The
Constitution of the Second Amendment is there. It is our
responsibility to defend it.
And if we look at the data from the mass shootings that
have occurred in the United States over the last 20 years, the
one constant, especially when it comes to schools, is that
these shooters are young. They are mentally disturbed, and the
vast majority of people who are in their age group would not
even think or go down the pathway of committing these
atrocities. We don't pass laws because of the ``one or two
psychopaths.'' We only pass laws in order to maintain the
actual legal momentum of freedom in the United States. The
Second Amendment is not there to stop psychopaths, to be
perfectly honest with it. It is not. That is not its purpose.
The purpose of the Second Amendment is clear. It is to protect
the constitutional rights of American citizens.
These shootings are awful. They are awful, but the data is
clear about how to find the people that actually do this, and
the measures put in front of us would not have actually stopped
these shootings. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Votes have been called to allow members to vote. The
committee will stand in recess until the end of the first vote
series.
The committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will reconvene.
The gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairwoman, and thank you so
much for all of you for being here.
Sometimes Congress often feels like it is in its own little
world separated from the rest of the country, but I hope this
morning, hearing the witnesses' strength and courage, inspires
meaningful action here. The biggest fear I have as a Member of
Congress, but also just really a mother in America, is that
when Buffalo and Uvalde stops being in the headlines, everyone
here will go on and do nothing. Other violent shootings never
reached those national headlines, like the four shootings in
the span of a week in the city of Ecorse in my district.
With that in mind, I want to really talk about AR-15s. A
few weeks ago in Buffalo, one person armed with an assault
rifle carried out a racist act of terrorism in a historically
Black community. And you may have heard my colleague from
California, Congresswoman Porter, talk about how the shooter
there having to re-round or reload the gun actually helped save
lives because they have a ban on AR-15s in the state of
California.
So, Mr. Suplina, the gunmen in each of these kind of mass
shootings use assault weapons to carry out their attacks,
correct?
Mr. Suplina. Correct.
Ms. Tlaib. In a span of one minute, how many people could a
person kill with an AR-15?
Mr. Suplina. I don't know the answer to that question, but
the answer is with the right high-capacity magazine, these are
designed to inflict the maximum amount of damage in that time.
Ms. Tlaib. And Buffalo was about two-and-a-half minutes,
something of that sort?
Mr. Suplina. Correct.
Ms. Tlaib. How many people? Ten?
Mr. Suplina. Correct.
Ms. Tlaib. Ten that killed. How many were injured?
Mr. Suplina. Three more.
Ms. Tlaib. And Ms. Everhart testified about the damage to
those even that survive?
Mr. Suplina. That is correct.
Ms. Tlaib. Talk about that, because I am just thinking of
the little 4th graders and 5th graders that survived the
shooting and what is happening, of not only the trauma, but
their livelihood of having that kind of trauma to your body.
Mr. Suplina. Gun violence in America is deaths, it is
injuries, and it is the community trauma that starts at the
scene of these crimes and ripples out. And we too often don't
talk about those that survive their wounds but have to live
with them forever, and the family members who need to take care
of them. We don't talk about the costs on society, that, you
know, loss of work, loss of mental well-being, costs to our
society, not to mention those that aren't hit by a bullet but
whose lives are forever changed.
Ms. Tlaib. So, many of my friends who are in the military
service and been trained to use AR-15s tell me that there is
this big opposition to call them weapon of war, but they are,
correct?
Mr. Suplina. They are not only weapons of war, but they are
literally designed and based on weapons in current use in the
military, correct.
Ms. Tlaib. One of the things, and if I may, Chairwoman, to
enter from The New York Times, article, ``The Mass Shootings
Where Stricter Gun Laws Might Have Made a Difference.''
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Ms. Tlaib. You know, I have not thought about that. I was
more focused on banning assault weapons, but as they went
through, they said four gunmen were the under the age of 21
that purchased their weapons legally, and they went on to say,
you know, the number of people that were killed. And it even
goes on to talk about the use of, like, so-called assault
weapons or weapon of war, as some of my veterans in my
community call them, that the easy access to them is even mind
boggling for those that serve our country, but even in some of
these committees had no idea that is how accessible they are,
that lot of the parents don't even realize that this person was
able to just go to the corner department store and get it. The
American people don't realize how accessible these weapons of
wars are.
Mr. Suplina. The reason that the country currently requires
you to be 21 to own a handgun is because the country came to
understand the lethality of handguns and use in crime. The
reason the country did not raise the age on long guns is
because what comes to mind is the hunting rifle that you use,
you know, in a rural area that 18-year-olds are more than
capable of learning to shoot on. These are AR-15s. These are
designed for people with military training, and, yes, in most
places, you can walk in as an 18-year-old into a department
store and buy one.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. Ms. Pringle, really quickly. I told
you, in tears, breaking down of friends I have known for a long
time as teachers buying literally ladders to bust the window
down to be able to climb out of their classroom in situations
like what we saw in Texas. What are you hearing from teachers
other than that, because I hear them talking about getting
bullet proof vests for not----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired. Ms.
Pringle may answer, briefly.
Ms. Pringle. I am hearing from teachers all over this
country that what is being asked of them, to stand in the gaps
to protect students is unacceptable, that they should not be
the ones responsible for trying to protect them against assault
weapons that are killing students in two minutes, four minutes,
all of the students and the adults were killed in Columbine. We
should not bear that burden. That is not our responsibility.
Our responsibility is to teach our students.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from South
Carolina, Mr. Norman, is recognized. Mr. Norman?
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Ms. Pringle, are you
familiar with the NEA's section, an end to policing in schools?
Ms. Pringle. What are you referring to?
Mr. Norman. The provision that basically, it is a call to
action for police-free schools.
Ms. Pringle. The NEA has not taken a position on police-
free schools. What we have done is we have taken a position on
ensuring that every student, everyone has access to a quality
education, and that they attend a safe, and supportive, and
nurturing environment in which every one of them can learn.
Mr. Norman. But as far as it relates to having police
officers armed, does that make students safer at the schools in
your opinion, as being head of the NEA?
Ms. Pringle. Having police officers armed?
Mr. Norman. Uh-huh.
Ms. Pringle. I don't understand your question. You mean
generally having police officers armed?
Mr. Norman. In schools, are children more safe if the
resource officers and/or armed police are armed?
Ms. Pringle. We have school resource officers in our
schools where we work and engage in making sure that they have
the training and the support that they need----
Mr. Norman. You are not answering my question.
Ms. Pringle [continuing]. so that they can engage with our
student's social, and emotional, and academic life.
Mr. Norman. OK. So, you do not agree that armed resource
officers or police make children safer?
Ms. Pringle. We believe that when you are in a school
environment----
Mr. Norman. OK. You are not going to answer the question.
Ms. Pringle. I did answer the question.
Mr. Norman. No, you didn't. You----
Ms. Pringle. Yes, I did.
Mr. Norman. Well, let me put it to you again, Ms. Pringle.
Do you think trained school personnel, who are trained and are
permitted to carry concealed weapons, are more of a threat to
students or would they keep our students safer? This will be
the last question I ask----
Ms. Pringle. Our teachers throughout this country
overwhelmingly reject the idea of arming teachers in our
schools. More guns in schools mean more killings.
Mr. Norman. OK. So, no teacher with a concealed weapon, and
I assume since you didn't answer, no resource officers ought to
have a gun. The only one that should have guns are the people
that come in there to do harm is basically what you are saying.
Ms. Pringle. I did not say that. I didn't say that.
Mr. Norman. Yes, you did not answer the question. Ms.
Swearer, the International Journal of Policing Strategies and
Management concluded that the presence of a school resource
officer reduces the fear of crime among students, and it
increases the safety among the students. Is that a true
statement?
Ms. Swearer. I believe, based on the evidence, that it is.
Mr. Norman. There is no question about that, is there?
Ms. Swearer. No. Again, I believe the evidence is pretty
unequivocal.
Mr. Norman. And if armed teachers or really the police had
gone in earlier, the carnage would not have been as grave,
correct?
Ms. Swearer. I think especially when you look at the
preventable blood loss and the ability to get first aid to
students who spent 78 minutes not receiving that first aid,
yes, that is incredibly important.
Mr. Norman. And you would think that arming teachers and
administrators would have quicker responses to stopping school
shooters, right?
Ms. Swearer. Obviously we should look at ways of ensuring
that we don't get to that point. But yes, when that point has
been reached, the armed response and the quickness of that
response is, at that point, the primary thing that matters in
terms of saving lives.
Mr. Norman. Just like it has gotten to the point in this
country under liberal administrations and the Democrats who
want to disarm the police, we have got to have police officers
in churches, of all places, who are armed, which is a sad day
in this country.
I want to yield the balance of my time to Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you to my colleague from South Carolina.
Ms. Swearer, Democrats have advocated for a gun buyback
program like the one in Australia. Do you think this would work
in the United States?
Ms. Swearer. No. I think the research on the Australia ban
has one of several things that has been greatly
mischaracterized today. Yes, rates of gun violence generally
dropped, but it did so in every developed country around the
world during that time, including in the United States, even
though our number of guns per capita almost doubled during that
time. Additionally, when you look at mass shootings before that
ban and after that ban, before the ban they were very rare in
Australia comparatively, especially compared to the United
States. Those types of shootings were overwhelmingly not
carried out by the types of weapons that were banned. And so
there doesn't even seem to be some sort of logical connection
even if you are looking at again these statistically low
incidences. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, is now
recognized.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. I want to
thank the witnesses for being here today. I want to
acknowledge, as others have done, the powerful testimony that
we heard from the first panel today. As we know, we heard this
statistic now many times today, each year more than 45,000
Americans are killed by guns, and nearly 10 percent of those
killed are children for whom gun violence is now the leading
cause of death in the United States. Yet for nearly 25 years,
until 2019, the strength of the gun lobby up here on Capitol
Hill prohibited the CDC from conducting research on gun
violence, effectively preventing us, the Federal Government,
and Congress, and others, from treating gun violence as the
public health crisis that it is. In addition to the human toll,
gun violence is draining our public health system. According to
GAO, gun violence costs the U.S. $1 billion per year in initial
hospital costs alone. Medicaid and other public programs
shoulders 60 percent of those costs, so we are paying for this
violence.
To meaningfully address the gun violence epidemic in our
country, as we have been saying again, and again, we must pass
commonsense reforms while also investing in evidence-based
prevention strategies and working with communities to address
the complex and systemic issues that drive gun violence. And
when I say commonsense, what I have in mind is many of the
measures that we are going to have on the floor today as part
of this legislative packet and tomorrow. ``Commonsense'' to me
means when you ask the average person out there in the country,
including by the way, the average law-abiding gun owner, does
it make sense to do this, they say, absolutely, it makes sense.
They do not fear these measures because they know that,
overall, it will create a more rational world and country for
us to live in.
And we have heard much about the Second Amendment. No one
is here to try to amend or take away the Second Amendment
right. The First Amendment is also very important to us, and we
know that there are some limitations that are placed there. We
don't allow people to yell fire in a crowded theater. So, as
sacrosanct as these amendments are, we can put rational
commonsense measures in place to achieve the right balance.
Mr. Jackson, you are a gun violence survivor, as you so
compellingly testified earlier, and you are an advocate for
reform. Most recently, as I understand, you had been on the
ground in Buffalo, working to help the community recover from a
horrific mass shooting that we saw there a few weeks ago. Can
you describe what you have been seeing there in the weeks since
the tragedy, and what you know, based on your experience, is
coming for that community in the weeks and months and years
ahead in terms of dealing with this? And speak, if you could,
to this sense of powerlessness that so many people feel when
they look at Washington, this idea that please do something
real that can make a difference, just something.
Everyone knows this problem is too complicated to flip a
switch on. You can't solve it overnight, but it is this sense
of being powerless in the face of gun violence because I think
it is so demoralizing to individuals, certainly to many Members
of Congress, and I am sure to communities like Buffalo and
others that are experiencing this pain. So, if you could speak
to that, I would very much appreciate it.
Mr. Jackson. Yes, thank you. You know, when I arrived at
Buffalo, for folks who don't know a lot about the community, 80
percent of the African-American community is concentrated in
one part of Buffalo, and when we got there, we saw instantly
how far-reaching this trauma had impacted people throughout the
community. The first vigil I went to, there was over 600 people
there, torn apart. Every person you met was either a family
member, a neighbor, a church member, went to school with
someone, was coached by someone. Ms. Pearl Young was the first
lady of our church, so you think about the generations that she
touched. I met one young man who was the nephew of Heyward
Patterson, who had eight children and couldn't even bring them
to the funeral because he didn't want them to be re-traumatized
by what had happened.
And we talk about violence and its impact. Yes, 10 people
were impacted and killed, yes, we know those families, but what
we don't see is the trauma that ripples through the entire
community. We had people literally on their knees crying. We
had folks, senior citizens in walkers coming to memorials in
tears, individuals screaming at the sky in anger. And while
there were hundreds of cameras, there were very little people
there to help them. There were very little victim services,
support services. There were very little people to provide
trauma care for those who have been impacted. And what we are
most concerned about now is what does that ripple of trauma
look like. We know violence is a disease, but now in Buffalo,
we have an entire community, and I would argue the entire Black
community across the country, who have been exposed to this
disease. And I think it reinforces the extent of this public
health crisis and why it is so urgent that we take a
comprehensive public health approach to support those who have
been directly impacted, as well as those who are impacted
indirectly by this trauma.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you for your----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
LaTurner, is now recognized.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. We have four
children, a preschooler, a 2d grader, a 4th grader, and a 5th
grader. I was heartbroken by what happened in Uvalde and in
Buffalo, and I join all Americans in praying for these victims'
families, but not just praying for the victims' families, but
willing to come to the table to try to find meaningful
solutions that can prevent this from happening again. After
events like this occur, many lawmakers seek simple solutions to
complicated issues. However, Congress must focus on the root
cause of violence by prioritizing mental health and school
safety resources, and by disincentivizing rising crime in
cities. Now is the time to come together, to use and improve on
the tools at our disposal, and find new ways to ensure that
this never happens again rather than spend time on proposals
that will not fix this problem and seeks to rob law-abiding
citizens of their rights guaranteed by our Constitution.
Ms. Swearer, Federal school safety grants and programs have
become more plentiful and accessible over the past several
years. SchoolSafety.gov, for example, is a central location
where HHS, DOJ, DHS, and the Department of Education collect
actionable safety recommendations for schools. The site also
has a grants finder tool to help administrators navigate a
growing collection of Federal grant programs related to school
safety. Speaking from your research and experience, are
resources like this helpful for state and local educational
agencies. And are they being utilized?
Ms. Swearer. They are absolutely helpful. You know, again,
we have talked about the benefits of all of these things at
various times today. In terms of their underutilization, I do
not have the data in front of me. I suspect the answer is it is
being underutilized. I suspect that based on the continued
problems that we do see, but I also know that plenty of schools
are availing themselves of that, and I think that is of great
benefit to the safety of their students and teachers and staff
members.
Mr. LaTurner. Would you care to comment on ways in which we
can encourage more participation, more utilization of these
resources?
Ms. Swearer. Well, first, I think the publicity of, you
know, enabling schools to know that they are out there, but
also of helping schools and school districts understand the
importance of looking in these directions. Like, even if you
think you can magically snap your fingers and tens of millions
of assault weapons will disappear tomorrow and that that will
make a meaningful difference, the reality is you are still
going to have threats in the meantime because, realistically,
it is going to take decades for that to come out of
circulation. You are still going to have the underlying
problems. You are still going to have other weapons. In the
meantime, this is still a viable option for those immediate
threats. Even if you disagree with me on it, everything else
related to gun control, this is still a viable option for the
here and the now in the immediate context of protecting life.
Mr. LaTurner. What types of warning signs could be
recognized in students who may consider carrying out acts of
violence in schools? And how do Federal grants help teachers,
resource officers, administrators, and counselors identify
students' mental health crises and prevent acts of violence?
Ms. Swearer. So, a lot of these students, especially in a
school shooting context, but just generally across the board
for people who commit acts of mass public violence, they have
long histories at that point of showing themselves to be a
danger to themselves or others, either inflicting self-harm,
harming animals, having suicidal tendencies, you know, showing
other concerning signs of violent behavior. I think you have
seen the quintessential examples of this in Uvalde and in
Parkland. When you look at the data on thwarted school
shootings, and thwarted mass public shootings, it is sort of
like this chain link of prevention, right, where you had people
who were able to recognize those signs, say, hey, this is a
concern, be able to take it to someone with the authority, to
do something to intervene, it was taken seriously. And then
there was a mechanism in place to intervene. And so, you know,
any sort of process that helps that, all of those links along
that chain come together is important because that is how you
save lives. That is how you successfully intervene because
those options for intervention are so often and so clearly
there.
Mr. LaTurner. Undoubtedly, you are right, that there are
ways to intervene, and we ought to encourage that and
incentivize and provide resources for it at the Federal level.
I just have a little bit of time left. What are some ways that
technology can play a role in improving school safety?
Ms. Swearer. Yes, I am not quite sure what you mean by
``technology,'' whether you mean social media or----
Mr. LaTurner. I mean social media, and I mean physical
security on campus.
Ms. Swearer. Sure. So, some of it is just the physical
security of being able to buzz people in and out and making
sure that there is secure access and security cameras, and
using best practices for physical safety, some of which
involves the best practices for technology. But again, I mean,
we have referenced social media. You know, I am not a big tech
expert, but certainly whatever it takes, that when these----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. OK.
Ms. Swearer. It is the same, finding the signs of dangers
wherever they come from, whether it is----
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady from California, Ms.
Speier, is now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for your
leadership. I must say that this has been a very tough hearing
to listen to. First of all, let me thank all the witnesses who
are here, and the first panel in particular. I am haunted by
what Dr. Guerrero said, that he went into the emergency room
and one of the dead children was decapitated. Think about that,
decapitated.
Commissioner, when you went into the Tops grocery store, I
think we spend too much time sanitizing what assault weapons
does to the body. Can you give us some descriptions of what you
saw on the ground when you got to Tops?
Mr. Gramaglia. I won't just get into that description, but
I have been at----
Ms. Speier. No, I want you to. I want us to hear it.
Mr. Gramaglia. Yes, I want to expand on that. I have been
to numerous shootings throughout my career that were the result
of high-powered rifles, assault rifles and the cavernous holes
that they leave in bodies. Decapitation is a pretty good
explanation for it. Some people couldn't be buried with an open
casket. Yes, the damage was absolutely devastating, and not
just in that one, but, as I said, in other homicide scenes that
I have been to, it is a devastation. It is incredible.
Ms. Speier. I am a victim of gun violence. I know what it
does to a body, and I cannot believe that my colleagues don't
recognize that prohibiting the sale of an assault weapon until
the age of 21 isn't going to save lives. It is the impulsive
actions by 18-year-old, probably men, that have cost 30
people's lives just in the last month. And we are not supposed
to be hardening schools. They are not supposed to be prisons.
Ms. Pringle, let me ask you, in your conversations with the
teachers in the 199 incidents of gun violence on school grounds
just last year, and the more than 311,000 students since
Columbine that have been victims of gun violence experience,
what does that inform you? What do the teachers tell you?
Ms. Pringle. I met with survivors from, teachers from Sandy
Hook and from Parkland, and students from Parkland and when I
was in Houston, in Texas. And what they said to me reflected
what teachers all over this country are saying, and that is
that the impact to the school community is forever.
Ms. Speier. Is forever.
Ms. Pringle. It doesn't end. It is forever. And the idea of
turning our schools into prisons, into places where they are
not conducive to teaching and learning, that is not the
solution to this problem. We all know what the solution to this
problem is. It is comprehensive gun reform in this country. We
know what it is. We are not supposed to be holding our students
and our teachers responsible. We all heard Mr. Reyes crying
from his bed in the hospital, saying, ``I didn't protect my
students. I didn't protect my students.'' He should not be
burdened with that. We are asking for Congress to do its job
right now.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ms. Pringle. Mr. Jackson, you, too,
are a victim of gun violence. Does that trauma ever leave you?
Mr. Jackson. Not one day. Anytime you hear a loud sound,
anytime you see an argument or a fight or even a movement of a
crowd, I am triggered over and over again, and I don't even
need that. Every day we turn on the news and we see how
prevalent violence is in our communities. You know, we say over
100,000 people have been shot or injured by gun violence, but I
really think that is a low estimate because in my community
alone, I know at least eight people who have been directly
impacted. And every morning I wake up, I have to apply ointment
to my wound. I have to watch news as a reminder of this crisis,
and then I also have to listen to politicians in chambers like
this make excuses about why they can't take action. All of that
is triggering.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Jackson. I would like to submit
for the record this article that references that the young man
in Uvalde, who massacred 19 children and two teachers, had
$5,000 worth of guns and ammunitions, and he was working at an
In-n-Out Burger restaurant.
And the question, Madam Chair, that we need to ask is,
where did he get the money for that? I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, is now
recognized.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair. The first thing, I would
like to take a moment to respond to my Republican colleague's
comment that Democrats are using children as political props.
These are the same tired arguments used by the gun lobby to
prevent meaningful change after Sandy Hook, after Parkland.
When victims and survivors speak up and demand change, the gun
industry and its supporters in Congress question their motives.
It is frankly shameful. Despite suffering unimaginable pain,
our witnesses wanted to share their story, even the young lady.
They had dared to hope that their trauma and heartbreak could
be turned into something good. They are pleading with us to do
our jobs. All I am asking my colleagues to do is open your
hearts and listen, and I hope we still have enough humanity in
this body to do this.
We have been talking a lot about mass shootings, and I want
to thank all the witnesses. I have long talked about the
everyday gun violence that exists in our communities. The city
of Chicago faces this every weekend, really every day. Over
Memorial weekend, 42 people were shot, and 33 people were shot
this past weekend. Tackling this issue will take community-
based approaches.
Mr. Jackson, thank you for sharing your story and the work
we have done together. Your organization uses community-based
approaches to fight everyday gun violence through community
intervention programs. Can you talk about the structural
factors that drive gun violence in a community?
Mr. Jackson. Yes, thank you. You know, we are big
proponents for community-based violence intervention strategies
because we know that can reduce the risk factors and address
the root causes of violence. Over the course of the pandemic we
saw a 39 percent increase in homicides in the Black community.
And that is not because there were less policing. That is not
because sentencing wasn't harsh. That was because the other
root causes of violence were intensified. When we look at the
lack of access to safe spaces, economic inequality, housing
instability, the reinforcement of poverty, all of those fueled
violence. And then on top of that, we poured in this flood of
guns into our communities. We talked about New York earlier.
Eighty-four percent of the guns in New York come from outside
of the state, and that is what our communities are going
through every single day. We are being flooded with firearms
into the communities that are most vulnerable.
And these community-based violence intervention strategies
focus on victim services for those who have been impacted,
supporting their families, providing therapeutic care for those
traumatized, providing intervention tactics that work with
folks in the hospitals to prevent them from retaliating. We
know that 40 percent of the people who have been shot, within
five years will be shot again or killed without any form of
intervention, and hospital-based violence intervention does
this, as well as cognitive behavioral therapeutic programs that
work with those who are most at risk, who maybe have had a
violent history and help them shift their lifestyle through
therapeutic and behavioral changes. In certain communities we
have seen violence reduced by 60 percent, and I have a whole
list of examples which I can submit to the record, but we know
these programs work.
What we also know is that the Federal Government has not
been investing in these efforts and has not been funding these
efforts that we know bring peace to our community, and that is
why we have been working together to push such legislation.
Ms. Kelly. And hopefully we can change that and get Steven
Horsford and Senator Booker's legislation passed. Commissioner,
you helped your community heal after the horrible mass shooting
last month, that you are helping them to heal, but you also see
the destruction reoccurring on violence in Buffalo. Can you
talk about how your police department works with organizations
to implement community violence intervention strategies?
Mr. Gramaglia. I am a strong believer in the Violence
Interrupters' strategy. We work very closely with them. They
get out in the community. They can say and do things that we
can't because they are credible messengers. We use them a lot
in place of where police officers might go to handle a
situation. They are also very helpful in getting guns turned in
at times. But the problem we have is, as my colleague, Mr.
Jackson, said, the flood of guns that are coming into our
communities, the ghost guns that are coming into our
communities.
And one of the scariest things I just heard the other day
at a gun meeting in my department is that about a half a dozen
ghost guns recently were firing fully automatic, not because
they had a switch on them, because they were being modified and
not modified properly, I guess if that is a term to use for a
ghost gun. But it is the flood of guns that are coming in,
where are they coming from. And we don't want to take guns away
from law-abiding citizens. We want to stop the flow of guns
coming in.
Ms. Kelly. Well, I have a trafficking or purchasing bill I
am going to run and talk about in a little bit because,
representing Chicago, we have the same problem. And really
quickly to Ms. Swearer, how do you explain the number of gun
owners who support what we are trying to do, or the number of
Americans that support, Democrat or Republican, doesn't matter,
Independents? But I was at a press conference yesterday, and a
swarm, they had shirts on of ``Gun Owners Support Gun Safety.''
That is what we are talking about.
Ms. Swearer. It is because it is not until you actually
explain to them what existing laws are and how these laws fail
to actually accomplish those goals. When you actually do that,
those numbers drop repeatedly. And actually, I believe I saw,
it might have been The New York Times, had an article precisely
on this today. It is just because people don't understand what
is being talked about when you reference an assault weapon or
universal background check. And so when that is explained to
them, that number actually drops off considerably.
Ms. Kelly. Well, the----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Kelly. The head of the Gun Violence Prevention Task
Force is a gun owner. Val Demings is a gun owner. Many people
on the task force, and they certainly know the legislation, and
they are still pushing it. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Comer, is recognized.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and, again, I want to
thank our witnesses for being here today. This has been a very
robust discussion, very difficult issue, brings out a lot of
emotion. I appreciate everything that you all are discussing
and fighting for. I had the opportunity to go first in
questions, and I like to go toward the end because I like to
listen to the debate, try to learn, listen to what other people
say and pick up some points that people make. And one of the
points that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez made was that some of the guns,
when we referenced the amount of gun violence in New York City,
that a lot of those guns were coming from outside New York
City, and I would say that is probably right.
We have in Kentucky a fentanyl problem, and I think just
about every congressional district has a fentanyl problem. Our
law enforcement tells us that fentanyl is coming across the
border, and, you know, it is frustrating for us because we have
had 100,000 deaths with fentanyl, and we believe that could be
reduced by securing the border. But as I was thinking about
that, I wonder if we ban certain types of weapons, Ms. Swearer,
just wondering, I wonder if the Mexican drug cartel, who is
profiting from all the illegals crossing into the United
States, they are profiting from all the fentanyl and much of
the crystal meth that is in the United States, I wonder if it
is possible that they would get into the gun business?
Ms. Swearer. Well, I think that might be the least of the
worries at that point. I mean, you would still have 400-million
plus privately owned firearms in this country. There would need
to be some sort of coherent enforcement plan. Americans
routinely do not turn in these weapons. I mean, you look at, I
think it was New Jersey, when they banned magazines capable of
10 or 15 rounds, nobody turned those in. Out of a million of
them, nobody turns those in. You know, the people who do turn
them in, let's say we are even twice as successful as
Australia, you still have 200 million guns in this country,
most of them now in the hands of the lesser law-abiding segment
of society who didn't bother to turn them in, who didn't turn
in their assault weapons.
So, I mean, and we would be holding hearings, too, about,
you know, who is this being enforced against. If I may be
blunt, these laws are less likely to be enforced against white
suburbia. We are now going to be having hearings about how they
are being enforced against poor people of color, and that helps
no one. So, I mean, I am not going to get into speculations
about drug cartels, but I will say we will have several other
problems that would be primary.
Mr. Comer. What do you think, Mr. Swearer, that we should
do instead of passing gun control laws to make our community
safer?
Ms. Swearer. I think, again, as I have outlined, one of the
first things you can do is focus on the mental health and the
well-being of communities, I mean, things that help communities
flourish, whether it is focusing on mental health, two-thirds
of gun deaths are suicides. As Mr. Jackson noted, you know,
there are a lot of issues that are interrelated. It is very
seriously interrelated with violence and violent crime.
Focusing on stemming those issues, whether it is access to safe
spaces, whether it is mental health, whether it is educational
and job opportunities, the things that make families and
communities flourish are the things that reduce violent crime.
And, again, it does more than reduce violent crime, because now
we are talking about human flourishing on top of that.
Mr. Comer. My friend, Ro Khanna, also mentioned about
violent criminals having guns, and, you know, our position is
violent criminals should be in jail. I think that is the
position of everyone on this side of the aisle. How can we
empower law enforcement professionals and our criminal justice
system to bring violent criminals to justice and keep them off
our streets?
Ms. Swearer. Well, I think, you know, I am hesitant to
actually blame law enforcement for a lot of those issues.
Mr. Comer. I am not blaming law----
Ms. Swearer. Right, no, no. I mean, at the end of the day,
you know, what happens to them afterwards, that is out of the
hands of law enforcement. That is local prosecution.
Mr. Comer. Exactly.
Ms. Swearer. That is, you know, dealing with laws, about
the parameters of what those prosecutors can and can't do, you
know.
Mr. Comer. Right.
Ms. Swearer. So, I think it is more complex than that, you
know, and it is going to come down to what state or locality we
are talking about where that problem might exist, but that is
that is a major focus, yes.
Mr. Comer. That is very good. I agree. There is a trend in
a lot of the cities where there is the most violence with guns.
These cities have strict gun control laws already in the books
that the criminals aren't abiding, but they also have many
prosecutors, including the one in San Francisco who was
recalled last night, who had been very lax on criminals. I
think the criminal justice system was created to try to help
people that had been unfairly incarcerated for minor things
like marijuana possession. I think there should be bipartisan
support for people who are in prison for little things like
marijuana possession to be let go. I support that, but I think
it has gone too far. And we have criminals now that are that
are on the street, and that is not good. In the name of COVID,
a lot of prisoners in this town, Washington, DC, were let out,
and we have seen, you know, a spike in crime.
So, I think that there are many points we need to consider
moving forward, and, Madam Chair, I am wrapping up. Obviously
we need to invest in school security. We need to invest in
resource officers. We need to have better-trained school
resource officers, and we need to share data on mental health
issues and any potential threats with kids from social media
and things like that. Thank you----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentlelady from Michigan, Mrs. Lawrence, you are now
recognized.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you so much. History teaches us a lot
of things. We have heard our educators, and our community
organizers, our law enforcement talk about the stagnant action
of nothing. So, we will have someone like Ms. Swearer come in
and say that it is not the guns, the guns are not the problem,
keep them coming, everybody has that right, and we move
forward. Then there is another shooting, but it is not the
guns. You can't kill someone in multiple rounds without a
weapon.
We own cars in America. In order to own a car in America,
you first have to buy it and get a registration for it. In
order for you to operate a car, you have to take a test, and
you have to follow laws. If you fail to do that, that car is
taken from you. It is a car. It is not a gun. And we are still
talking about background checks. Yes, we need to talk about
mental illness, but what happens after we do all our prayers
and best wishes, which I can say my colleagues on the other
side are beautiful at prayers and best wishes, but never bring
forth a bill that would address this crisis in America.
It is unacceptable. We cry when we think about these
babies. We heard the descriptions of these bodies where a
person, who was clearly unfit to own a gun, walked in and
legally purchased a gun at 18, and used that gun within hours
to not only kill his family, shoot or injure his family, but
others. It comes a point of time when this deflect, deflect,
don't do it because if they pass one law, it is a slippery
slope, I have heard it, don't let them take away your guns,
that is our right. When in America, when we have more guns than
people, does the sickness of operating and owning a gun kicks
in that we in America have a problem?
I know for a fact if you drive a car you bought, and you
have to put on a seatbelt. We don't care if it is
uncomfortable. We don't care if you don't like it. You have to
put that seatbelt on, and if you don't put that seatbelt on, if
you repeatedly do it, we will take away your license to drive
that car. First of all, we studied the deaths and we found out
how many people die in car crashes, and you know what? We said
we want to stop the deaths in car crashes, and look at all the
innovation: airbags seatbelts. We stepped up as America.
And we keep talking about our faith in God and how we love
people and equality. How can we say we love God when we take a
gun and shoot and kill people, and if someone does it, you sit
back and drop your hands, say prayers and best wishes? It is
time. It is time for us as America and this body to stand up
and confront the fact that it is sick. It is sick to think that
if I have a gun, nothing is going to happen to me, and I become
a gigantic figure. I had a member tell me that his five-year-
old wanted a pink gun for her birthday--five-year-old--and he
said, when you get old enough for your fingers to operate the
gun, I will buy you a gun. And he did, and he thought that was
a good thing. And I am sitting here saying, you know, I would
stand up in court and say you needed to go to jail, a five-
year-old with a gun, and the only purpose of a gun is to kill
something.
So, you are giving a five-year-old, who is not mentally
capable of making decisions, a gun. That is sick. It is no way
you can rationalize that. And you have homes throughout
America, they have their gun in the back of the car, they are
wearing open carry. It is like the Wild, Wild West. We have
evolved as a country. We have all these technology and
advancements, but we are literally going back to the Wild, Wild
West where we stand up and we have a shoot down in the middle
of the street, people die, and we just walk away and blow the
smoke off the gun. It is unacceptable.
And I know I am supposed to be asking questions, but if I
can just impact one person. And like my colleague said there is
large number of Americans who say can you just do something
other than prayers and best wishes. If someone shot and killed
your child, you would not be sitting here wanting to hear about
my constitutional right to own a gun. Well, I will give my
prayers and best wishes for you because when you lose a child
over gun violence, it is unacceptable. I yield back my time----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
And the gentlelady from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, is now
recognized.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you to all
of our witnesses here today, especially our survivors, those
who shared their pain, their grief, and their trauma. I really
do look forward to a day where our families and our children,
children like little Miah, will no longer have to relive their
trauma simply to compel action because only in America do we
normalize mass shootings and the trauma left behind.
Now, when a partner loses a spouse, we ascribe the word
``widow'' or ``widower.'' When a child loses their parent, we
use the word ``orphan.'' There is no word to describe a parent
who has suffered the devastating sorrow of losing a child. The
unimaginable pain, grief, and trauma of burying your own baby,
it just goes against the natural order of things. And with gun
violence now the leading cause of death for children's society,
now we are searching for a word, for what do we call a
surviving parent who has been robbed of their child due to a
massacre? Only in America.
So, whether it is our babies learning in Uvalde, our
elder's grocery shopping in Buffalo, or neighbors in my
district, the Massachusetts 7th, whose experience don't always
make national headlines but do deserve just as much attention,
it is long past time to treat gun violence as the public health
crisis that it is. We must do something about these damn guns.
And yet predictively some are resorting to deflection and
distractions, touting failed policies that do more harm than
good, like arming teachers and militarizing police in our
schools.
Ms. Pringle, very eloquently, earlier today you said we
need resources, not revolvers, in our schools, but yet we spent
$1 billion over the last two decades to grow our school police.
Mr. Pringle, in your experience does adding more police to
schools end mass shootings, yes or no?
Ms. Pringle. No.
Ms. Pressley. I completely agree with you, and so do the
majority of experts that have studied the impacts of police in
schools.
Chairwoman, I ask for unanimous consent to enter the
following documents into the record: a 2015 study titled,
``Preventing School Violence, Assessing Armed Guardians, School
Policy and Context,'' a 2019 report titled, ``Cops and No
Counselors,'' and a series of letters from the Federal School
Discipline and Climate Group and more than 500 community-based
organizations on the need to end the mass policing of our
students, and instead invest in trauma-informed services that
make our schools and children safe.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Ms. Pressley. Since Columbine, our country has approached
the problem of school shootings by funding school police, $1
billion, thousands of school police officers, when 90 percent
of our students can't access a school nurse, a social worker,
or a guidance counselor, and more than two decades later, we
find ourselves in the same spot as before. Only in America. So,
instead of contributing to the safety, the data shows that
police in schools can have the opposite effect and actually
result in making many students feel less secure.
Ms. Pringle, what have you heard from educators and
students about policing schools, especially from students who
are Black, brown, LGBTQ, or disabled?
Ms. Pringle. Our teachers, and, in fact, all of our
educators are focused on making sure that they create a safe,
welcoming environment for every single student. We know that
our Black, and brown, and indigenous students are
disproportionately impacted by the inequities in every single
social system in this country.
Ms. Pressley. Ms. Pringle, I am sorry, I am going to
reclaim my time because I am losing it here. I apologize.
Ms. Pringle. Go ahead.
Ms. Pressley. Just ``yes'' or ``no.'' Outside of more
police, some have recommended arming teachers, hardening our
schools, and even constructing schools so that they only have
one door. Is this a good idea?
Ms. Pringle. It is turning our schools into prisons. That
is never a good idea.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. This is not an issue of the
architecture of our schools. It is about the foundation of our
country and whether we care about our people, our children more
than guns. Every single life wrought by gun violence matters.
The 87-year-old doing Bible study, the 27-year-old walking down
the street, the seven-year-old learning to read, all had lives
to live and dreams to achieve. Only in America do we consider
arming teachers while failing to pay them a livable wage. Only
in America do survivors have to go and start GoFundMe pages to
afford mental health and trauma supports. Only in America do we
expect survivors who have barely buried their loved ones to
make the case for policymakers to save lives. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady from Ohio, Ms. Brown, is now recognized via
Zoom.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, for holding this
hearing. I would also like to thank the witnesses for coming,
and, in particular, the witnesses on the first panel whose
stories were simply gut-wrenching.
In 2020, guns were the leading cause of death in children.
Out of the 45,000 firearm-related deaths in 2020, more than
4,300 of these were children. Many more have been injured or
traumatized by gun violence. Sitting here, it is hard not to
feel angry that we allow so many children to be killed by guns.
Now, let me be abundantly clear. My job is not to take away
guns. I, myself, am a licensed gun owner. My job is to keep our
communities safe. Our national obsession with guns is killing
thousands of kids each year. Every one of those kids deserve to
grow up and live a full life. We cannot sit idly by and do
nothing as guns are used to kill our children and fellow
Americans.
So, my first question is for Mr. Gramaglia. How does a red
flag law work before you begin?
Mr. Gramaglia. A red flag law is designed that if there is
some sort of a threat that is alleged, a threat to harm
yourself or others, that is brought forward so law enforcement
or another professional can bring that to a court. That is the
due process of a judicial process where a judge will examine
the evidence that was brought forward, will look to see what
the circumstances are, and a judge will make a determination
whether or not a weapon or weapons are to be seized. And that
is for a determinant amount of time, to be reviewed after a set
amount of time where then that individual who had their weapons
taken can come back in again and make a claim to get their
weapons back.
Ms. Brown. Thank you so much. Mr. Suplina, why are we
seeing an increase in child deaths due to guns?
Mr. Suplina. Well, the short answer is that we are not
doing anything. We are seeing an increase in child deaths
because we don't have the laws in place that we have been
discussing this morning and this afternoon. We have not enacted
child access prevention laws at the Federal level that could
protect children both from unintentional access or rather
unauthorized access and child suicide. The reasons go on and
on. And children are dying in homicides in this country, they
are dying by suicide, they are dying by unintentional deaths,
and we have not addressed that. In the states that have, we see
better outcomes, and I want to emphasize that because we gloss
over it so much. In the states that are enacting these laws,
even though their efficacy is lessened by the influx of
firearms from other states, we are seeing lower mortality rates
among children and the general population.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Mr. Jackson for you. We have heard
your testimony today about kids who have been traumatized by
the horrors carried out in Uvalde, in communities that look
like yours and mine. Can you share with us the impacts of gun
violence on child survivors as well as their friends and family
members?
Mr. Jackson. Yes. I mean, what we have to realize is that
they have a lifetime of trauma that they have to live with. And
we know that one of the biggest indicators of whether someone
will become a future victim or even an offender of violence is
had they been exposed to that trauma. And what is most
terrifying for me is in both of these communities and
communities all over the country, we are forgetting about
victims and their trauma. We are not providing the services and
support for them or their families, and there are people in
Buffalo right now that have been abandoned by our government
and just asked to deal with that trauma. So, a huge thing that
we can do now is fight for resources, for community-led
violence intervention and prevention strategies that include
therapeutic and trauma care for those who have been directly
impacted.
Ms. Brown. Thank you so much. I think we have all heard far
too many stories of gun violence. Again, I personally have been
impacted by losing the lives of three young men who were part
of my youth ministry that did not live to see the age of 21.
This has to stop. Enough is enough. We have the tools to make a
difference for families across this country if we can just come
together and find the political will, the compassion, and the
courage, and the capacity to just do it. With that, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlewoman from Missouri, Ms. Bush, is now recognized.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for
convening this hearing.
In St. Louis, we know the devastation and the trauma of
daily gun violence in our community. It is the drumbeat of
violence where 6 people were killed and 14 shot within one
weekend and in one part of our community where the population
is only a little over 300,000, and it is not considered an
anomaly. It is the daily occurrence of trauma and heartbreak in
a community reeling from a Nation who is unwilling to act but
can. So, many people in our community have been directly harmed
by gun violence, and everybody in our community has been
traumatized in some way.
Since the massacre of 19 students and two teachers at Robb
Elementary in Uvalde, Texas, we have heard a lot of stories, a
lot of theories about how best to protect students and how best
to protect teachers. At best, these suggestions are absurd
distractions, and at worst, they will further harm the very
communities in need of our help the most, communities like
mine, communities like Buffalo and Uvalde, Black communities,
Latino communities, AAPI communities, our schools, our
churches, the list goes on. And we need to address the
incidence of gun violence in this country, not with carceral
interventionist solutions, but with a public health approach
that is rooted in prevention.
Mr. Jackson, briefly, what specific strategies has your
organization employed to address the gun violence crisis in
communities of color, just briefly?
Mr. Jackson. Really briefly, victim services and support
for families, hospital-based violence intervention and
prevention strategies, cognitive behavioral therapy programs
like READI Chicago, Advance Peace, that work with those who are
most at risk, creating safe passes for youth as they are coming
home. And that is actually a short list of some of the
evidence-based models that we know can save lives, and we are
fighting for that. You know, cities all over the country are
investing their resources. We know that community leaders all
over the country, thousands of these organizations are fighting
to save lives but yet we are stuck with scraps when it comes to
Federal resources.
Ms. Bush. Evidence-based models that save lives. We need to
pass out the pamphlet on what you are doing. I am a survivor of
gun violence. I have sat with parents who lost their children
to gun violence. I have heard from students who sat next to me
and talked to me about how they lost friends, and they lost
classmates, and they don't cry, they don't even feel anything
anymore, all due to gun violence. Our children want action, but
the strategies that I get to hear too often from my fellow
colleagues, and some on this committee, will call for the
hardening of schools and for placing armed staff and police
officers in academic environments.
And it tears me down because I think about as a child when
we had fire drills and tornado drills, and they taught us, you
know, crouch down and cover your head. And I remember we would
have these routine drills, and I really believed that a tornado
was going to come because they made us do this. I believed that
a fire drill was coming. It can happen because our school is
making us do this, and now they have these shooter these active
shooter drills. What are we doing? I think about my nephew. I
think about my son's safety at school. It is always on my mind,
is this unrelenting concern about not only their physical
safety, but also the emotional toll that they endure through
this run, hide, fight reality every single day.
So, President Pringle, how has the daily reality of
militarized schools and active shooter drills affected our
students in these times of extreme gun violence?
Ms. Pringle. We have seen evidence of increased trauma-
related illnesses, physical illnesses, as well as our students
reporting to us that they are afraid to come to school, that
they don't want to go to a grocery store because the violence
is in the communities, too. We have heard from our teachers
that they are leaving our profession because they don't believe
that they can protect our students, but they are not stopping.
We see our students rising up, don't we? They are demanding
that this country protect them and pass gun laws that are
common sense where most Americans agree we should be passing.
That is what our students are demanding, that is what our
teachers are demanding, and that is what we will continue to
fight for.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. You know, 81 percent of those
convicted on gun possession charges in my community in the
Eastern District of Missouri are Black, and it tears me up when
we talk about saving lives. How do we talk about saving lives
but we arm people to be able to take lives, and we arm them
easily, and we arm them from the standpoint of it is my right.
What about life?
Mr. Jackson, in our efforts to save lives and prevent
further harm, why is it important for lawmakers to consider the
impact of gun control laws and how they affect Black and brown
communities?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady has time has expired.
You may answer the question briefly, Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Because this is life or death for us. You
know, this is now the No. 1 cause of death for Black men and
the No. 2 cause of death for Black women and Latino men. And
while this may be a political topic for Congress, this is life
or death for our communities. You know, I have been nearly shot
five times, despite going to church, like the member said it
before, despite saying the Pledge of Allegiance every day in
school.
Gun violence surrounds us every single day, and we are
dropping like flies, and we don't need more carceral
strategies. What we need are real investments in our
communities, real investments and prevention strategies that we
know work, and we need someone to stand up against the flood of
firearms that are pouring into our communities. Guns don't grow
on trees. We are not creating these guns. They are being
flooded into our communities and the gun industry is profiting
off of our death every single day.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis, is now recognized.
Mr. Davis. Thank you. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman,
and I also want to thank all of our witnesses who have been
here with us for much of the day.
I think it is clear. There is no doubt that we have a gun
violence crisis in our country. Matter of fact, there have been
more mass shootings this year than there have been days in the
year, because there is one almost every day and every time you
pick up the paper or watch television. In addition, there is a
steady drumbeat of gun violence daily. It was an average of 124
people losing their lives to gun violence every day. In 2020,
more than 45,000 people were killed by gun violence, the
highest number in our history. The lives lost by homicide,
suicide, and other gun-related injuries occur hourly, and the
crushing impact of these losses expands exponentially to their
loved ones and their communities.
Given that gun violence is a public health problem, I am
preparing to reintroduce my bill to create a dedicated funding
stream for gun violence prevention. You know, an ounce of
prevention, I was told, is worth much more than a pound of
cure. No comparable developed nation near the number of gun
deaths as we do. To reduce gun violence, we need stable revenue
to research it and combat it.
When we talk of all the aspects of gun violence, I live in
inner-city America with one of the largest populations of low
income people that you find in a city in America. That is the
city of Chicago. We call it the Windy City, and, of course, it
is a city where local elected officials have been making every
effort that they could to reduce gun violence. You cannot
purchase legally a handgun in the city of Chicago, yet handguns
are flowing into our city like water flows into a river, and
that is because we know that no matter how hard we try, we
can't do the job that we need to do unless there is Federal
action--Federal. You can walk across the street into another
area and purchase all the weapons that you want and manage to
sneak them back into Chicago.
When we talk about the trauma of gun violence, mine does
not come from reading the papers or watching it. My grandson
when he was 15 years old, was killed in a little scrap with a
group of kids, and they didn't even really dislike each other.
They had a little group who would swap clothes. ``Let me wear
your gym shoes tomorrow and you wear my jacket.'' ``Let me wear
your hair piece.'' But they got into a little scrap and one of
the young people had a gun, and, of course, another one told
him, ``shoot,'' and he shot. It was the most chilling telephone
call I have ever gotten from a police commander who called in
and said, I think I got some bad news. The trauma of that
experience has wrecked his family. As a matter of fact, shortly
after that, my son, his father, just kind of gave up, passed
away. My granddaughter has been traumatized, and their whole
family is disrupted.
And so if we are going to be real in terms of what we need,
we need Federal gun legislation that limits the number of guns
that exist in our country. There is no reason we can't do that.
We can, we should, and we must. And I thank you, Madam
Chairman, and yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
The gentleman from California, Mr. DeSaulnier, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you so
much for this hearing. Thank you, the panelists, and, in
particular, thank you to the first panelists. For all of those
who have lost family members to gun violence, how this can
continue to happen in this country is extraordinary. It is just
so depressing, and we hear the same arguments every time this
happens, unfortunately.
So now, we have some history. Coming from a state that
coordinates efforts, we are going to have a difference, many of
us are. A state California vote for years, we have worked at
this on evidence-based research on policy that can save lives
and stop these things from happening. So, let's just look at
the numbers. ``If you are in California, we can't stop these
things from happening.'' Again, it is not that we have some
kind of unique wisdom to this, but we have relied on
investments and evidence-based research. And what that shows is
kids are almost 60 percent, statistically, less likely to be
victims of gun violence in California. Adults, all people in
California, are 35 percent less likely, statistically, not less
likely 35 percent, less likely to be victims of gun violence,
25 percent less likely to be involved in a mass murder.
``We couldn't do this.'' The problem in California is that
accepting the fact that these things are going to happen, but
we are trying to do is prevent them as best we can, rather than
just accepting that it is a fait accompli, that somehow this is
going to happen, for whatever their reasons are. And of course,
we have our own suspicions about what motivates people to let
this continue to happen. But one of our problems is 25 percent
of the guns that are used in crime in California come from
outside of California, so we need national standards. We will
continue to do what we can do in jurisdictions that support
evidence-based research that treats this as a public health
epidemic that it is.
So, Mr. Suplina, to this point in the work that you do in
my area, in the Bay Area, we have a long history and we are
doing this again, and we call it is not here. We are just
examining the evidence-based research that you and others at
Gifford CDC does so well at national comparisons and as a
state, but we are trying to bring it to the local level. And if
we have things that were preempted about, we will go to our
elected officials at the Federal, and state, level and the
Court if we have to. And by the way, all these laws have been
in place and they are more stringent than the ones we are
considering, and they are constitutional. The Courts have
decided they are constitutional.
So, in that context, Mr. Suplina, tell us a little bit
about your experience in evidence--based research and the
causality and the outcomes. There are thousands of lives that
have been saved by these policies. What does your work inform
you to that point?
Mr. Suplina. Well, Congressman, precisely that when you
look at all 50 states based on their strength of gun laws and
look at their rate of gun deaths, there is a direct correlation
between strength of gun laws and lower rates of gun deaths. It
is just, you know, statistically correlated, and it is a fact.
And California, which does have some of the best gun laws in
the country, also has some of the lowest rates of gun violence.
Not enough. There is always more to do, but I actually really
appreciate the way you have framed it because we are talking
about a Nation that does have hundreds of millions of firearms
in it. We are going to continue to have incidents of firearm
violence in a Nation that has that many guns, but we can also
do sensible things, as California has been a leader on, to
reduce firearms deaths, and it just bears out in the data. You
can look at it. You cited some of it, and there is more than we
can be doing. I believe the programs that Mr. Jackson has been
referencing throughout the afternoon are a place where, you
know, California has also led, but more can be done.
And I believe that the next level of our intervention here
really has to be with the industry because in California, what
has happened, the industry has innovated around your laws. They
have created ghost guns, which are turning up in crime scenes
at record rates in California more than any other place in the
country. And they are, you know, designing around other laws.
So, it is time to take a look at the industry. I think
California may be ready to do that and doing so will save
lives.
Mr. DeSaulnier. That is why we have to keep stay on it, but
evidence-based research can save lives.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
The gentlelady from the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton,
is now recognized.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Madam Chair, for this valuable
hearing. If you look at the statistics, gun violence turns out
to be a woman's issue, and what do these statistics show?
Nearly 1 million women who are alive today have been shot or
shot at by an intimate partner, and an average of 70 women are
shot and killed each month by an intimate partner. Mr. Jackson,
in your experience, is domestic violence a major factor in gun
violence?
Mr. Jackson. Yes, it is a huge factor, and it is also a
huge reason why we are fighting for people-centered strategies
to research the root causes of such violence and incidents.
Right now there is the Protect Black Women and Girls Act that
were strong proponents to address the 100,000 Black women and
girls who go missing or murdered every single year.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Jackson, I know that you have advocated for
both community violence intervention and supply side efforts to
reduce the number of guns in circulation. How would reducing
the supply of guns reduce domestic violence deaths in
particular?
Mr. Jackson. There have been multiple studies done which I
can supply to the record that have shown the presence of a gun
greatly increases the risk of violence against someone in the
home. And when we think about gun violence and how it is
terrorizing our community and it being the No. 2 cause of death
for Black women, we need to do all we can to address this
violence beyond simple policing strategy.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. Commissioner Gramaglia, in your
experience, do firearms in the home heighten the risk of injury
or death in a domestic dispute?
Mr. Gramaglia. Well, I will say that we don't typically, on
an annual basis, have very many domestic homicides in our
community. But when you have an illegal gun in the home, it
certainly does increase the risk of harm to everybody in the
house.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Suplina, what effort did the coronavirus
pandemic have on gun related domestic violence?
Mr. Suplina. Well, to step back for a second, the presence
of a gun in the home increases the risk of homicide by two
times, risk of suicide by three times, and the risk that a
domestic violence incident will become fatal by five times,
just to lay that out for you. During the COVID-19 and the
response in the lockdowns, we have, you know, real reason to be
concerned that domestic violence increased even while being
underreported. I don't have statistics in front of me on how
domestic gun violence increased during that time period, but we
know that it is a, you know, tragic form of gun violence that
we often really do not hear about. In fact, many mass
shootings, both ones you have heard about and ones you haven't
heard about, start with an act of domestic violence either
earlier in time or directly in relation to the incident as we
have recently seen.
Ms. Norton. And, Mr. Suplina, currently Federal law
prohibits spouses with a history of domestic abuse from
possessing a gun, but the so-called boyfriend loophole allows
abusive dating partners, like abusive boyfriends and
girlfriends, to have access. Could you explain how this
boyfriend loophole works and what we could do about it?
Mr. Suplina. Well, what we have to do about it is close it.
There is really no reason why in 2022 we shouldn't give
protection where there are incidents of domestic violence, that
we shouldn't also remove firearms, where, you know, a couple is
not in a married relationship. So, there are efforts, as you
know, in the House to close that loophole, and doing so would
be very effective at reducing domestic violence deaths.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
I ask unanimous consent that Representative Sheila Jackson
Lee be allowed to participate.
Without objection, so ordered.
The gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is now
recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Madam Chair, I thank you, and the
chairman, and all members for their generosity in yielding to
me at this time. I wanted to be very sure to be in this
committee meeting today. I have just come off the floor of the
House. We are now debating the Protect Our Kids Act. I want to
acknowledge Zeneta Everhart, Dr. Guerrero, Miah, Felix and
Kimberly Rubio, and the previous witness, Ms. Hughes. To the
witnesses that are here, I want to acknowledge you and as well,
to acknowledge Mayor Adams for his presence here.
My time is short. And so, I will be asking very pointed
questions. To Mr. Suplina, I hope I pronounced it correctly,
you said 2021 was the deadliest year. We are now close to that
in 2022. ``Yes'' or ``no?''
Mr. Suplina. We are on pace, correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The bill that I have introduced, the
Kimberly Vaughan Safe Storage Act, among others that are in the
Protect Our Kids Act, which I will comment on specifically,
deals with the requirement of point of sale for storage
devices. In the instance of Kimberly Vaughan, the son stole a
gun from an unlocked, unsafe area, which I think goes to
suicides and other uses of homicide. Is a safe storage issue an
important issue as it relates to bringing down gun violence?
Mr. Suplina. It is such an important issue, Congresswoman.
It is important for safety in the home. It is important to
keep, you know, young kids away from firearms. It is important
to reduce youth suicide. It is important to reduce school
shootings because guns often start in the home and are accessed
when they are not safely secured. There is just no overstating
the importance of child access protection laws and other secure
storage laws, as well as all programs that really encourage
responsible gun store.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Mr. Jackson, let me express my
concern, but also your heroic recovery should be touted and
recognized. You had very important statistics. The No. 1 killer
of African-American men, premature death, is by guns, second
for Latinos, and second for Black women. You also have already
mentioned the cycle of violence. How much of a disparity and
impact in our minority communities is this gun usage, and gun
victimization, and gun death? I have two other persons I want
to raise a question with, so bear with me as you make a very
brief answer to that, and I thank you and salute your recovery.
Mr. Jackson. No, thank you, and I will be very brief. But
we have seen the largest increase in homicides since the start
of the pandemic in the Black community, a 39-percent increase,
as well as it already being 80 percent of homicides coming from
Black and brown communities. And we are in a world now where a
Black man is at a greater risk of being shot and killed than a
police officer, and that shouldn't be a reality for anyone.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So, protecting our kids, dealing with the
prohibitive magazines, raising the age limit, getting rid of
ghost guns, because I have seen some of the folk on the street
with the ghost guns, stopping trafficking, which, you know,
they want to tout a city like Chicago, gun violence, but all
the states around them have no laws. Would all that be part of
helping to bring down the carnage?
Mr. Jackson. That will be a huge help, and we need that
comprehensive strategy to be applied everywhere. You know, we
saw with every other health crisis that we didn't just say, oh,
let's work on this one community. How do we make our entire
country safer? And that is what we expect to see here.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Commissioner, I believe in the
Constitution, and in the Constitution is a Bill of Rights, and
the Second Amendment is there. I, as a member of the Judiciary
Committee, have no reason, no intent to take away the Second
Amendment rights. You have guns. You hunt. You are a
responsible gun owner. Speak to me, and I have got one other
person, so I guess I am going to be in trouble, about the fact
on the assault weapons ban. There are more weapons in that
potential bill that are allowed, automatic weapons, than those
who are not. So, can you speak to the fairness of an assault
weapons ban and a potential seven-day waiting period?
Mr. Gramaglia. An assault weapon ban, to me, is a no
brainer. Those weapons are made for one thing, and that is to
kill people, and it is to kill a lot of people at one time. It
is, you know, seeing the damage caused by them and I just can't
see any other purpose from it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would a seven-day waiting period help as
well on automatic weapons?
Mr. Gramaglia. It is a start. If that weapon has not
banned, it prevents someone from getting something right away.
Ms. Jackson Lee. May I, to Ms. Pringle, indicate in the
state of Texas, we have been waving that the solution has been
``arm teachers.'' Can you give me a sense of arming the
teachers, those precious teachers that was shot and died, and
then, the ones that was shot and lived, can you----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired, but
Ms. Pringle can answer briefly.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I appreciate it. Thank you so very much.
Ms. Pringle. Putting the responsibility on teachers to
carry guns to protect our students is not only irrational. It
is unfair, and we know what we need in this country, and you
just described it. It is that comprehensive, commonsense gun
laws, all of them working in collaboration, not arming
teachers, and putting that responsibility on them and causing
more harm and damage to the people who have dedicated their
lives to educating American students. That is not OK. We know
what we need to do. We need to do it now.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the chairwoman and the ranking
member. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the witnesses.
Chairwoman Maloney. Before we close, I want to thank all of
our panelists for incredible and meaningful testimony. It is
tremendously important for Congress's work. I want to thank
each and every one of you for your time, your knowledge, your
commitment. Before we close, I want to offer the ranking member
an opportunity to offer any closing remarks he may have.
Ranking member Comer, you are now recognized.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and, again, I thank the
witnesses for being here. This was a meaningful conversation,
discussion. That is what this committee is supposed to do, and
I appreciate the opportunity, Madam Chair, and again, thank you
for your time.
When we look at this issue, like any issue in Congress, we
need to focus on where we can have compromise because obviously
the two parties have very differing ideologies, not just on the
Second Amendment, but just about every major issue in America.
But there is consensus to protect our school children. We all
want that. I have three kids in the public schools. My mom was
a public school teacher. I think when you look at the areas
where there is consensus to act now, do something now, they are
to harden our schools, to invest in better infrastructure.
We had a school shooting in Marshall County, Kentucky a few
years ago, and there was overwhelming support, bipartisan
support to harden those schools. You have to go through two
doors now in just about every schools in the state--elementary,
middle, and high school--to be buzzed in through those doors to
go in. We need to invest in more school resource officers, and
we need to better train those school resource officers. I think
we saw that in Uvalde. The officer there obviously wasn't
trained very well in that situation.
Another idea that I think is common sense where there is
compromise is something my friend, Ro Khanna, mentioned with
respect to social media companies. We need to have some type of
alert with the social media companies. Anytime a user posts
anything about school violence, somehow that needs to get to
the hands of the authority. Somehow we need to have some type
of communication between the school resource officers, law
enforcement, whomever, and the social media companies. That is
a responsibility of the social media companies, in my opinion,
that they could do better on.
We need to stop the Defund the Police movement, and that
has been an effort by some of our friends on the left. That has
been an utter failure. Crime is on the increase in every year,
all types of crime. We need to stop that. And last, we need to
ensure that we have prosecutors who are tough on crime because
that has been a problem in the name of COVID and everything
else with so many criminals that have been let out early
release. It is just not working. We are seeing that in the
data, especially in the inner city. So, I think there are areas
where we can come together and compromise, and I hope that we
can work together in a bipartisan way to better protect our
public school children.
Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Today, we heard firsthand
accounts of the devastation that gun violence epidemic inflicts
on American communities and families. To our witnesses who
shared their personal stories of pain and loss, thank you for
your bravery. We also heard from a local government leader from
a gun safety advocate, a community activist, from an educator,
and from a law enforcement officer. They spoke with one voice
calling on Congress to end this epidemic of gun violence.
Let me emphasize that our Nation's police, the men and
women sworn to protect our communities, are pleading with
Congress to pass meaningful gun safety laws. And I am proud to
say that today the House of Representatives heard their call
and is approving commonsense gun safety legislation supported
by a strong majority of Americans. This is an important first
step toward protecting our children, and I hope that the Senate
will pass this legislation without delay. But the fight does
not end here. The gun lobby still has a powerful hold over many
of my Republican colleagues, and they are opposing simple steps
to save lives, like banning assault weapons, simply because it
might hurt the industry's bottom line. It is time to hold this
industry accountable for the suffering and death that it has
caused, including the death of Lexi Rubio, her teachers, and
classmates.
Two weeks ago, I wrote to the Nation's largest gun makers,
including those who sold the assault rifles used in the
massacres in Buffalo and Texas. We wanted to get to the bottom
of how much these companies are profiting from selling weapons
of war and how they are marketing these weapons to civilians.
Over the last few days, the committee has received information
from these companies that is troubling. It is clear they are
reaping enormous profits from assault weapons that are used in
mass shootings of innocent people. This hearing is not the end
of our investigation. In the coming days, we will continue to
gather information and issue findings. I also intend to hold a
second hearing to hear directly from the gun industry so they
can explain to the American people why they continue to sell
the weapons of choice for mass murderers.
The fight to protect our children from gun violence is far
from over, but based on the bravery and determination our
witnesses displayed today, I am confident it is a fight we can
and will win.
Again, I thank you all for your commitment, for your time,
for your testimony today. I yield back.
Oops. Before I close, I want to thank, again, everyone and
I commend all my colleagues.
And with that, without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit extraneous
materials and to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses to the chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses for their response. I ask our witnesses to please
respond as promptly as you are able.
Chairwoman Maloney. And with that, this meeting is
adjourned, and we are going to the floor to vote for gun
safety.
[Whereupon, at 4:10 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
