- MCKINSEY & COMPANY'S CONDUCT AND CONFLICTS AT THE HEART OF THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MCKINSEY & COMPANY'S CONDUCT AND
CONFLICTS AT THE HEART OF THE
OPIOID EPIDEMIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 27, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-79

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-526 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Vacancy
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Richard Trumka, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 27, 2022...................................     1

Witnesses

Mr. Bob Sternfels, Global Managing Partner, McKinsey & Company
Oral Statement...............................................     6

The Honorable Maura Healey, Attorney General, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, in Joint Testimony with Ms. Gillian Feiner,
Senior Enforcement Counsel, Massachusetts Attorney General's
Office
Oral Statement...............................................     8

Mr. Uttam Dhillons, Chair, Regulatory Defense, Compliance & White
Collar Practice Group, Michael Best & Friedrich LLP
Oral Statement...............................................    10

Professor Jessica Tillipman, Assistant Dean for Government
Procurement Law Studies, George Washington University Law
School
Oral Statement...............................................    11

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

No additional documents were submitted for this hearing.

MCKINSEY & COMPANY'S CONDUCT AND
CONFLICTS AT THE HEART OF THE
OPIOID EPIDEMIC

----------

Wednesday, April 27, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom; Hon.
Carolyn B. Maloney [chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Connolly,
Krishnamoorthi, Khanna, Mfume, Tlaib, Porter, Bush, Davis,
Welch, Johnson, Kelly, DeSaulnier, Pressley, Comer, Jordan,
Foxx, Grothman, Cloud, Higgins, Norman, Keller, LaTurner,
Fallon, Herrell, and Donalds.
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time. I now recognize myself for
an opening statement.
Good morning and thank all of you for coming. Today, we are
holding the third hearing that I have convened as chair on our
Nation's deadly opioid epidemic.
My goal is simple, to promote accountability and seek
justice for the millions of families whose lives have been
ravaged by this epidemic and to protect Americans from
suffering from more harm.
Our committee has examined the role of Purdue Pharma, which
got millions of Americans hooked on the pain killer Oxycontin
despite knowing it was highly addictive. We have also
investigated the role of the Sackler family, which made
billions of dollars fueling a public health crisis that has
killed half a million people in our country and counting.
Today's hearing focuses on another key driver of the
epidemic that operated behind the scenes, the consulting firm
McKinsey and Company. For nearly 15 years, McKinsey secretly
designed strategies for companies like Purdue to boost sales of
addictive painkillers, paving the way for an explosion of drug
abuse and overdoses across the country.
Documents show that McKinsey created a roadmap for these
drug companies to, quote, ``turbo charge'', end quote, opioid
sales. Some of the advice McKinsey provided is absolutely
shocking beyond belief.
In 2017, after the opioid epidemic had been declared a
public health emergency, McKinsey recommended that Purdue offer
pharmacy benefit managers a rebate of thousands of dollars for
each overdose caused by the opioid pills.
McKinsey's goals, it seems, was to make sure that mounting
concerns about overdoses did not slow down sales. Apparently,
this advice was too shocking even for Purdue to accept. Thanks
to the tireless work of state attorneys general, we have
finally begun to expose McKinsey's secret role in this health
crisis.
I am deeply grateful for the participation today of
Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey, who has been
leading the fight for accountability from Purdue, the Sacklers,
and McKinsey.
Our committee launched our own investigation into McKinsey
more than five months ago. We have learned that at the same
time McKinsey was providing secret advice to Purdue to boost
opioid sales the firm was also consulting for the Food and Drug
Administration, which oversees the opioid industry. In other
words, McKinsey was advising both the fox and the henhouse and
getting paid by both.
The committee recently released a staff report showing that
at least 22 McKinsey consultants work for both the FDA and
opioid companies, often at the very same time.
Now, McKinsey has defended this conduct claiming that the
firm did not work for the FDA on specific opioid regulation or
approvals. But the truth is there was obvious connections
between McKinsey's work for FDA and for opioid companies.
For example, in 2009, McKinsey advised opioid companies to
quote, ``band together'', end quote, to, quote, ``defend
against strict treatment by the FDA,'' end quote.
Then, in 2011, McKinsey began working for the very FDA
offices overseeing the opioid industry. The assignment was set
to, quote, ``strategic goals and objectives and to improve drug
safety and address adverse health impacts.'' Clearly, McKinsey
should not be setting strategy for both drug companies and the
FDA.
Since 2008, McKinsey has collected $140 million from the
FDA. Just yesterday the FDA announced at a Senate hearing that
it has stopped issuing contracts to McKinsey while
investigations into its conduct are ongoing. Documents
uncovered by the committee also paint a damning picture of how
McKinsey used its Federal connections to advance its private
sector business interests.
In a sales pitch to Purdue's CEO, McKinsey bragged about,
quote, ``who we know and what we know, including the FDA.'' In
2018, the firm sent a private memo to--they sent a private memo
to President Trump's Secretary of Health and Human Services,
Alex Azar. The memo was edited by consultants working for
Purdue with one consultant urging that the memo should
emphasize the, quote, ``important societal benefit'' end quote,
of opioids. McKinsey's conflict of interests was undeniable,
they were long lasting, and they were detrimental to public
health.
Today, our committee will reveal new documents that raise
even more questions about McKinsey's role in the opioid crisis.
These documents show that the firm recommended a, quote, ``cash
prize'', end quote, and other perks to boost opioid sales, and
urged companies to target communities that were already hard
hit by opioids.
McKinsey's conflicts and conduct are among the worst I have
seen in my years in government. McKinsey has apologized for
some of its conduct but it continues to deny its conflicts of
interest, raising doubts about whether it has really learned
from its mistakes.
McKinsey also continues to withhold key information from
this committee, including client lists and staffing information
that could reveal the extent of the company's role in the
opioid crisis and problems in other areas.
Today we will hear from McKinsey's managing partner, Bob
Sternfels, and I hope we will get some answers about his
company's practices. Today, I am also introducing legislation
to ensure that we have stronger guardrails on conflicts in the
future.
I want to thank Senator Peters, in partnership with Senator
Grassley, for their leadership in developing this bipartisan
legislation. We can no longer tolerate it when companies and
Federal contractors put their profits over the health and
safety of the American people.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr.
Comer, for an opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I want to thank our
witnesses who are here today.
The opioid epidemic has caused untold harm to millions of
Americans, and in my district in rural Kentucky, thousands of
my constituents have lost friends and loved ones to this
devastating crisis.
But today's hearing is not about how to end the opioid
epidemic. If it were, we would have officials from the Biden
administration here testifying. President Biden has been in
office for over a year.
Yet, we have not had any cabinet level officials here to
testify about the many crises affecting America today. Zero
Biden cabinet officials before the Oversight Committee.
Instead, the majority has allowed other committees to
conduct the oversight this committee should be doing. This week
alone House committees will hold 14 different hearings with
cabinet secretaries and four more with agency heads. Today, the
Energy and Commerce Committee will hold a hearing with the
Secretary of Health and Human Services, Xavier Becerra.
This committee should have him here to explain why a
teacher's union was allowed rewrite the CDC's school reopening
guidance to effectively keep thousands of schools shuttered.
A career CDC official told us this level of coordination
was uncommon, contradicting Dr. Walensky's assertion it was
customary. And while he is at it, let us talk about the CDC's
jumbled guidance on all things COVID because CDC continues to
push for COVID mandates on Americans but seeks to end public
health expulsions for illegal immigrants crossing the southern
border--Title 42.
Tomorrow, Secretary of State Antony Blinken will testify
before the House Appropriations and the House Foreign Affairs
Committees. This committee should have him here to testify
about the war in Ukraine, the botched withdrawal from
Afghanistan, and the failures of the Afghani refugee program.
We have a question--Republicans.
How many Afghanis are over here? We can't get an accounting
of that. I know this. It is significantly more than we were
told were going to come to the United states. That is why
committee Republicans have already requested that Secretary
Blinken come testify.
Also tomorrow the Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm
will testify before the Energy and Commerce Committee and the
House Appropriations Committee. This committee should be where
the Secretary of Energy comes to testify about rising gas
prices and this administration's war on domestic energy
production.
That is why committee Republicans have already requested
that she come to testify before the House Oversight Committee.
Today and tomorrow Secretary of Homeland Security Mayorkas will
testify before the House Judiciary Committee, House Homeland
Security Committee, and the House Appropriations Committee.
I said earlier in today's hearing it is not about the
opioid crisis. If it were then Secretary Mayorkas should come
here to testify about the crisis at the southern border, a
crisis that is directly fueling this drug epidemic.
Republicans on the House Oversight Committee just returned
from our second trip to the border and all we heard was about
all the fentanyl and crystal meth pouring across the southern
border.
We need Secretary Mayorkas here in the Oversight Committee
to answer our questions. That is why Republicans on this
committee have requested that he come testify. But Democrats
and Chairwoman Maloney continue to ignore these requests.
Democrats aren't interested in fact finding. They want the
public to believe the opioid crisis is still driven by over
prescribing. It is not.
It is driven by the thousands of pounds of fentanyl and
other illicit opioids pouring across our southern border every
single day because of President Biden's open border policy.
Decreasing funding at the border, halting border wall
construction, and allowing illegal immigrants to make a mockery
of our immigration laws have made it easy for cartels to
smuggle the drugs that are killing people in neighborhoods all
over the country.
Last year alone over 100,000 Americans died of opioid
overdoses, most of which were caused by illicit opioids that
came across our southern border. Yet, this administration does
everything in its ability to encourage an open border.
Madam Chair, this is the Oversight Committee. But this
committee under Democrat leadership isn't conducting oversight.
In fact, a nonpartisan group gave the Oversight Committee a
failing grade on oversight.
Cabinet secretaries are finally coming to the Hill. But
they are not coming to the Oversight Committee. Democrats'
refusal to take seriously the core responsibility of this
committee is damaging our institutional credibility.
Who needs an oversight committee that does no oversight?
Come next January things are going to change if Americans
entrust Republicans with a majority. We will hold the Biden
administration accountable on behalf of the American people.
We will seek to root out waste, fraud, abuse, and
mismanagement in the Federal Government and Americans will get
answers to the issues that matter most to them--why their
grocery bills are so high, why it costs so much to fill up
their gas tank, why prices for everything are so high, why this
administration was focused on keeping children out of school
instead of searching for ways to get them back in the
classroom, why their communities are overrun with illegal
aliens, why our children are struggling and teens turning to
illicit drugs laced with fentanyl coming from our open border.
Next Congress when Republicans take back the House we will
conduct robust oversight of this administration and find
answers to these and many, many more questions.
Republicans are ready to deliver credible oversight that
produces real results. Americans deserve no less from their
Congress and no less from the House Oversight Committee.
Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
Let me briefly say that this should not be a partisan issue
because opioid abuse affects all Americans. All of us have
people in our district that have died from overdoses, and the
recent spike in overdose deaths began under the previous
administration.
The Biden administration has surged efforts to address this
crisis. The Department of Homeland Security seized more than
14,000 pounds of fentanyl last year and just yesterday released
a new plan to further enhance border security.
The Homeland Security has Secretary Mayorkas testifying
today. If you want to go to that hearing and discuss that, then
go right ahead and do that. But today we are looking at,
really, the second cause of death in America. It is preceded
only by COVID.
For a long time we had more deaths from overdoses, and you
will see that there were practices where they were giving
rebates. Pay them more. Pay them more if you kill more people.
I always try to find a bill to answer problems. What do you
do, put a bill in don't kill people? It is outrageous what they
have done. It is serious. It needs to be looked at. The
conflict of interest has to be looked at and it has to stop.
Now, I ask unanimous consent to put a listing of the 26
hearings that we have had in this committee, many of them with
people that are in the administration, and on many issues that
are important.
Chairwoman Maloney. But nothing is more than hope important
than the health of the American people and opioids is causing
too many deaths. It is addictive. They said it wasn't addictive
when it was addictive. It is a serious health problem. It needs
to be addressed, and I hope we will focus on the issue before
us.
Now we need to move on and I would like to introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness today is Bob Sternfels, who is the
global managing partner with McKinsey and Company, and I now
will recognize Ms. Pressley to introduce our next witness, AG
Healey. She will recognize AG Healey and we thank her so much
for coming.
Ms. Pressley?
Ms. Pressley. Good morning. Thank you, Madam Chair. It is
really my distinct privilege to introduce Maura Healey, the
attorney general for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
As the people's lawyer, General Healey has been a national
leader in efforts to confront the opioid public health crisis,
which has decimated communities and families in the
Massachusetts Seventh and throughout the country.
She has been a champion for families and communities
targeted, victimized, and traumatized by the corrupt and
malicious actors that have profited from the opioid epidemic.
Most notably, Attorney General Healey created a first of
its kind, a restorative justice-focused opioid recovery and
remediation fund that takes the ill-gained profits from
companies like McKinsey and uses them to expand access to
opioid use disorder prevention, intervention, treatment, and
recovery options.
Attorney General Healey, I applaud your leadership. I thank
you for your many years of friendship and steadfast
partnership, and I welcome you back to the House Committee on
Oversight and Reform.
Ms. Healey. Many thanks to you, Congresswoman Pressley, for
your work on behalf of so many families devastated by this
opioid epidemic and crisis.
To Chairwoman Maloney, Representative Comer, members of the
committee, thank you for holding this important hearing.
Chairwoman Maloney. AG Healey, we are introducing all of
the people and then we are coming back to you, very briefly.
But, unfortunately, AG Healey has a hard stop at 11
o'clock, but when she leaves she will be replaced on the panel
by Gillian Feiner, who is a senior enforcement counsel in the
Massachusetts AG office.
Next we will hear from Uttam Dhillon, who is the chair of
the Regulatory Defense Compliance and White Collar Practice
Group at Michael Best & Friedrich. Finally, we will hear from
Jessica Tillipman, who is the assistant dean for government
procurement law studies at George Washington University Law
School.
The witnesses will be unmuted so we can swear them in.
Please raise your right hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
[Witnesses are sworn.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you. And without objection,
your written statements will be made part of the record.
With that, Mr. Sternfels, you are now recognized for your
testimony, and you will be followed by Attorney General Healey.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF BOB STERNFELS, GLOBAL MANAGING PARTNER, MCKINSEY
AND COMPANY

Mr. Sternfels. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
be here today to discuss our history, policies, and approach to
client service.
McKinsey is one of the world's leading providers of
business and organizational consulting services serving the
largest and most significant American and multinational
companies, institutions, foundations, and not for profit
entities.
We were founded in Chicago in 1926, and today we encompass
more than 38,000 employees globally with more than 12,000
employees in the United States. We are currently serving more
than 3,000 clients and nearly half our revenues come from
clients headquartered in the United States.
Our work is deeply rooted in American values, including the
principles of economic growth and mobility, business
innovation, sustainability, community development, and the rule
of law.
Our approach to client service is centered on evidence-
based empirical research, fact-based problem solving, rigorous
data gathering, and deep economic analysis. Our consulting
services often require us to work with the clients' most
sensitive, confidential, and competitively important
information.
The protection of this information entrusted to us is,
therefore, a fundamental value at McKinsey and the backbone of
our policies on conflict of interest. This is why we have a
comprehensive set of policies and procedures designed to
maintain client confidences, protect client data, and avoid
[technical issue].
We have also adopted practical guardrails that are
important to us and our clients, including long-standing
restrictions on staffing projects where confidential
information from one client could be used against another
client.
These policies and procedures are core to who we are as a
firm, and when we serve the U.S. Government we take additional
measures to ensure compliance and accountability. We have a
separate legal entity with dedicated physical space and
technology, and additional policies also apply, including our
organizational conflicts of interest policy, which follows the
requirements the of Federal Acquisition Regulation.
We also recognize that we must continue to evolve and
strengthen our approach to governance and client service. As
part of our own continuous improvement, in 2019, we launched a
more rigorous framework and set of criteria to determine which
clients we serve and on which topics.
It is by far the most comprehensive and complete client
service framework in our industry today. We have substantially
increased our internal resources in the area of risk, legal,
and compliance. In the last four years alone, our investment
and professional staff compliance training, technology, and
related activities have topped $600 million.
I would now like to turn to the committee's recent staff
report about McKinsey's work for Purdue Pharma and the FDA.
Most importantly, McKinsey did not--did not serve both the FDA
and Purdue on opioid-related matters.
As both McKinsey and the FDA have made clear, our work for
the FDA focused on administrative and operational topics,
including improvements to organization structure, business
processes, and technology.
In response to congressional questions, the FDA have been
equally clear. McKinsey did not consult about any specific drug
product or product class, and none of our contracts with the
FDA are related to opioids.
The staff report has additional flaws. It looked at a time
period of the work without examining the nature of the work. It
implied incorrect conflict standards and it took large
speculative leaps to reach unwarranted findings.
As one example, the staff report incorrectly said McKinsey
shared confidential FDA information with its private sector
clients. In fact, the referenced content was publicly published
by the FDA more than eight months earlier.
Madam Chairman, we fully recognize--fully recognize the
terrible consequences of the opioid epidemic. We have
acknowledged our role in serving opioid manufacturers and we
apologize for that work.
We have been committed to being part of the solution,
including funding and a settlement that provides more than $575
million to prevention, treatment, and recovery efforts. We are
committed to continuing to provide service that are consistent
with our values and guided by our strong policies on client
service and conflict of interest.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer questions today.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Attorney General Healey, you are now recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF MAURA HEALEY, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF MASSACHUSETTS

Ms. Healey. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney.
Chairwoman, Representative Comer, members of the committee,
thank you for convening this important hearing. I am grateful
to be here today on behalf of the people of Massachusetts, and
I am here to explain to you why my team investigated McKinsey
for its role in the opioid crisis, what we uncovered, and what
we did about it.
I am here today because of the families who have been so
hurt by this opioid crisis, thousands of people in our state,
hundreds of thousands across this country, who today need
access to treatment and recovery and harm reduction, parents
who have lost their children, grandparents who are raising
their grandchildren.
When I became attorney general, I promised that I would
uncover what caused this crisis. I would hold the perpetrators
accountable and make sure that nothing like this ever happens
again.
In March 2015, I opened my investigation into Purdue and
the Sackler family, and that investigation led to further
investigations, including our investigation of McKinsey and its
role in fueling this opioid crisis.
As attorney general, I follow the facts. I follow the law.
We are prosecutors. We are investigators. We subpoenaed
documents, we uncovered information, and here is what we
learned about McKinsey. Through millions of confidential
documents from Purdue Pharma, from the Sacklers, and from
McKinsey, this is what we learned. We learned how McKinsey
worked directly with Purdue and the Sacklers to turbo charge
Oxycontin sales exactly at the time when people in
Massachusetts were overdosing and dying.
We learned that McKinsey consultants worked directly with
the Sackler billionaires who controlled Purdue. We found that
McKinsey told the Sacklers to target the most dangerous
prescribers who put the patients on opioids at the most highest
levels and at the highest doses for the longest periods of
time.
We found that McKinsey coached Purdue to band together with
other opioid companies to defend against strict treatment by
the FDA. We found that at the same time that McKinsey was
working for Purdue the same McKinsey consultants were, in fact,
also working for the FDA.
McKinsey went so far as to brag about this. They wrote to
Purdue's CEO that Purdue should hire McKinsey because of,
quote, ``who we know,'' close quote, including, specifically,
because McKinsey worked for the FDA.
We found that McKinsey did not want the world to know what
it was doing. When I sued the Sacklers, McKinsey consultants
read about my investigation and lawsuit and actually planned to
delete their documents and emails. They wrote that they were
going to destroy the evidence because, quote, ``someone might
turn to us,'' close quote.
I wasn't about to let them get away with that. I worked
with attorneys generals from both parties to secure a national
resolution that made McKinsey pay for its misconduct, forced
McKinsey to change its practices, and required McKinsey to turn
over its documents to the public for all to see.
I want to thank Colorado Attorney General Phil Weiser and
many other colleagues for working with me to hold McKinsey
accountable. I submitted for the record the court order that
requires McKinsey to pay and change its ways.
First, we required McKinsey to pay more than $500 million
to address the opioid crisis nationwide. In Massachusetts,
every dollar that we recovered is going to treatment,
prevention, and harm reduction through a trust fund that is
overseen by public health experts, by families who have
experienced substance use disorder, and by representatives from
Massachusetts' cities and towns.
Second, we banned McKinsey from the opioid business
forever.
Third, if McKinsey ever tries to do business with any
state, county, or city anywhere in America, we require that
McKinsey must disclose its conflicts of interest in writing.
Fourth, to make sure that McKinsey never tries to destroy
evidence again, we required McKinsey to preserve for five years
every email and instant message by any of its employees working
on any matter anywhere in the world.
And fifth, we required that the documents we uncovered from
McKinsey's own files will be published on the internet so that
families who are hurt and everyone else can see the evidence
for themselves.
I applaud Chairwoman Maloney and this committee and your
staff for taking on this important matter. The report that you
released this month and the hearing that you are holding today
will help expose dangerous misconduct.
On behalf of the people of Massachusetts, I thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you for your leadership and thank
you for your testimony.
Mr. Dhillon, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF UTTAM DHILLON, CHAIR, REGULATORY DEFENSE,
COMPLIANCE AND WHITE COLLAR PRACTICE GROUP, MICHAEL BEST &
FRIEDRICH, LLP

Mr. Dhillon. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, and
distinguished members of the Committee on Oversight and Reform,
thank you for inviting me to testify today.
In 1997, I joined the House Government Reform and Oversight
Committee as a senior investigative counsel, the first of
several positions I have been fortunate to hold on the Hill.
So, I am very pleased to return to this hearing room to serve
as a witness at today's hearing.
I began learning about drug enforcement in the 1990's when
I served as an assistant United States Attorney in the Central
District of California, prosecuting drug traffickers and gang
members, often one and the same.
During the second Bush Administration, I was nominated by
the President and unanimously confirmed by the Senate as the
first director of the Office of Counter Narcotics Enforcement
at the Department of Homeland Security, a drug policy office
responsible for working with DHS' counter narcotics agencies.
And more recently, I had the honor and the privilege to
lead the brave professionals of the Drug Enforcement
Administration and to serve as the director of Interpol
Washington.
Today, the United States is experiencing the third wave of
the opioid crisis. The first wave began with a flood of
prescription opioids.
Increased pricing and better regulation led to a cheaper,
more powerful alternative to prescription opioids--heroin--
starting the second wave. The source of the second wave was
predominantly Mexican drug cartels who poured cheap heroin into
the U.S., resulting in increased heroin seizures along the
Southwest border and a dramatic rise in overdose deaths.
Today, we are in the third wave of the opioid crisis,
distinguished by the introduction of synthetic opioids such as
fentanyl into the illicit U.S. drug market. This third wave is
driven, largely, by the Mexican drug cartels and China's
willingness to sell fentanyl and fentanyl precursors to those
cartels.
Synthetic opioids such as fentanyl are easy to produce,
easy to conceal, and more lucrative than other drugs. Unlike
illicit drugs such as cocaine and heroin, drug traffickers do
not need to control large areas of land to grow coca or opium,
the plants from which cocaine and heroin are derived, nor are
they subject to natural forces like droughts or blight.
The barriers for entry into this synthetic drug market are
relatively low. All you need is a base understanding of
chemistry--a basic understanding of chemistry, access to the
right chemicals, and a distribution network.
Mexican drug cartels possess these three operating
requirements and their pivot into synthetic opioids was as
deadly as it was swift.
Last year, largely, as a result of illicit drugs smuggled
into the U.S. across our Southwest border, over 100,000
Americans died from a drug overdose with more than 70 percent
dying from synthetic opioids such as fentanyl.
That is an increase of 30 percent from the previous year.
Add to that the countless number of Americans suffering from
substance addiction and this crisis touches virtually every
American.
DEA's most recent National Drug Threat Assessment issued in
March of last year describes the Mexican drug cartels, also
known as transnational criminal organizations due to the global
nature of their criminal activity, as, quote, ``the greatest
drug trafficking threat to the United States,'' close quote.
These organizations, most notably the Sinaloa Cartel, and
the Cartel de Jalisco Nueva Generacion, more commonly known as
CJNG, are large, well-funded, and exceedingly violent.
They operate with relative impunity in Mexico and are
responsible for tens of thousands of murders and disappearances
in that country, and the cartels are taking advantage of our
unsecured Southwest border by flooding our communities with
fentanyl, methamphetamine, cocaine, and heroin, and they show
no signs of abating.
To make matters even worse, since late 2020, the
relationship between U.S. and Mexican law enforcement has
deteriorated significantly. Last year, Mexico's government
enacted strict regulations curtailing foreign law enforcement
in Mexico by essentially requiring DEA to tell Mexican
authorities about its operations and activities in Mexico.
Given the massive corruption in Mexico, this was the
equivalent of requiring DEA to communicate its intelligence and
law enforcement strategies directly to the drug traffickers.
And just last week, it was reported that one year ago
Mexico disbanded a select anti-narcotics unit known as the
Sensitive Investigative Unit that DEA had been working with for
more than two decades.
These actions by the Mexican government are devastating
blows to DEA's ability to fight transnational organized crime
in Mexico. Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador's
anti-law enforcement tactics are making it very difficult for
U.S. law enforcement to effectively fight and defeat the drug
traffickers, largely, responsible for the illicit drugs driving
America's overdose crisis.
The unfortunate result of all of this is that without
immediate action to secure the Southwest border and reestablish
an effective working relationship between U.S. and Mexican law
enforcement, Mexican drug trafficking organizations will
continue to grow stronger in the foreseeable future and we can
expect to see increasing amounts of illicit drugs entering our
country, poisoning our communities, and killing even more of
our fellow citizens.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and I look
forward to answering the committee's questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Professor Tillipman, you are now recognized for your
testimony.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA TILLIPMAN, ASSISTANT DEAN FOR GOVERNMENT
PROCUREMENT LAW STUDIES, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY LAW
SCHOOL

Ms. Tillipman. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
and the members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to
testify in this legislative hearing. I am Jessica Tillipman,
the assistant dean for government procurement law studies at
the George Washington University Law School.
In addition to leading the law school's government
procurement law program, I teach our anti-corruption and
compliance course. The interim majority staff report provides
the compelling case study in how conflicts and compliance
issues significantly undermine the public's confidence in our
procurement system and the contractors that provide the U.S.
Government with critical goods and services.
The U.S. Government procurement system aspires to obtain
the best goods and services from the best firms at the best
prices. To attain these goals and ensure taxpayer dollars are
appropriately safeguarded, the Federal acquisition, or FAR,
makes clear that the government procurement process demands the
highest commitment to ethical and unbiased conduct.
To maintain integrity in the system, entities that do
business with the government are subject to a patchwork of
requirements, restrictions, and compliance obligations.
The House report presents two important questions. First,
whether the FAR's current organizational conflict of interest,
or OCI framework, adequately addresses potential conflicts
between a contractor's public sector and private sector work,
and if not, what legislative changes could help avoid potential
conflicts of this nature in the future?
With respect to the first question, any objective observer
with a basic understanding of the FAR and access to Google
would conclude that existing OCI regulations most certainly
cover conflicts between a contractor's public and private
sector work.
As to the second question, the OCI language in the FAR,
which has remained largely unchanged since 1984, should be
revisited. It is no longer reflective of modern procurement
practices and the sophisticated body of OCI case law that has
developed over the past several decades.
OCIs are generally separated into three categories, but
most relevant today is what is referred to as an impaired
objectivity OCI, which may arise where a contractor's outside
business relationships create an economic incentive to provide
biased advice under a government contract.
Experience suggests that OCIs are more likely to occur in
contracts involving certain services, such as management
support services and consultant or other professional services.
The FAR requires a contracting officer to avoid, neutralize, or
mitigate significant potential conflicts before contract award.
To fulfill this obligation, contracting officers depend on
contractors to disclose actual or even apparent OCIs. The
failure to disclose information required by an applicable OCI
clause can lead to a multitude of adverse consequences,
including contract termination, prosecution for false
statements, False Claims Act liability, or even suspension and
debarment.
Given the potentially severe consequences for failure to
disclose an actual or potential OCI, most experienced
contractors take affirmative steps to identify potential
conflicts of interest and, to the best of their ability,
mitigate them by, for example, developing firewalls, executing
nondisclosure agreements, or shifting work to a neutral
unaffiliated third party.
All of the issues highlighted in the House report must be
considered against the backdrop of a growing global consensus
on the importance of internal ethics and compliance programs
designed to prevent, detect, and mitigate ethics and corruption
risks.
Given the heightened corruption risks and compliance
obligations associated with government contracts, most
sophisticated government contractors have invested heavily in
risk-tailored ethics and compliance programs to reduce the
risks they face.
Moreover, given the increased OCI risks associated with
contracts involving management support and consulting services,
contractors providing services of this nature would be expected
to dedicate a greater proportion of their compliance resources
to this particular aspect of their compliance program.
Notably, merely adopting an OCI policy is not enough. An
official policy that appears strong and protective is virtually
meaningless if ignored. To be clear, an occasional violation or
deviation does not mean that compliance program is ineffective.
However, evidence of a systemic disregard for compliance
policies and procedures, particularly when committed by senior
leaders, is often very strong evidence of a weak culture of
compliance.
In 2011, the FAR Council thoughtfully proposed a revision
of the FAR's OCI rules that addressed numerous outstanding
issues.
Although the rule was ultimately withdrawn, the House
report reminds us that it is time to revisit the work the FAR
Council began over a decade ago and bring greater awareness and
compliance attention to this important issue.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important
matter with you. I would be pleased to answer any questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.
Attorney General Healey, your investigation revealed that
McKinsey helped drug companies increase opioid sales and fight
against meaningful regulation of opioids. Based on your
investigation, did McKinsey advise Purdue to undermine Federal
drug safety measures, and if so, how?
Ms. Healey. Thank you, Congresswoman. The answer to that
is, quite simply, absolutely and it is infuriating, and it
spanned many years.
If you go back to 2008, there was a time when the FDA was
actually trying to create a safety program for Oxycontin and
impose stricter standards, and at that time, McKinsey was
actively coaching Purdue on how to band together with other
opioid companies to fight against those stricter safety
requirements.
The FDA never implemented the stricter requirements and, of
course, the opioid epidemic just kept getting worse. I
submitted today McKinsey's own email from their very own files
as the first exhibit with my testimony, from their own mouse
marketing to Purdue and the Sacklers that their relationship,
basically, with the FDA was something that would benefit Purdue
and its bottom line.
Now, you move forward to 2013, another example. This is at
a time when Americans were overdosing and dying of opioids.
McKinsey is telling the Sacklers to, quote, ``turbo charge''
Oxycontin sales by relentlessly targeting doctors who wrote the
most dangerous prescriptions for the most patients at the
highest doses possible, a calculated effort to specifically
target those prescribers. This is from McKinsey as a way to
boost more Oxy sales by Purdue.
McKinsey consultants went so far as to actually get in the
car with Purdue sales representatives to go pitch opioids to
doctors, and McKinsey went to Purdue's national sales meeting
to push their scheme to sell more drugs.
We found that McKinsey time and time again worked directly
with Purdue to oppose efforts directed at safety and knowing
what was happening in terms of people becoming sick,
overdosing, and dying. McKinsey designed schemes to get more
people on opioids and, as a result, more people suffered and
died.
And I want to raise something as well that I find really
appalling. One thing that we uncovered is that as thousands of
people in America were dying, McKinsey was briefing Purdue on
ways to salvage the opioid business with health insurance
companies because there was more pressure being brought to bear
as more recognition that these prescription opioids which in
Massachusetts alone have accounted for two-thirds of all
overdoses in our state since 2009--that while this is happening
and more focus and attention is being brought to bear, McKinsey
is advising Purdue on how to deal with this and, in particular,
concerns raised by insurance companies.
So, here is what McKinsey proposes. They actually propose
paying a rebate to the insurers for each patient who overdoses.
Their analyses show that paying a rebate could be a, quote,
``attractive option'' for Purdue if the payment was in the
range of $6,000 to $14,000 for each patient who was harmed. The
money wouldn't go to the patient but it would go to the
insurance company to encourage them to keep paying for Purdue's
drugs.
While we don't believe that this rebate proposal ever got
traction, it is evidence that McKinsey shouldn't be in this
business and it is emblematic of the kind of activity that
McKinsey engaged in with Purdue.
And to answer your question, it absolutely undermined
public safety.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. Sternfels, our committee found that McKinsey made more
than $140 million consulting for the FDA in 2008 but McKinsey
has never publicly disclosed how much it made working for
private opioid companies.
How much money was your firm paid by Purdue and other
opioid manufacturers?
Mr. Sternfels. Congresswoman, I don't have that number
today. If that is of interest, I am happy to dig that up and
come back to this committee.
Chairwoman Maloney. Fine.
Attorney General Healey, how much money was McKinsey paid
by Purdue? Do you know?
Ms. Healey. Forgive me. I was unmuting. Eighty-six million
dollars.
Chairwoman Maloney. Eighty-six million dollars. That is a
lot of money and that is just one of four companies that they
were paid privately, and we know what kind of advice that
brought with that money, advice on how to fight Federal
regulation, increase its own bottom line, knowing that it would
lead to more opioid overdoses.
I have many questions but my time is almost expired and I
want to stick very strictly with the five-minutes because AG
Healey has an 11 o'clock leave and I want more people to get to
her.
But, Mr. Sternfels, can you please make a commitment that
you will give to this committee the documents that we have
requested by Friday?
Mr. Sternfels. Chairwoman, as we have made very clear, our
intent is to work fully with this committee to answer all the
scope of questions that you have answered and we will continue
to do that. So, I think, as we had indicated going into this,
we are not done on answering your questions and you have my
commitment that we will continue to provide the information.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Thank you. Very briefly,
will you commit to turning over the complete client list and
staffing information the committee required requested in
November in our November letter by this Friday?
Mr. Sternfels. We will continue to keep working with you,
Congresswoman, on the questions that you need. Our team is not
disbanding on helping answer your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, the families destroyed by the
opioid epidemic deserve accountability from your company and we
will not stop until we get it.
My time has expired. I now recognize the gentlelady from
North Carolina.
Ms. Foxx, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Madam Chair, and if I go over a little
bit I will note the clock went off but you kept talking.
Limiting the supply of opioids available on our streets is
crucial to preventing opioid abuse and overdoses. That is why I
introduced the Return Act, which aims to pave the way for drug
take-back programs to provide incentives for individuals to
turn in their unused opioids for destruction.
Simply put, we need to keep these drugs off our streets and
prevent illegal opioids such as fentanyl ever crossing our
border.
Mr. Dhillon, would you agree that stopping the illicit
trafficking of fentanyl across our southern border is,
arguably, the most important thing we can do to limit opioid
overdose deaths?
Mr. Dhillon. Absolutely.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Dhillon, would the
administration's actions such as moving to rescind Title 42 and
moving to stop construction of the border wall help stop the
flow of fentanyl into the country?
Mr. Dhillon. Anything that prevents drug traffickers from
entering into the United States is a good thing. Anything that
allows a free flow of individuals without screening across our
Southwest border allows drug traffickers, human traffickers,
terrorists, and others to freely enter the United States. So,
anything that prevents that is a bad thing.
Ms. Foxx. So, do you think that finishing construction of
the border wall will help CBP gain operational control over the
border and slow down drug traffickers?
Mr. Dhillon. Absolutely. Any barrier helps Customs and
Border Protection. As I am sure you know, if you visited the
border, Border Patrol will tell you that a wall, a barrier of
any kind that delays the entry--the illegal entry into the
United States gives them the opportunity to evict those
individuals.
Ms. Foxx. Yes. It is just common sense.
Mr. Dhillon. It is just common sense. I also would like to
say----
Ms. Foxx. Could I ask you another question?
Mr. Dhillon. Yes, ma'am. But if I could just on CBP, a
point that I would like to make, in Fiscal Year 2021, the
highest year on record for assaults against CBP officers in
history, I think that demonstrates what is happening at our
Southwest border today.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. During your tenure at the Drug
Enforcement Administration you oversaw the first annual
decrease in overdose deaths in 30 years. The Trump DHS set an
all-time high for the amount of drugs seized at the border and
the Trump administration awarded a record amount in Federal
grants in support of drug interdiction and public health
programs.
What should we do to build off those successes?
Mr. Dhillon. We need increased border security. We need to
reestablish our law enforcement relationship with Mexico. It is
critical for the Drug Enforcement Administration to be able to
fight drug traffickers at home where they live in Mexico.
Right now, drug traffickers, as a result of the policies of
the Mexican administration, have free rein in Mexico. They have
free rein at the border. There are literally hundreds if not
thousands of drug traffickers associated or members of drug
cartels--the Sinaloa Cartel, the CJNG Cartel--right here in the
United States. We need to attack them at all those levels.
Ms. Foxx. Right. Republicans have sent five letters to the
chairwoman asking her to hold a hearing on Biden's border
crisis and the need to secure the southern border. So far, we
have not heard any hearing--had any hearings on this issue.
If we do not address the crisis at the southern border will
we be able to stem the tide of opioid abuse in this country?
Mr. Dhillon. Absolutely not. I believe that if we do not
secure the Southwest border, the drug cartels will continue to
flood this country with even more fentanyl, methamphetamine,
cocaine.
It is important to recognize also that Americans are dying
at record numbers from methamphetamine and cocaine overdoses.
We are focusing on fentanyl because we see more Americans dying
as a result of opioids.
But there are other drugs that are killing Americans, too.
We have record overdose deaths here and the only way to stop it
is to stop the drugs from coming into the U.S. and the majority
are coming through the Southwest border.
Ms. Foxx. Well, you already touched on my last questions in
that comment, but just, say, all together, that there is a lot
at stake on the southern border if we do not stop this drug
trafficking, and you have mentioned the transnational criminal
organizations coming into our country.
Are they going to continue to grow and import their
violence into the U.S.?
Mr. Dhillon. Absolutely. There is no reason for them not
to. This is a multi-billion dollar trade and when you have
billions of dollars involved and criminal organization--global
criminal organizations fighting for every dollar, you can
expect violence to increase as a result.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I didn't
need my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
As announced at the beginning of this hearing, Attorney
General Healey has a hard stop at 11 o'clock. Attorney General
Healey, we thank you for your testimony. You are excused. We
will pause for a moment while Ms. Feiner gets on the camera.
Thank you so much for your leadership.
Ms. Healey. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentlelady from the
District of Columbia, Ms. Norton, is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Madam Chair, for this important
hearing. It is only in recent years that McKinsey's role in
helping Purdue to flood the--our communities with highly
addictive painkillers has come to light. Two weeks ago, the
committee released an interim staff report that found that
McKinsey didn't just work for both FDA and Purdue, they staffed
some of the exact same people for those contracts.
Dean Tillipman, when a government contractor uses the exact
same personnel for both private sector and public sector work,
are there any potential red flags for conflict of interest?
Ms. Tillipman. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman.
An OCI analysis is very fact-intensive analysis.
Nevertheless, depending on the nature of that work, if there is
a potential of significant overlap it could raise significant
red flags about the presence of an OCI.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Sternfels, you are the global managing
partner of McKinsey. You have also held roles with
responsibility for McKinsey operations. The buck, therefore,
clearly, stops with you.
When did you first become aware that McKinsey staffed the
same consultants at Federal regulators and private sector
companies with matters before them?
Mr. Sternfels. Thank you, Congresswoman, and I would also
just start by we fully recognize the travesty that this crisis
has had in America and we have lost several of our colleagues
in the epidemic as well.
As you note, I became our global managing partner in July
of last year is when I took over----
Ms. Norton. Is that when you became first aware?
Mr. Sternfels. That is when I took over this current role
and I became aware of our staffing, actually, on this
particular issue with--associated with my responsibilities
around that time.
Ms. Norton. Every single one of the 37 FDA contracts
examined by the committee had at least one McKinsey consultant
who also consulted for Purdue Pharma on it.
The committee found at least 22 consultants who worked at
FDA and opioid manufacturers since 2008. On one project in
2011, McKinsey consulted for an FDA office responsible for
multiple drug safety matters on setting that office's
priorities for, and I am quoting, ``strategic goals and
priorities'' and asked McKinsey to help weigh--again, I am
quoting--``the adverse impact of drugs on health in the U.S.''
At least four non-McKinsey consultants worked on the same
contract--on this contract and worked for Purdue at the same
time.
Mr. Sternfels, are there today consultants working on
Federal Government contracts who are also working for private
sector clients with business before those agencies?
Mr. Sternfels. Congresswoman, I am aware that we have some
subcontracts in place today with the FDA, for example. I am not
aware if any of the currently staffed members also work in
industry.
I will point you to the fact that this notion of conflict
of interest--I would go to Professor Tillipman--is not rooted
in the individuals. It is rooted in the nature of the work, to
quote her own statement, and what we----
Ms. Norton. Well, will you commit today that McKinsey will
stop staffing consultants on projects for Federal agents and
private sector clients with business before those agents--
agencies?
Mr. Sternfels. I will commit today and remain committed
that we will not staff on any topical areas that are in direct
conflict, Congresswoman. That is the nature of OCI FAR.
We take compliance with that incredibly seriously. We take
disclosure incredibly seriously, and we will make absolutely
sure that we comply with all rules and regulations that are
appropriate with that.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. I just want to say that just
yesterday the FDA announced it would not be engaging in any
further contracts with McKinsey. I encourage all Federal
agencies to reevaluate whether they should be spending taxpayer
time on that firm.
[Pause.]
Ms. Norton.
[Presiding.] The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. I would like to thank the
committee chairman for having this hearing. I don't think we
can really have too many hearings on the drug companies and
maybe the excessive influence they have on our bureaucracy.
We, right now, have in the most recent 12-month period
110,000 deaths from illegal drug overdoses. I will ask Mr.
Dhillon could he comment on those deaths and which drugs, in
particular, you think are responsible for the 110,000?
Mr. Dhillon. Which drugs are most responsible?
Mr. Grothman. Yes.
Mr. Dhillon. Opioids are as a general category. So, that
would include synthetic opioids such as fentanyl and natural
opioids such as heroin, and prescription drugs--prescription
opioids. That group together is responsible for the vast
majority of the overdoses.
Mr. Grothman. I am told right now fentanyl is the biggest
of the bunch. Is that----
Mr. Dhillon. Absolutely. That is correct.
Mr. Grothman. And where do those drugs come from?
Mr. Dhillon. Largely, they come from Mexico. The drugs are
imported either as fentanyl into Mexico and then brought by the
cartels across our Southwest border, or precursor chemicals
come from China into Mexico. The drug cartels then manufacture
the fentanyl and bring it across the Southwest border.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I was told by my local DEA guy that he
thought maybe 100 percent of the deaths in Mexico came from
fentanyl brought across the southern border. I mean, 540--could
all 540? But that is what he speculated.
Mr. Dhillon. Yes, that is probably--I always hate to say--
hesitate to say 100 percent. But there is virtually no, that I
know of, illicit fentanyl manufacturing occurring in the U.S.
It is almost entirely in foreign countries and then brought
into the U.S.
Mr. Grothman. Could you comment--and I was down on the
border last week, and it is so frustrating to see 110,000
deaths and nobody, seemingly, caring very much because you
would figure as a minimum we would begin to try to cutoff the
spigot and, actually, things are going the opposite way right
now.
We have less drugs being captured because the Border Patrol
is busy doing other things. Could you comment on our efforts
being made to stem the tide of drugs across the southern
border? It seems like--it seems like it goes up 80,000, 90,000,
100,000, 110,000, the less we guard the border. Could you
comment on that?
Mr. Dhillon. Well, I want to say that the men and women of
the Border Patrol and Customs and Border Protection, I know,
are doing their very best. They are overwhelmed.
I view the border at this point as, essentially, an
unguarded border and the cartels are aware of that. They are
actually--they actually plan at times to surge migrants to the
borders so that they can take Customs and Border Protection--I
am sorry, Border Patrol--off the line.
So I believe, at this point, large swaths of our Southwest
border are, essentially, unprotected, allowing for anybody--
drug traffickers, human traffickers, terrorists--to cross our
border at will and enter into the United States.
Mr. Grothman. Can you say we, as a government, care about
the 110,000 who died last year and still have an open border?
Mr. Dhillon. I believe that once--in my view, establishing
border policy, immigration policy, one cannot ignore national
security, and national security, a part of that, is looking at
how these drug cartels are affecting and killing our citizens.
So, in my view, it is impossible to have or to have a
drug--a border policy that doesn't also take into account
national security.
Mr. Grothman. Ultimately, people should go to prison or
suffer some penalty for that, I would think. Some people
consider sales or trafficking in fentanyl or other deadly drugs
nonviolent crimes.
Do you consider that nonviolent?
Mr. Dhillon. I could not disagree more with that
contention. You have--over 100,000 Americans were murdered by
drug traffickers last year. That is violence. Talk to any
individual who has lost a family member. Look in their eyes and
you will see the pain. This is a violent crime. This is a--this
is not a victimless crime. Drug trafficking has created----
Mr. Grothman. Do you think we should increase the mandatory
minimums on fentanyl? Right now you have to have more fentanyl
than heroin to get the mandatory----
Mr. Dhillon. We absolutely should be increasing the
mandatory minimum on fentanyl's. I am a firm believer in
mandatory minimums for drug traffickers and I believe that the
fentanyl mandatory minimum should be increased. Incarceration
works.
Putting drug traffickers in jail works. Right now, we have
overdose deaths because the supply is high. The only way to
attack the supply is to seize those drugs and put the
traffickers in jail.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Final question. There are
allegations, which I believe, by the way, that the
relationships between the regulatory agencies and the
pharmaceutical industries are too cozy and, as the result,
there are some drugs we are not looking into.
Do you believe that sometimes the relationship between big
pharma and the drug companies is too cozy in this country?
Mr. Dhillon. That is not something that I can actually
address, sir. I can say that when I was the head of DEA there
was no cozy relationship between DEA and the pharmaceutical
companies.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you
very much.
I call now the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, who is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Sternfels, isn't it true that since 2008 the Food and
Drug Administration has paid McKinsey more than $140 million in
taxpayer money?
Mr. Sternfels. We have been serving the Food and Drug
Administration since that time, Congressman.
Mr. Johnson. And you have received $140 million over that
time, correct?
Mr. Sternfels. I don't know the exact number but it sounds
about right.
Mr. Johnson. And, Mr. Sternfels, isn't it also a fact that
$40 million of those fees came from the FDA's Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, which oversees numerous opioid-related
programs?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, I don't have the splits by
program. If that is of interest, I am happy to provide that
back to the committee.
Mr. Johnson. Sure. Sure. But, I mean, you won't disagree
with the fact that your firm, McKinsey, took money from the
FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, which oversees
numerous opioid-related programs, correct? You won't disagree
with that?
Mr. Sternfels. No, Congressman. I would agree with you that
we did work on, I think, what is called CDER as the acronym for
that, and it might make sense to also describe what we actually
did with CDER because, as I think the committee knows, it
covers all drugs, not just opioids. We worked on----
Mr. Johnson. But it does include opioids, though, correct?
Mr. Sternfels. It does, and we worked----
Mr. Johnson. And isn't it true, Mr. Sternfels, that at the
same time that McKinsey was taking money consulting from the
FDA that McKinsey was also consulting with the opioid
manufacturers, including Purdue Pharma, Johnson & Johnson,
Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, and also Endo International,
correct?
Mr. Sternfels. We work with a host of pharmaceutical
companies and----
Mr. Johnson. At the same time that you were working with
the Federal Government, correct?
Mr. Sternfels. We work, Congressman on different topic
areas.
Mr. Johnson. Now, Mr. Sternfels, when was it that McKinsey
first alerted the Federal Government to the fact that you were
also working with the opioid companies?
Mr. Sternfels. If you look through the history of our work
with the FDA in our proposal process, Congressman, we have made
multiple mentions in our proposals of our experience both in
the pharmaceutical industry and----
Mr. Johnson. But when did--when was it--when did you first
alert the Federal Government that you were working for the
opioid companies at the same time?
Mr. Sternfels. I can't point to the first specific
instance. But I can tell you there were over 40 references for
one partner in particular about our work with pharmaceuticals
and over 20 over a period of several years that he had specific
experience with opioids.
Mr. Johnson. So, isn't it a fact, though, Mr. Sternfels,
that while your company was receiving money from the Federal
Government that it failed to disclose to the Federal Government
that it was also taking money from the pharmaceuticals? Isn't
that correct?
Mr. Sternfels. I think that is incorrect, Congressman, with
respect. We made very clear that we were working both with the
industry and with opioids, in particular.
Mr. Johnson. From day one with the Federal Government you
are contending that McKinsey let the government know that it
was also taking money from the pharmaceutical industry?
Mr. Sternfels. I will figure out if it is from day one.
Mr. Johnson. From the opioid industry, actually.
Mr. Sternfels. And, Congressman, if the first date is of
interest, I will find that. I looked for total references and
there is many. But I will go back and get you when the first
date that--and as recently as yesterday we have seen the FDA
come out on record both about the work that we did with them
and our relevant experiences in the industry and in opioids.
So, if it is useful, I will go back and get you the actual
first date if that is helpful.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. I would like for you to do that. I would
like for you to do that. And do you believe it is proper for a
company--a private company--to contract with the taxpayers of
America through the Federal Government for money to advise the
Federal Government on how to combat the opioid epidemic while
at the same time taking money from the opioid industry to help
them turbo charge profits? Is that right?
Mr. Sternfels. I would not--sir, I 100 percent agree that
would not be appropriate. Our work for the Federal Government
was not specifically focused on combating the opioid epidemic,
and if we were working that exact issue on both sides that
would be a conflict of interest. Hundred percent agree.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson. I thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman,
is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
You know, I find it interesting there is not one Democrat
posing the question to the Biden administration, as you pointed
out, Mr. Dhillon, who is allowing somewhere close to 540,000 a
month, which are five football stadiums that whole 79,000
people, into this country, not knowing where they came from,
not knowing what they represent.
There is not one question that has been posed to the Biden
administration as to why you are not securing the border. There
is not one Democrat that signed a discharge petition on having
Title 42 remain in effect. All we need is seven to put it for a
vote.
And, you know, we heard Tom Homan, who used to be director
of ICE, and Mark Morgan, who was head of the Border Patrol,
give a dark picture for what is happening to this country under
this administration under his watch, President Biden's watch,
and what it is doing to the children who, as you mentioned, Mr.
Dhillon, are dying.
Do you see the issue that the fentanyl and all the opioids
coming across are a direct result of the policies of this
administration?
Mr. Dhillon. Look, I want to say that I believe that an
open border allows drug traffickers free rein to bring in any
drugs or any contraband they want.
So, any policy that does not secure our border absolutely
is a policy that is resulting in overdose deaths every day. So,
sir, to answer your question are the policies of this
administration allowing drug traffickers to enter into the
U.S., the answer is yes.
Mr. Norman. It used to be, under the Trump administration,
a thousand a day was alarming. Now we are having close to
585,000 people a month coming into this country and we not
knowing where they are going, what they are doing.
What, in your opinion, should be done to stop this?
Mr. Dhillon. We need to secure the border. We need to do
two things right away. We need to secure the border so that
Border Patrol can go back to actually interdicting drug
traffickers, seizing their drugs, arresting them, and
prosecuting them.
We also need to establish a--reestablish our law
enforcement relationship with Mexico. More than a year ago, the
Mexican government, essentially, made it impossible for the
Drug Enforcement Administration to operate in Mexico.
DEA has--in terms of foreign offices--has the most number
of agents and offices in Mexico, for obvious reasons. That is
where the drug traffickers are who are killing our citizens
every day with their poisons.
We need to--the administration needs to immediately
reestablish those relationships. It needs to hold Mexico's feet
to the fire. It needs to tell Mexico that we will not tolerate
what is, essentially, looking like a narco state on our
southern border. We will not tolerate Mexico allowing drug
trafficking organizations like the Sinaloa Cartel and CJNG to
pour these deadly drugs into the U.S.
Those are the first two priorities. There are many other
things that need to be done but those are the two that need to
be done immediately.
Mr. Norman. Well, I have been to the border, as many have.
I can't--I don't think this President has been to the border. I
don't think the Vice President has been to the border, other
than her laughing about it. I don't really see the thought that
this is a serious situation with this country.
Do you agree that the Border Patrol agents that I met with
and others are totally demoralized and totally feel like the
handcuffs are on them, not on the criminals?
Mr. Dhillon. Sir, I have not had a chance to visit the
border and visit with those hardworking law enforcement agents
along the border since I was the DEA administrator.
But I have, certainly, read accounts of that and absolutely
believe that to be the case. I can't imagine how if you joined
Customs and Border Protection, if you joined Border Patrol, if
you joined ICE and, basically, your hands are being tied and
you are not being allowed to do the job that you joined to do
that your morale is very high. So, I would agree that that is
the case.
Mr. Norman. This is a total travesty of this country. It is
going to be hard to recover from. It is a violation of the
Constitution. We have got an invasion that is taking place
right before our eyes and nothing is being done about it.
And for the four families that are having that dead child
or that dead relative due to a drug overdose there is simply no
excuse for. I think----
Mr. Dhillon. Sir, I would actually point out that during
the Trump administration we succeeded for the first time since
1990 in bringing drug overdose deaths down. So, there is hope.
With the correct policies it can be done. We can succeed at
bringing these numbers down. We can be successful with the
right policies.
Mr. Norman. Thank you for your testimony. I yield back.
Ms. Norton. I recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for five minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Sternfels, I want to ask you about the history of
McKinsey's work for Purdue Pharma. McKinsey first began working
for Purdue Pharma in 2004. Is that correct?
Mr. Sternfels. I think that is about right in terms of
timeframe, Congresswoman.
Ms. Kelly. McKinsey had a few engagements with Purdue in
2004 and 2005, but most of McKinsey's engagements occurred
after McKinsey reengaged with Purdue in 2008. Is that correct?
Mr. Sternfels. I think so, and then wound--most of it wound
down about 2014.
Ms. Kelly. In 2007, one year before McKinsey reengaged with
Purdue, the company and three of its executives pleaded guilty
to Federal criminal charges of misleading doctors and public
about Oxycontin's addictiveness and its potential to be abused.
At that point, several states had also sued Purdue for
misleading claims about Oxycontin's addictive potential and,
yet, McKinsey's work continued for the next decade.
According to information obtained by the committee, from
2008 to 2017 McKinsey had 65 engagements with Purdue Pharma or
its affiliates. Many of these involved working to increase the
profitability of Oxycontin.
During this period, hundreds of government entities sued
Purdue for its harmful practices. What is more, your
consultants were tracking those lawsuits for Purdue, one 2017
presentation to Purdue and, I quote, ``128 lawsuits in Federal,
state, and local governments filed against Purdue this year,''
unquote, and reported that media mentions, and I quote, ``now
imply that Oxycontin may have been a driver of the opioid
crisis.''
Your company was clearly aware of the harm Purdue was
causing. Did McKinsey ever consider cutting ties with Purdue
during this period?
Mr. Sternfels. Well, Congresswoman, thanks for the
question, and you are right that we had a long history of
serving Purdue. As you all know, we also exited opioids on our
own decision in 2019, and I have apologized--and you heard my
opening statement--for our work with Purdue and other opioid
manufacturers.
We fully recognize that it fell short of our standards and
it is why we pivoted to settle with the states and spend over
$575 million on prevention and treatment.
So, we are all in in being part of the solution, going
forward. You know, I think the root of this is while our intent
was not to fuel an epidemic in any of our work, I think we
failed to recognize the broader context of what was going on in
society around us and that is why we put new policies and
protocols into place to prevent this kind of stuff from
happening again.
Ms. Kelly. All righty. It wasn't until more than a decade
after reengaging with Purdue to boost sales of Oxycontin and
after making untold millions of dollars in consulting fees for
this work that McKinsey issued a public apology for its role in
finding--in fueling the opioid epidemic, as you have just said.
But for over a decade, McKinsey advised Purdue on how to
boost sales of Oxycontin while tens of thousands of people were
dying each year from opioid overdoses.
It is time for accountability and transparency. The
American people deserve the truth about your company's role in
this epidemic.
And I yield back.
Ms. Norton. The gentlelady yields back.
I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, for five
minutes.
[No response.]
Ms. Norton. I move on, therefore, to recognize the
gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
this hearing. I am going to try and bring some perspective to
this conversation--the street perspective, my perspective.
Louisiana overdose deaths have increased since 2018--just
some specific numbers--from 1,065 in 2018 to 1,926 in 2020,
virtually doubled overdose deaths. But the opioid crisis in
America is constantly a moving target for law enforcement and
this committee should be focused on the actual challenges that
America faces right now.
McKinsey, obviously, was involved in gray areas and,
arguably, criminal areas of their interaction with the opioid
disbursement across the country, and they are being held to
account. They have settled with 49 or 50 states and we should
acknowledge that as a committee and move on to the actual
threat to our country, which is fentanyl pouring over the
border.
Over the course of the last 30 years, the opioid threat has
changed. Back in the mid 1990's, Oxy showed up in street with
the street names Percs, 512, OC. My DEA friend will know this.
Oxy showed up. It was very powerful and it was frightening.
By 2007 or so, Oxy was moved aside by Hydrocodone, Lortabs,
Hydro tabs. Lortabs were horrible. They were available like
candy on the street. It was very easy to get a prescription.
So-called pain management was the destruction of untold scores
of thousands of American families. Each one had a story.
In 2009 as a street cop, I welcomed a new resident to our
community. That was a regular part of being a good cop.
Somebody moves in, you get down and talk to them. A lady moved
into a single-wide trailer with her adult daughter and her
granddaughter. The family seemed very happy for a while. I kept
an eye on the family.
But over the course of about a year, things started to go
wrong, and I knew that it was about drugs and I knew that it
was about Lortabs. And I watched that family disintegrate. The
daughter left with the granddaughter. Couldn't deal with the
mother anymore. The mother was addicted. I had to take her dog
away from her because she was abusing her dog. She was
spiraling downwards further and further.
One night I got a call from the daughter through the police
department. They dispatched me to the house. She hadn't been
able to reach her mother. This is one story--one story,
America. Pay attention, because this story is multiplied by the
millions across our country. The daughter calls. She couldn't
reach her mom.
I got to the house. I couldn't get in. I didn't have a
warrant but I kicked the door. Her grandmother laying there
dead, empty bottle of Lortabs in a filthy single wise. She died
in squalor and filth, dead by tabs. This story is multiplied
again and again in my career. Every cop knows this story.
By 2014 or so, Lortabs were gone. The laws were changed up
here in this body. The schedule was changed on that drug.
Doctors started restricting the prescription.
It was in that era I suppose McKinsey was responsible for
what they were responsible for and they have been held to
account. But it is our southern border right now where fentanyl
is pouring across into our country. Leading cause of death, my
God, and we are not discussing the border in this committee?
Americans are dying. Fentanyl is 80 to 100 times more
powerful than morphine. A backpack of that junk will kill a
whole city. It is pouring into our country directly as a result
of the policies coming out of our own White House.
Our own White House is killing Americans with fentanyl
pouring across the border. We want to talk about litigation and
settlements from McKinsey, a company that had to deal with
pushing RX drugs. They should be held to account but they are
being held to account. That is the American way. This committee
should be focused on the existing threat.
Madam Chair, I yield.
Ms. Norton. I now recognize Mr. Krishnamoorthi, the
gentleman from Illinois, for five minutes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Sternfels, I wanted to draw your attention to a
different topic, namely, JUUL Labs and vaping. There are two
complaints I have before me, one by the Alaska attorney general
against JUUL from 2020, as well as another complaint filed by
the city and county of Denver, Colorado, against the same,
along with some other defendants. McKinsey is not one of the
defendants but it is mentioned within each of these complaints.
I will draw your attention to paragraph 155 of the Alaska
complaint, in which it says that in 2018, at least as of 2018,
McKinsey and Company had been retained by JUUL Labs to conduct
some market research with regard to e-cigarettes and teen
preferences with regard to e-cigarettes. You don't have any
evidence to dispute this particular fact, correct?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, what I do know is that we
stopped all work for vaping and that from my understanding our
work with JUUL was actually focused on youth prevention while
we worked with them, and with our new client framework that I
had mentioned earlier this ended up saying, look, what is going
on in society means that we shouldn't actually be doing work in
vaping.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So yes, there was an engagement with
JUUL at least through 2018 under the topic heading, largely,
youth e-cigarette prevention. Let me just go over some of the
work that was done.
In paragraph 156 of this complaint it says that McKinsey
and Company surveyed teens aged 13 to 17, generating over 1,000
responses and as part of that survey that McKinsey conducted it
found that teens co-favorite flavors were mango and mint. You
don't dispute those findings, correct?
Mr. Sternfels. What I--I don't dispute the findings,
Congressman. What I understand was that work was to then
exclude those flavors to drive youth prevention, at least my
understanding of the work.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Well, let me just tell you what JUUL
ended up doing with that conclusion. In November 2018, the FDA,
basically, warned JUUL that it has to stop selling flavored e-
cigarettes because those flavored e-cigarettes are what hooked
young people onto vaping.
JUUL decided that they would stop selling all flavors
except mint e-cigarettes, possibly because they found that one
of the co-favorite flavors that teens had identified in your
survey was mint.
I presume that you would have counseled them to stop
selling mint e-cigarettes, correct?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, I am not an expert on flavors
of vaping. What I can tell you as a father of three teenagers I
am 100 percent in agreement about the concerns around vaping,
particularly for youth.
I do know that our work was focused on making
recommendations around youth prevention.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I guess what I am saying, Mr.
Sternfels, is if your findings identified that mango and mint
flavors were teenagers' co-favorite flavors as part of your
survey and you had been engaged to prevent vaping among youth,
I presume that you would have counseled JUUL not to sell mint
e-cigarettes following the conclusions of your survey, right?
Mr. Sternfels. I am not familiar with our specific
recommendations, Congressman. I do know that part of the reason
we decided to exit the category entirely was the belief that
even our work focused on youth prevention was not having the
effect in the broader society that we envisioned by the exit.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me jump in for one second, Mr.
Sternfels.
No, I am sorry for interrupting. I just have limited time.
I would respectfully request that you and McKinsey please
produce this particular survey along with your recommendations
coming out of this survey, because it is very important to my
investigation as chair of the Economic and Consumer Policy
Subcommittee into the youth vaping epidemic.
I should tell you that following our investigation the
Trump administration then banned these flavors except for
menthol and tobacco flavored e-cigarettes. Mint and menthol are
extremely close in taste preferences among youth.
And so I would--can you commit to producing those documents
to us? Or should I just commend you for focusing in on this
area?
Mr. Sternfels. Well, Congressman, I just commend you for
focusing in on this area. As you heard me, I am equally worried
as a father of three teenagers on this, and I would be happy to
work with you following up on what your specific questions are
with respect to vaping to help answer any questions you may
have after the testimony today.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. The gentleman's time has expired.
I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, for five
minutes.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Ms. Chairman.
Last term, we had seven hearings on the border in this
committee hearing. We have seen videos of the majority members
now who were at the border crying tears. Today, we are here to
talk about an opioid epidemic while the number-one killer in
the United States among young people is fentanyl.
I am from south Texas and so regularly I hear stories from
farmers and ranchers. I just left a meeting with farmers and
ranchers to come here. I will constantly hear about their
fences being run over from bailouts.
We hear from families who are afraid to let their children
roam their own property because of what is going on. We hear
stories of rape trees found on properties. I visited the
facilities where a young woman--over 50 percent of them will
admit to being abused along the journey.
And just recently, we had a Texas National Guard member,
Bishop Evans, who drowned while trying to save what he thought
was some migrants who were trying to make their way here and it
looks more now like they were trafficking drugs into our
country. Yet, this committee refuses to have a hearing on this.
Mr. Dhillon, you mentioned that under the Trump
administration something happened with the drug overdose issue
in our country, which was remarkable, actually, historically.
Could you speak to that?
Mr. Dhillon. I believe it was in 2018 we saw drug overdose
deaths reduced for the first time--decreased for the first
time, a little over 4 or 5 percent, and that was the first
reduction that we saw, I believe, since 1990 and I believe that
was as a result of the aggressive policies.
And I am here talking mostly about enforcement but it is
also to remember that prevention and treatment are absolutely
critical in fighting the overdose crisis, and during the Trump
administration we took that three-pronged approach.
We prioritized prevention. We prioritized treatment and we
prioritized enforcement, and I believe that was why we saw
overdose deaths dip that year. The same aggressive approach,
again, with enforcement, which has to be an important part of
that to reduce supply, I think, could also have a similar
effect.
Mr. Cloud. You mentioned prevention and enforcement. Would
you connect the enforcement that happened at the border as a
prevention mechanism? I mean, would you say the data suggests
that there was a connection?
Mr. Dhillon. When we talked about prevention we usually
talked about education.
Mr. Cloud. Sure.
Mr. Dhillon. Taking drugs is bad. In my day, it was this is
your brain on, you know, the fried egg.
Mr. Cloud. Right. The frying pan, yes.
Mr. Dhillon. Yes. So but, yes, prevention in the sense that
preventing drugs from coming into the U.S. I describe that as
the supply issue. One of the things we learned from the opioid
crisis is that supply matters, that an increase in supply
results in an increase in overdose deaths.
So, enforcement is the only way you can attack supply so
enforcement has to be a critical part of that, which means the
only way to keep supply down is to stop those drugs from coming
across our Southwest border and a secure border is absolutely
critical to that.
Mr. Cloud. Now, you mentioned Mexico. It was interesting
the term you used--I have thought of it before but I don't hear
the term much--as becoming a narco state. Could you speak to
that a little bit?
Mr. Dhillon. Well, so the government designates certain
countries as a narco state. I am not saying that the government
has done that. But what I am saying--that the U.S. Government
has done that.
Mr. Cloud. Sure.
Mr. Dhillon. But what I am saying is that the way Mexico is
now treating drug traffickers, in my view, not harshly at all--
--
Mr. Cloud. Right.
Mr. Dhillon [continuing]. that its failure now, its
affirmative efforts to undo the cooperation--the law
enforcement cooperation between the U.S. and Mexico is,
effectively, turning Mexico into a narco state.
Mr. Cloud. Right.
Mr. Dhillon. There were swaths of Mexico, parts of the
country, that are completely controlled by drug traffickers.
Mr. Cloud. Controlled by drug traffickers.
Mr. Dhillon. So, we need to recognize the national security
risk of an open border. We have what is verging on a narco
state on our southern border.
Mr. Cloud. And what is interesting about that is we are
beginning to see certain communities even in California that--
where cartels are beginning to take over certain communities
and we are seeing that now being established, albeit in
pockets, but here in the United States as well.
The Biden administration policies have--their open border
policies have created a reversal of this trend for sure. Right
now, the big issue, of course, in the public sphere is Title 42
and there is an understanding that that would--I have been to
the border several times over the last year--that that is like
the last thing holding together any shred of security.
Now, we understand that Nancy Pelosi doesn't want to bring
a Title 42 bill to the floor. But I will say this. There is a
mechanism, a discharge petition. We need seven more Democratic
members to support in order for us to force a vote on the Title
42 bill, and I would encourage the members of this committee,
15 of which who said we needed to repeal Title 42 Because of
the false story about Border Patrol members riding horses
whipping migrants. Fifteen members of this committee----
Chairwoman Maloney.
[Presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cloud [continuing]. supported that. I would encourage
you to reverse course and support this discharge petition.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. DeSaulnier, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
your tenacity on this subject. It is so important. It is hard
to believe that we could hear and have another hearing that
would be worse in terms of business behavior than the one we
had with the Sackler family and Purdue Pharma. It is very, very
upsetting to hear this testimony. The company, McKinsey, that I
used to respect I can't imagine having anyone--my children
working for McKinsey, Mr. Sternfels.
Ms. Feiner, congratulations to you and the attorney general
for your--makes me proud of being a native of Massachusetts.
Let us talk a little bit about what you uncovered about the
communication of trying to cover up the actions by McKinsey.
In 2018, an investigation on Purdue began closing in on
McKinsey. Their employee, Martin Elling, a partner at McKinsey,
emailed another partner to ask if we should do anything, quote,
``other than eliminating all our documents and emails.''
A month later, Mr. Elling emailed himself a note to, quote,
``delete old Pur documents from a laptop,'' Pur referring to
Purdue Pharma.
Ms. Feiner, did you uncover evidence in your investigation
that McKinsey consultants may have taken even additional steps
to hide or cover up their actions?
Ms. Feiner. Thank you for your question.
Yes, we did uncover documents about obstruction, deleting
emails and documents relating to McKinsey's work for Purdue,
and because they discussed destroying evidence right after we
filed our lawsuit we included a term in our judgment requiring
McKinsey to automatically preserve every email or instant
message by every McKinsey employee working on any matter
anywhere in the world.
People at McKinsey and at other companies engaged in this
type of conduct, this reprehensible conduct, should know when
your company and your executives do something that you don't
want uncovered, the right answer is not to do it. No one should
think that they will be allowed to hurt people and keep it
secret.
And one astonishing fact that we uncovered is that there
were people inside of McKinsey who saw these red flags. They
saw these conflicts and they said, you know, we should be
treading carefully here.
There are conflicts between industry, our industry clients
like Purdue, and our regulator clients, and they went ahead and
they changed recommendations in documents anyway.
Conduct like this should never happen, especially when it
affects American lives, and that is why we banned McKinsey from
the opioid business forever, and I am pleased to hear today
that they are no longer working for JUUL.
I think that those kinds of changes and conduct are the
results of this committee's efforts and our office's efforts
and I think that we are on the right track.
We have to protect American lives. That is our job. Thank
you.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. And you heard the comments by
the managing partner of McKinsey earlier about things being
taken out of context. Can you--based on your investigation, the
overall theme of McKinsey's irresponsible behavior, how do you
respond to what I take as obfuscation?
Ms. Feiner. Yes, I agree with you that there is definite
obfuscation here. I mean, just look at the types of
recommendations that they were making to Purdue at the height
of this crisis when thousands and thousands of Americans were
getting sick from the disease of addiction and dying.
They were working with companies like Purdue, like Johnson
& Johnson, to turbo charge opioid sales. That is the height of
irresponsibility, at a time when they were also working inside
the FDA learning how that agency worked and trading on their
relationships and their insider knowledge to get their private
clients.
Mr. DeSaulnier. The testimony today strikes me as
encouraging the continued behavior or at least defending it,
making light of that behavior in spite of the apology.
Ms. Feiner. I think that this is par for the course with
companies that engage in misconduct like this. I mean, it is
not surprising to hear that their answers today are defensive.
I think the real thing that this committee is doing and our
investigation did is to look at what they were saying at the
time that they were engaging in this conduct, and those actions
and those words speak volumes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Mr. Sternfels, have you done a
comprehensive analysis of what communication happened within
the company and will you turn any of that over to the committee
as the chairman has suggested?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, we have done a comprehensive
analysis of the communications and document retention and the
policies associated with that are absolutely critical to us. It
is why that the two colleagues that you made mention of were
terminated as soon as we actually realized that they violated
our document retention policy. And if that--areas of further
interest----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired,
regretfully.
OK. Now we recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Keller. You are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member
Comer, and I would like to thank our witnesses for being here
today.
The opioid epidemic is an issue that continues to affect
millions of Americans. CDC reports that last year from April
2020 to April 2021 there were 100,000 deaths caused by
overdoses and three-quarters of those were due to opioids.
Clearly, it is a devastating problem that is happening and
it deserves congressional attention. But it is not a stand-
alone problem. President Biden and my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle refuse to address the glaring source of
illicit drugs in our country, the unsecured southern border.
In Fiscal Year 2021, Customs and Border Patrol seized
11,000 pounds of fentanyl at our southern border. That is
enough to kill two and a half billion people. Think about that.
The amount of fentanyl that would have flooded American
communities without CBP intervention would have been sufficient
to kill one-third of the Earth's population. DEA issued its
first public safety alert in six years, warning the public
about fentanyl-laced prescription pill lookalikes. And we heard
what had happened in 2018 when we saw the first reduction in
overdoses and I think that is partly due, as was mentioned by
my colleagues, to the fact that we were taking the security of
our southern border seriously during the Trump administration.
So, Mr. Dhillon, as a former DEA acting administrator, how
do you think the current situation at the border is affecting
the DEA's ability to keep life-threatening substances off our
streets?
Mr. Dhillon. It is making it very difficult. Again, if you
combine the efforts of Mexico to, essentially, make it
impossible for DEA to operate there, an open border, you are,
essentially, forcing DEA to fight the battle against the drug
cartels on our home turf.
So, that means the DEA is only able to really attack drug
traffickers now once the drugs get into the U.S. and you are
going after the traffickers here locally.
Extraditions over the last year of drug traffickers from
Mexico has decreased significantly. During the Trump
administration, we had a number of extraditions from Mexico for
wanted drug traffickers. That has ended.
So, that means we can't even prosecute drug traffickers in
Mexico because we--even if we could collect the evidence, which
we can't now because of the poor relationship that Mexico has
created with U.S. law enforcement, we can't even get them here
because the Mexican government isn't expediting them.
So, the job has become astronomically higher, I think, for
all drug and law enforcement in the U.S.
Mr. Keller. OK. So, I guess I would ask, what would you
recommend government--what actions should we take as government
officials to help the DEA in its mission to stomp out illicit
substance trafficking at our southern border?
Mr. Dhillon. Well, I think from a policy perspective,
securing the border is the first thing. That is where the drugs
are coming from. So, that is--it is just common sense that we
need a more secure border.
But we also need to take the battle to the drug traffickers
where they live, which means DEA needs to be able to work
effectively with Mexican law enforcement in Mexico where we can
work with them to go after drug labs there, which DEA has done
in the past, where we can collect evidence against high-level
drug traffickers in the cartels.
We can then give that evidence to U.S. Attorneys here in
the U.S. who can indict them, and then we can seek extradition.
Pressure needs to be put on Mexico to reengage the U.S. in
a cooperative manner to allow us to do our jobs there.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I appreciate that, and it is a
serious issue and there is many serious issues. I heard my
colleagues talk about vaping and other things, which, again,
are serious issues. But we talk about these things and then we
just voted on a bill to legalize marijuana for recreational
use.
I mean, really, we need to get serious if we are concerned
about addiction. Addiction is a health epidemic and we need to
make sure we are treating it that way, not making more drugs
available and making it easier to have that happen.
So, if my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are
serious about addressing the opioid crisis, then they should be
serious about securing our southern border.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is recognized for
her five minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairwoman.
Hey, Bob, do you know what the term hyperbolic means?
Mr. Sternfels. No. Can you help me?
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Oh, I am going to show you an example
actually.
So, Bob, you know, in 2020, after McKinsey's work for
Purdue Pharma came to light your firm admitted that it, quote,
``did not adequately acknowledge that the epidemic unfolding in
our communities or terrible impacts of opioid misuse and
addiction on millions of families across the country.'' Like,
you just didn't--did not adequately acknowledge. OK.
So, then the committee, of course--the great work of the
committee continued their investigation and found that McKinsey
didn't just fail to acknowledge the severity but behind closed
doors your staff, your team, routinely just went through this
whole disregarding all the information that was coming very
clearly to you all in regarding the mass poisoning in the first
place.
So, I would like to put up an email, in 2018 an email where
McKinsey's government-facing practice discussed how a senior
partner at McKinsey who served opioid manufacturers viewed the
situation.
[Screen.]
Ms. Tlaib. The person wrote, quote, ``told me the word
epidemic and/or crisis are hyperbolic.'' OK. So, Bob, this--you
know, it means marked by language that exaggerates or
overstates the truth.
So, fair question, Bob. More than half a million people in
the United States have died of opioid overdoses in 1999. Do you
agree, yes or no, that calling a half a million deaths an
epidemic or crisis is hyperbolic?
Mr. Sternfels. I am still a little confused on the
question. I think half a million is catastrophic.
Ms. Tlaib. That it is exaggerated--that you literally are
saying half a million that is just an exaggeration, that it is
not a crisis to have a half a--you know, literally, a half a
million people died of opioid overdose. That is what you all
said in an email.
Mr. Sternfels. I have been clear, Congresswoman, that we
view it as an epidemic.
Ms. Tlaib. OK. We have the email, Bob.
OK. For 15 years, you all know, the strategy of McKinsey,
Bob, was routinely used to have sales and marketing
representatives targeting doctors who wrote, you know, high
numbers of prescriptions and including those that ran so-called
pill mills.
I mean, to me, that is trafficking, correct? Aren't you
guys trafficking?
Mr. Sternfels. I wouldn't say that our work on any aspect
of sales and marketing is trafficking, Congresswoman.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. I know you all wear suits and everything
and you don't consider yourself drug traffickers. But let me
give you some information here.
When the FDA announced new restrictions on opiates in 2013,
including a, quote, ``boxed warning for pregnant women'',
McKinsey consultants at Purdue had doubts that this warning
would even change the behavior of high-prescribing doctors and
emailed each other about the safety concerns.
So, I would like to put one such email up on the screen.
So Laura, on your team--she is a principal at the firm--she
said, ``I am most curious to see if high writers even notice
this. Smiley face.''
So, Bob, I think it is safe to assume that, quote, ``high
writers'' were--refer to prescribers that were writing high
numbers of prescriptions for opioids. Would you agree?
Mr. Sternfels. If you can give me a second just to read
that the email, Congresswoman. I just see it up on the screen
here.
Ms. Tlaib. I mean, those are, like----
Mr. Sternfels. I get--yes. Sorry.
Ms. Tlaib. Those were the exact prescribers McKinsey was
advising Purdue to target, correct, in order to turbo charge
sales?
Mr. Sternfels. From my understanding, this email chain
refers to how we could help Purdue comply with new FDA
restrictions. I completely agree that a smiley face is totally
inappropriate. But I think this chain----
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Yes. Well, you guys are trafficking. You
are making money off of poisoning people. So, why do you think
your employee--you think it is fun? Why do you think your
employee would even put a smiley face next to a question of
whether or not high writers would notice a black box warning--
literally, a warning had been put on the Oxycontin for pregnant
women?
Mr. Sternfels. I can't guess as to why there was a smiley
face. I do know this string relates to how we help Purdue
comply with that--with new FDA regulations.
Ms. Tlaib. No. You all were happy to think that this
warning wasn't going to derail McKinsey's pill-pushing schemes,
you know, trafficking the drugs while McKinsey was celebrating
its blood money, communities were being torn apart.
You know, Bob, 86 percent of overdoses in my district in
the city of Detroit were due to overdoses from opiate. Did you
know that?
Mr. Sternfels. I did not know that stat. I know that there
have been many.
Ms. Tlaib. Do you know behind that number--behind that
number was a human being, Bob? Do you understand, like, if
anyone could explain me the difference between McKinsey big
pharma opioid cartel and the organizations of people like Pablo
Escobar, I am all ears. I really am.
You all may be wearing suits and you may be having these
fancy offices but you are doing the same freaking thing.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Comer. Would the lady yield to a question?
Chairwoman Maloney. Her time has expired and we are trying
to keep on record.
Mr. Fallon from Texas, please.
Mr. Fallon?
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Today, the majority party wants to discuss the business
practices and conflicts of interest of McKinsey and Company.
Well, that is all well and good. I have been here a year and a
half and we haven't talked about having a hearing about the
southern border at all.
What we should also be talking about is the business
practices and conflicts of interest of some Members of Congress
who choose to shamefully and blatantly ignore the root causes
of 100,000 American deaths, our fellow citizens, due to drug
overdoses, 75 percent of which are opioid overdoses.
And, now, where do these drugs come from? How do they get
here and who is responsible for bringing them?
Today what we really should be talking about--or if we
don't do it today we should have a hearing about it,
certainly--it has been a year and a half--discussing, some say,
the border crisis. It is not even a crisis anymore.
We are talking about a border catastrophe, and if these
trends continue it is going to be cataclysmic. The border
crisis catastrophe and cataclysmic events that are going on are
responsible for 100,000 of our citizens' deaths.
In 2021, the DEA in Phoenix, Arizona, alone seized 9.5
million fentanyl-laced pills that were designed to look like
prescription drugs. In Fiscal Year 1921, U.S. Customs and
Border Patrol seized 11,000 pounds--over 11,000 pounds of
fentanyl, which is enough to kill every American eight times
over. We keep hearing that but let that sink in.
In Fiscal Year 1921, almost 200,000 pounds--or sorry,
200,000 pounds of methamphetamine was seized. Now, the Mexican
drug cartels are making wild profits, record profits, in fact,
and it is not just with narcotics smuggling but with the
smuggling of human beings.
We talked to Customs and Border Patrol a few weeks ago and
they told us that the cartels are charging $4,000 a person, and
in March there was 221,000 known illegal border crossers, about
60,000 to 70,000 known got aways.
So, you are bordering on a number here of about 300,000.
You do the math on that, that is a billion dollars in a month
and the estimates are that the drug cartels' GDP is somewhere
between $15 billion and $25 billion on the narcotics end. But
that is making about $10 billion to $15 billion just on
smuggling human beings.
And the answer is not to sit there and obfuscate and ignore
and be an ostrich and put your head in the sand. We had the
Homeland Security Director Mayorkas last year say in front of a
committee that the border was secure, and then he gets caught
on a hot mic a few months later saying that it is chaos.
So, which one is it? Because is that hyperbole or is that a
lie? So, the crisis isn't getting better, by the way, just
because the media doesn't cover it. It is not getting better.
It is getting worse.
Mr. Dhillon, a question for you. Where is the majority of
the fentanyl that gets into this country--where is it produced?
What country makes it?
Mr. Dhillon. It comes from Mexico. It is either produced in
Mexico or it is trans shipped from China to Mexico and then----
Mr. Fallon. So, China.
Mr. Dhillon. But the bottom line is it all ends up in
Mexico, by and large, and then comes across our Southwest
border.
Mr. Fallon. Right. So China, obviously, no friend of the
United States--our biggest foe and I think we would all agree
our greatest threat, moving forward.
Methamphetamine--where is most of that produced?
Mr. Dhillon. Mexico. Meth labs are rampant in Mexico. Super
labs.
Mr. Fallon. So, the high-tech labs that we saw, like, on
``Breaking Bad,'' you know, that were underground, they are in
Mexico, right? I mean, those really exist.
Mr. Dhillon. As the acting administrator of the Drug
Enforcement Administration, I visited one of those labs in a
jungle. They exist and they produce enormous amounts of
methamphetamine. That technology can be applied to fentanyl.
So, I would anticipate that the cartels are already doing that.
Mr. Fallon. Yes, they are going to cut out China and they
will just make it there. More money to be made? How does the
majority of these drugs that are killing our fellow citizens
get to this country? Is it by air, is it by land, or is it by
sea?
Mr. Dhillon. It is by land across the Southwest border.
Mr. Fallon. The southern border.
So if--as Americans, if we are not safe, then we are not
free, and what we need to be doing is ensuring that we use
Title 42 as a tool to secure the border and reimplement the
migrant protection protocols that worked magnificently when
President Trump was able to turn this flood into a trickle, and
now, unfortunately, it is a flood again.
Support legal migration by deporting criminals and building
walls and other barriers with gates. Because this isn't about
migration. There is going to be migrants coming this country
and there should be. But we want to support legal migration and
oppose with every fiber of our being illegal migration.
And it shouldn't be a partisan issue. It is. I don't know
why. But we are going to find out in November what the American
people think about this.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Missouri. Ms. Bush is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Chairwoman Maloney,
for convening this timely hearing.
My hometown in St. Louis ranks among the deadliest cities
in the country for overdose deaths among Black people. Just
last week, the University of Missouri, St. Louis, released data
that showed opioid-overdose deaths among Black people in St.
Louis, city and county, increased by 560 percent in the last
six years; 560 percent in six years alone.
As a nurse, I am heartbroken by this preventable,
preventable, totally preventable loss of life. And as a
Congressman, I am outraged.
We are demanding answers from one of the most evasive and
secretive consulting companies in the world, McKinsey &
Company. They have worked for and advised both, opioid
manufacturers like Purdue and the Federal agency responsible
for regulating them, the FDA.
Over the span of 15 years, McKinsey raked in nearly $1
billion in government contracts; contracts that included
assisting the FDA in determining who drugs are safe. At the
same time, they would make untold millions more consulting with
companies like Purdue to help them exploit regulatory loopholes
at the FDA.
There are dire implications of private corporations
crafting public policy behind closed doors. And the process of
discovering the extent of McKinsey's role in fueling the opioid
crisis, lawmakers have an obligation to call for both,
accountability and justice, transparency and honesty, and
apology and reparations.
The families and friends of the nearly 500,000 people who
have died from an overdose since 1999, they deserve answers.
Congress deserves answers. And those who died or whose lives
have been destroyed because of opioids, deserve accountability.
Mr. Sternfels, please respond yes or no, just simply yes or
no, is McKinsey required to disclose current or potential
conflict of interest when bidding for government contracts?
Mr. Sternfels. We are, ma'am.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
And another yes-or-no question, was it a conflict of
interest to consult with the FDA about the safety of drugs like
OxyContin, while also profiting from OxyContin through Purdue?
Mr. Sternfels. We did not comment on the safety of drugs,
such as OxyContin or any other drug in our work with the FDA.
Ms. Bush. Is your company willing to submit documentation
to the committee, confirming that McKinsey's relationship with
Purdue was not a conflict of interest?
Mr. Sternfels. We have been very transparent with this
committee, Congresswoman, on both, our work with Purdue and we
are happy to provide any more transparency around that, and
also with our work with the FDA. And so, if there are any
questions around either side on that, Congresswoman, I am happy
to work with you to provide it.
We believe in transparency on both those. I know you said--
--
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Mr. Sternfels [continuing]. we didn't, but we do.
Ms. Bush. So, I will take that as a yes, that you will be
willing to submit documentation to the committee, confirming
the relationship was not a conflict of interest. Thank you so
much.
Ms. Feiner, when OxyContin sales were low, McKinsey advised
Purdue to send its sales representatives to, quote, high-decile
prescribing physicians. Purdue adopted this advice.
Ms. Feiner, why would McKinsey have advised Purdue to
target these physicians?
Ms. Feiner. Thank you for your question.
McKinsey did a lot of work with the data and found out, and
sold advice to Purdue, that the highest decile prescribers were
the most likely to write more OxyContin prescriptions and that
is the same advice that they sold to Johnson & Johnson.
You know, 25 times more than their counterparts, those are
the doctors that McKinsey was sending Purdue sales reps to
visit relentlessly, 25 times more than their counterparts,
because they were the most profitable targets. They didn't care
whether those doctors were writing safe prescriptions and, in
fact, looking at the data, you know, the odds were that they
weren't. Purdue paid its sales reps to visit these doctors over
and over again.
We tracked every time Purdue visited a Massachusetts doctor
and every time someone in Massachusetts died of an overdose,
and we found that Purdue's top targets were at least 10 times
more likely to prescribe Purdue opioids to patients who
overdosed and died.
The Nation, thousands and thousands of Purdue patients
overdosed and died. That is why it was so important to us to
expose McKinsey & Company.
Ms. Bush. Thank you so much for those insights.
As a nurse who has seen devastation, the devastation
opioids have caused in my community, I am deeply troubled by
these taxes--these tactics. Communities like mine have
struggled under the deadly and devastating opioid crisis for
decades, our community criminalized, and companies like Purdue
and their consultants, like McKinsey, enrich themselves in
billions.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Connolly. Will the lady yield to a question?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Donalds, is now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We are wasting more time in Congress. This hearing,
although the opioid epidemic from pharmaceutical manufacturers
in the United States was a serious problem in our country for a
period of time, many states, like my state of Florida, like the
state of Massachusetts, and so many of the other 48, have
actually gone through legislation, at the state legislative
level, to actually deal with overprescribing any opioid
epidemic, as it existed at that time.
We have a new opioid crisis, folks, and it is not from big
pharma in the United States; it is from the drug cartels who
operate pharmaceutical sites below the southern border in
Mexico. We all know this.
I was on the southern border a week and a half ago. It was
my third trip to the southern border. For the record, Madam
Chair, the President of the United States has not been. The
Vice President of the United States was there for about three
hours.
But members of this committee have been there multiple
times in the last 15 months and the thing we are told
consistently by border agents on the ground, the people who are
tasked with actually securing our country, is that the is the
President's radical policies on immigration at the southern
border have led to massive increases in trafficking fentanyl,
trafficking methamphetamines, trafficking heroin, and
trafficking cocaine into the United States. And that the
fentanyl that is being trafficked into the United States is
being laced into all pills and other narcotics by the drug
cartels, because fentanyl is 40 percent more addictive than
crack cocaine.
The drug cartels are lacing this into everything that they
traffic into the United States and that is what is leading to
the death of American citizens, primarily by fentanyl, but then
also by opioids, who are using illegal drugs.
We all understand what happened with this company and what
they were doing with the FDA, but that was 10 years ago. Why
are we focused on an issue from 10 years ago where most of the
legislative fixes have already occurred? I mean, are we just
trying to get a pound of flesh for talking points? That is the
way it seems to me, because the real issue that is happening
right now is how we are treating trafficking of both, people
and drugs into the United States.
Ms. Tillipman, I am so sorry that you came here today,
because we are wasting your time. I was told my one of my
colleagues that you had one question this entire hearing and
you were there prepared. But what we are talking about today
has no impact on the United States currently.
What does have impact on the United States currently, Mr.
Dhillon, I have heard you give the same answer multiple times
today, is the mere fact that the drug cartels are utilizing our
weak and ineffective border policies to traffic more drugs into
the United States.
Let me give a picture to the American people how this is
actually working. The coyotes are actually marketing to people
in countries all over the world, not just the Northern Triangle
countries, to all over the world that, hey, if you pay us a
couple thousand dollars, we will traffic you into the United
States, where, when we know that you are trying to get there,
it is going to take you legally about three years or five years
to get in, but if you do it our way, you can get in, in about a
month. So, that is what is happening. They are doing this all
over the world. The drug cartels are allowing the coyotes to
move people across the southern border and they are getting a
piece of the action.
By some estimates, the drug cartels made $7 billion last
year, if not more, allowing people to be trafficked into the
United States because those who don't know that anything that
moves across the southern border into the United States, the
drug cartel is paid, whether it is legal or illegal to come
into our country. Those are the facts.
The immigration policy currently by Joe Biden and by
Secretary Mayorkas, is that border agents are supposed to begin
processing people's asylum/amnesty claims at the southern
border and our Border Patrol is not allowed to make a
determination on credible fear. They are only allowed to begin
the processing of people coming into the United States and that
they are given a day in court in front of an asylum judge. But
the asylum judge hearings are, at a minimum, six months to
three years, the first hearing.
So, instead of saying people need to claim asylum or claim
amnesty at a U.S. embassy in their home country, or if their
country does not have a U.S. embassy, at the next closest
embassy, the Biden administration is allowing people to travel
two, three, four, five, sometimes six different countries,
passing U.S. embassies and consulates, to come to our southern
border, enter illegally, and force Border Patrol agents to
process people, as opposed to securing the border. That is what
is happening, America.
Oh, and by the way, under Homeland Security, the Office of
ORR, is they are putting people on airlines all over the United
States and sending them everywhere.
We are not serious. If we were serious, we would have
Secretary Mayorkas, who is in Appropriations right now, we
would bring him in here and ask him about the real threat.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Donalds. Madam Chair, the real threat----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Donalds [continuing]. to the American people, which is
fentanyl trafficking by the drug cartels into the United
States, and they are using radical immigration policy by Joe
Biden to kill more Americans here.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Donalds. Now, I will yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady from California, Ms.
Porter, is now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Porter. I hope you can hear me if I don't shout.
Mr. Sternfels, to be clear, is your position that
manufacturer, that McKinsey, is your position that McKinsey,
working for both, the FDA and opioid manufacturers at the same
time, did not create a conflict of interest?
Mr. Sternfels. That is my----
Ms. Porter. Is that your position?
Mr. Sternfels. That is my position, to be clear.
Ms. Porter. OK. I appreciate your clarity.
Let's look at what McKinsey employees told pharmaceutical
companies. McKinsey consultants bragged to opioid-maker, Purdue
Pharma, that their FDA work, quote, improved Purdue's ability
to influence the regulatory environment; that is a McKinsey
statement.
Quote, McKinsey's FDA work improve, will improve Purdue's
ability to influence the regulatory environment.
McKinsey worked for Purdue at the same time it was working
for the FDA.
Mr. Sternfels, should McKinsey have disclosed to the FDA
that it was helping opioid manufacturers influence drug-safety
regulations?
Mr. Sternfels. I will start with your direct question,
which is we don't view our work at the FDA, at the same time,
working with pharmaceutical companies, including opioids, as a
conflict, because the topics were different.
Ms. Porter. OK. I know you say that you worked on, I read
your testimony and all of the information, you worked on broad,
systemic issues is your claim.
But are you suggesting that working on things like the
design on organizational structure, staffing, resource
allocation, building the bones of a drug safety system doesn't
affect how those regulations actually get enforced against an
entity like Purdue? I mean, if your work for FDA was so
important, didn't it have some influence on what they actually
did in the world with regard to drug manufacturers?
Mr. Sternfels. No, it didn't, Congresswoman.
It may be worthwhile being more specific----
Ms. Porter. So, you charged the Government to not do
important work?
Mr. Sternfels. I didn't say that the work wasn't important;
I said that it didn't actually influence their decision with
respect to pharmaceutical companies or opioids, in particular.
It may be worth--for the committee understanding in a bit more
detail what actually we did with the FDA.
This is the kind of work that McKinsey & Company performed
for the FDA. It was implementing technology solutions so that
we could have repeatable process. It was taking paper out of
processes that had too much paper. It was putting in visibility
and performance management as to where people were allocated so
that FDA employees could actually be more productivity to help
save taxpayer money.
These are the kinds of aspects. We didn't design the
processes. We didn't actually set policy. We made some of these
core processes more efficient and effective to make the FDA
more efficient and effective.
Ms. Porter. Well, Mr. Sternfels, is, shouldn't the FDA have
been allowed to make its own decision about whether or not your
company's work for Purdue did or did not create a conflict? Why
should you and your company be the decisionmaker here?
Mr. Sternfels. We aren't the sole decisionmaker in this.
Ms. Porter. Who made you conflict of interest czar for the
United States Government?
Mr. Sternfels. We are not the conflict of interest czar,
Congresswoman. We follow----
Ms. Porter. OK. So, let me ask you, did you disclose to the
FDA your, McKinsey's work at the same time, did you disclose to
the FDA that McKinsey was working, at the same time it was
working for the FDA, that it was working for Purdue? Did you
disclose that to the FDA?
Mr. Sternfels. We made clear in multiple instances that the
individuals involved had experience in both, pharmaceuticals
and opioids, in particular.
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time.
Mr. Sternfels, they didn't have experience; they were the
identical humans working for both at the same time.
Did you tell the FDA, did you make these disclosures and
then allow the Government to decide if there was a conflict of
interest?
Mr. Sternfels. When we assessed the work progress, the work
request from the FDA, we brought professionals, our legally
team, our dedicated government team, to understand, first, is
there a conflict of interest?
We verified that the work was different and, therefore----
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time.
Mr. Sternfels, that is you putting yourself as the czar of
conflicts. Look, your scheme worked really well for McKinsey;
McKinsey got contracts, Purdue got rich, and America got
addicted.
Since 2008, McKinsey earned $140 million in contracts from
the FDA, and you did not ever disclose your work for Purdue.
You did not disclose your conflicts of interest.
So, my question for you is, since you didn't disclose the
conflicts of interest, will you return to $140 million to the
FDA?
Mr. Sternfels. I will point you to the FDA's statement as
recently as yesterday, where they highlight that our work was
not related to opioids or the pharmaceutical industry
whatsoever.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time is expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Comer, he
is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I appreciate Representative Porter's questions about
disclosure.
Representative Porter, I hope you share our passion for
wanting administration officials to have full disclosure with
their conflicts of interest when we talk about, in January, the
Biden family's lack of disclosures and Peter Daszak's lack of
disclosures with his work with the WHO immediately after the
outbreak of COVID from the Wuhan lab. So, we look forward to
working with you on that quest for disclosures.
Mr. Dhillon, welcome back to the committee. As you heard
from members on our side of the aisle, we are very concerned
about what is going on with the southern border. You can't have
a conversation about opioid abuse without talking about what is
going on at the southern border.
And unlike my friends on the other side of the aisle, we
have actually been on this committee, Republicans, to the
border at least two times; many members, Glenn Grothman, have
been probably seven or eight times and many other members like
Representative Biggs and Yvette Herrell live on the border. So,
it is a daily struggle.
But will we be able to stem the crisis of opioids in this
country without focusing on the southern border?
Mr. Dhillon. No.
Mr. Comer. Would you agree that policies that fail to
address the situation at the southern border is exacerbating
the opioid epidemic as cartels smuggle drugs past an
overwhelmed Border Patrol?
Mr. Dhillon. That is correct.
Mr. Comer. Do you agree that Mexican trends national
criminal organizations, or cartels, as Representative Donalds
was talking about, manufacturer synthetic opioids in
clandestine labs on the Mexican side of the border?
Mr. Dhillon. They either import them from Mexico finished
or they manufacturer them in labs. They also press them into
pill form, also.
Mr. Comer. That is right.
And I was in Ohio County, a little town called Hartford,
Kentucky, two weeks ago talking to the sheriff and they had
just had a big crystal meth bust there, the biggest one they
had ever had in that part of Kentucky. One hundred percent of
that, they verified from drug agents, was manufactured in a lab
just across the border in Mexico. They carried it right across
the border with our lax border policies. It is just
unbelievable.
And when the cartels manufacturer these synthetic opioids,
where are they obtaining the precursor chemicals from, what
country?
Mr. Dhillon. Largely China. India is also a country where
they obtain those chemicals, but it is largely China.
Mr. Comer. China. China, Madam Chairwoman.
Do we wonder on this side of the aisle if this
administration is compromised by China because of son of--
Hunter Biden, and now what we have learned in the last few
weeks, Hunter Biden's uncle's dealings with China?
Because it just seems like this country, you know, we know
that China is contributing to the drug problem in the United
States; fentanyl to Mexico, Mexico packs it across the border--
a hundred thousand deaths from fentanyl. We know that China
played a leading role in COVID-19. We know that China had
covered up a lot that went on in that Wuhan lab, but yet, this
administration doesn't want to talk about China.
It is odd and that is why we keep talking about Hunter
Biden, because we wonder if this administration is compromised
on China because of the President and the President's son and
the President's brother's shady business dealings in China.
Now, as Representative Donalds mentioned, we found out when
we were on our second border trip, that the cartel, they
smuggle both, people and drugs in their operations.
Is that correct, Mr. Dhillon?
Mr. Dhillon. Yes, the cartels on their side of the border
completely control all of the passages into the United States.
You cannot get from Mexico into the U.S. without going through
a cartel member.
Mr. Comer. Now, are the cartels using their human-smuggling
operations to facilitate their drug-smuggling operations?
Mr. Dhillon. Yes, they profit both, from human smuggling
and they can also use them to bring drugs into the U.S.
Mr. Comer. All right. Well, Madam Chair, I appreciate the
concern about the opioid crisis in America. We share your
concern about the opioid crisis in America.
Much of what we talked about has been litigated and there
have been many reforms made with respect to the American opioid
producers. The problem with opioids on the southern border, and
this administration has an open-border policy that is
facilitating the opioid crisis in America, we need to have
hearings with Mayorkas, with administration officials to talk
about the Biden border crisis.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Let me get right to it. I want to thank all the witnesses
for being here, but I do want to direct my questions to Mr.
Sternfels. As you know, after former President Trump nominated
Alex Azar to serve as Secretary of Health and Human Services,
McKinsey consultants got to work drafting a transition memo to
share with Mister, with him.
That memo covered six broad topics and the third one was
the very important topic of tackling the opioid epidemic. And I
would like to bring up that memo, if we could, so that you can
take a look at it.
[Slide.]
Mr. Welch. But the draft of that section that was
originally presented had strong language about the severity of
the opioid crisis and it emphasized the link, that link between
prescription opioids and the epidemic. And it read, despite
significant attention and effort, the opioid crisis continues
to inflict devastating consequences on the health and well-
being of people in this country. Millions of Americans are
addicted to opioids. Approximately 95 million Americans use
prescription painkillers in the past year; more than used
tobacco.
You know, I regard that as candid and complete. But the
final version was distilled to an anodyne statement, quote, you
are well aware of the major challenges associated with the
opioid and associated heroin epidemic.
So my question, Mr. Sternfels, is what happened? What
happened to the complete and clear language, replaced by the
anodyne, sanitized language?
Mr. Sternfels. Thanks, Congressman.
You know, I would start with the notion of transition memos
for both, Democrats and Republicans taking office, has been
something that we have often done----
Mr. Welch. No. No. No.
The only thing, you don't have to give me a dialog about
the transition memos. The language was candid and complete and
then it was anodyne.
I mean, why?
Mr. Sternfels. No, I appreciate where I was going is the
memos cover the entire Department, so HHS, and if you read the
memo entirely, it covers many topics under the remit of HHS of
which the opioid epidemic, which I believe, and I am not exact
on this, I think we named the epidemic six times, at least in
the final memo, is one very important topic.
Mr. Welch. Let me go on. Let me go on to the next question,
because, frankly, I am not finding that an explanation.
McKinsey did significant work for Purdue Pharma and the
task that McKinsey had was to help that terrible Sackler family
sell more and more drugs that got more and more people
addicted. That was, like, the day job. At night, McKinsey did
work for the governmental agencies that were tasked with trying
to stem the opioid epidemic.
So, let me ask how McKinsey can justify a day job
facilitating the efforts of the biggest drug-dealing family in
the history of the country and its night job was trying to help
the Government address the problems that that drug family
caused during the day. Just tell me how that works.
Mr. Sternfels. Well, Congressman, I want to be very clear.
I am not here to defend the work that we did with Purdue. I
have noted clearly that it fell short of our standards and that
we, and I apologized for that work, and it was part of the
reason that we led to the accelerated settlement for the
state's AG and are now firmly vetted in being part of the
solution, the $575 million that we paid, standing up McKinsey
Health Institute. So, I want to be clear on that front.
And I also want to----
Mr. Welch. I do appreciate that.
Go ahead.
Mr. Sternfels. OK. Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you.
I also want to be clear that the work that we did with the
FDA focused on improving their processes. It was agnostic of
any pharmaceutical-specific drug, including opioids----
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Sternfels [continuing]. and the FDA has been on
record----
Mr. Welch. OK.
Mr. Sternfels [continuing]. multiple times to that effect.
Mr. Welch. All right. Thank you.
In fact, I only have a little time, I didn't mean to
interrupt you, but I will just ask the professor, do you have
any comments on this?
Ms. Tillipman. I think there has been almost a hyper-
fixation in listening to the words that I have heard today on
subject matter overlap. It is important to keep in mind that
the crux of an OCI analysis is bias and, in fact, the language
in many agency clauses and the language that are in FDA
contracts actually ask companies to report the existence of any
facts that may cause a reasonably prudent person to question
the contractor's impartiality because of the appearance or
existence of bias.
So, by focusing exclusively on subject matter, you are only
really taking a piece of it. All of it needs to be factored in
and considered when you are doing an analysis of this nature.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
I yield back and I thank the chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman
[Audio malfunction.] is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Davis?
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Sternfels, according to your website, McKinsey boasts
that it is, and I am quoting, the trusted advisor and counselor
to many of the world's most influential businesses and
institutions, end of quote.
Your life sciences practice, in particular, holds itself
out, and I am quoting again, the leading consultancy for
pharmaceutical and medical products companies, end of quote.
In December 2020, after McKinsey entered into a $573
million-dollar settlement with state attorneys general,
including Attorney General Healey, for McKinsey's role in
contributing to the opioid epidemic, your company issued an
apology for, and I am quoting again, our work for Purdue.
But Mr. Sternfels, McKinsey did opioid work-related for
companies other than Purdue; isn't that right? Could I have a
yes-or-no answer?
Mr. Sternfels. That is correct, Congressman.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Nearly six months ago, this committee requested that
McKinsey turn over all documents from its risk committee
regarding its opioid and drug-consultant work. I think we
deserve to know how McKinsey's risk processes failed at Purdue.
It also requested client lists and work product from opioid
distributors, like McKesson, AmerisourceBergen, and Kartner
Health, and pharmacies like CVS and Walmart, all of whom played
a pivotal role in this epidemic.
You have not turned over these materials. So, Mr.
Sternfels, can we count on you to produce these documents to
the committee?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, I want to be clear that our
work with distributors and pharmacies did not cover opioids. I
also want to restress our collaboration with this committee to
turn over 375,000 pages of material, which relate to
pharmaceutical companies beyond Purdue; some of those have
actually related to opioids that you actually have some
documents on.
And if there are further questions that you are interested
in, I would be happy to continue to work with you to answer
those questions. We know we are not done answering your
questions.
Mr. Davis. OK. Is, but you can't get those to us in, say, a
week or something that is close to that?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, as I have said----
Mr. Davis. That is----
Mr. Sternfels [continuing]. I am happy to work with you.
Mr. Davis. Thank you. Let me move on.
Two weeks ago in response to the committee's staff interim
report, McKinsey issued a statement that, and I quote, we
understand and accept the scrutiny around our past client
service to opioid manufacturers, end of quote.
This statement echoed your December 2020 pledge to, quote,
again, continue to cooperate fully with the authorities
investigating these matters, end of quote.
Now, Mr. Sternfels, you cannot claim to be accepting
accountability without committing to transparency. This
committee identified 22 McKinsey consultants who worked for
both, the FDA and Purdue, even at the same time.
The committee has asked what other pharma companies they
work for. You have not told us. Congress cannot develop
legislative reform to address these issues without fully
understanding the extent of McKinsey's conflicts of interest.
Mr. Sternfels, as a start, will you commit to providing the
committee with the lists of these consultants, private sector
clients, as requested by the committee?
Mr. Sternfels. Congressman, I would start by agreeing with
you on this notion of transparency and accountability; those
are absolutely fundamental tenets for you and for us.
We have been very clear around the 22 consultants. We don't
hide the fact that they worked with both, the FDA and the
pharmaceutical companies. It gets to the heart of the issue: we
don't believe there is a conflict of interest, given there was
no bias and there was no overlap in topic areas.
If there are further things you would like to know----
Mr. Davis. So, thank you, again. Now, let me reclaim my
time before it runs out. Thank you for your answers.
Today's hearing illustrates the dangers of allowing
McKinsey to operate behind its code of silence. McKinsey's
conflicts of interests have led to enormous costs, not just in
dollars and cents, but in human lives. Without full
transparency, there can be no accountability.
I thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and yield back the balance
of my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, is recognized
for his five minutes.
Mr. Connolly?
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Does he know?
Voice. Then go to Mr. Comer for closing.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. Mr. Connolly?
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. He is not listening.
Voice. Go to Mr. Comer for----
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. Mr. Comer, we recognize you for
closing.
Mr. Comer. For closing?
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes. He is, apparently, not ready.
Mr. Comer. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
And I want to, again, thank our witnesses----
Voice. Ms. Pressley just walked in.
Chairwoman Maloney. Excuse me, Ms. Pressley just walked in.
Mr. Comer. OK. That is fine.
I will yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Congresswoman Pressley, you are now
recognized.
Voice. You are on.
Chairwoman Maloney. Congresswoman Ayanna Pressley, you are
now recognized and then we will go to Mr. Connolly.
Does she hear?
Ms. Pressley. OK. Thank you, Madam Chair----
Chairwoman Maloney. OK.
Ms. Pressley [continuing]. and thank you to the committee
staff who drafted the report detailing the deceptive, callous,
and immoral role that McKinsey has played in furthering the
opioid epidemic.
As Attorney General Healey mentioned, families in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts have been disproportionately
impacted by this crisis. The overdose death rate in my state is
nearly twice as high as the national average and those stolen
lives are disproportionately people of color.
In the Massachusetts' 7th, the district that I represent, I
hear from community health centers and addiction recovery
organizations that are doing all that they can to facilitate
healing after the pain caused by McKinsey and opioid
manufacturers.
So, Mr. Sternfels, your apologies feel empty and insincere
and sort of PR responses, because McKinsey was profiting off of
the hurt and harm for years with zero remorse. In 2013,
McKinsey presented Purdue Pharma, run by the Sackler family,
with a strategy to, quote, turbocharge, unquote, sales of
OxyContin.
Ms. Feiner, as senior counsel in a lawsuit led by
Massachusetts, was this the first time that McKinsey deployed
the turbocharge strategy?
Ms. Feiner. Thank you for your question.
No. Well, McKinsey had been doing similar work for Purdue
for a very long time, so it started early. And it also used the
same destructive playbook with another client, Johnson &
Johnson, for its NUCYNTA opioid. So, this was not the first
time that McKinsey pulled out this playbook for one of its
opioid clients.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
And, in fact, documents obtained by the committee show that
in 2011, McKinsey consultants launched a project, as you just
referenced, to turbocharge Johnson & Johnson's flagship opioid
NUCYNTA. McKinsey helped to identify physicians that would
write high numbers of opioid prescriptions. In one Johnson &
Johnson presentation, McKinsey stated it had, quote, key
McKinsey experts who have implemented similar efforts, unquote,
at other pharma companies.
Mr. Sternfels, what other companies had McKinsey worked
with on these sales strategies outside of Johnson & Johnson?
Mr. Sternfels. Congresswoman, first, I would apologize if
you think that our stance is insincere. We take this stuff
deadly seriously and it is why we are here today, and it is why
there is nothing more important that being transparent and
accountable with all of you.
If a full list of the work that we do in terms of pricing
work, revenue work, what have you, with opioid manufacturers is
of interest, I will get you that and come back to it. I don't
have that----
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
Mr. Sternfels. I don't have the full list with me.
Ms. Pressley. That is enough.
OK. I will reclaim my time and look forward to that
information if you can't provide it here in the committee
hearing today, again, on what other companies McKinsey worked
with on these sale strategies of turbocharge, outside of
Johnson & Johnson. So, that is the information that I will be
looking for.
But, again, we know McKinsey had strategies to spread
opioids like, quote, wildfire, and that these were strategies
that they had perfected elsewhere. Based on the documents the
committee has, McKinsey pushed a turbocharged opioid strategy
at Purdue and at Johnson & Johnson; however, we need more
documents to see what other pharmaceutical companies you worked
with. So, I thank you in advance for your transparency on that.
Mr. Sternfels, will you finally commit to providing the
committee just one more time, yes or no, with all the
information that we have requested?
Mr. Sternfels. As I have said many times today, I am fully
committed to continuing to work with the committee. We know
that we are not done in answering your questions and we want to
pursue that, quite frankly, until you feel that you have the
answers that you need, Congresswoman.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
Like the Sackler family in Purdue Pharma, McKinsey &
Company, you have been complicit in creating this country's
opioid crisis and profiting off of the pain of millions of
families. You have raked in billions of dollars every year.
Offering an apology while avoiding responsibility is really
worthless. What you have done is unconscionable. It is
unacceptable. Families were robbed of loved ones by your so-
called consulting expertise and McKinsey & Company must be held
accountable.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, is recognized
for five minutes. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I am sorry I am in and out of this hearing. I have been
hearing NATO meetings all morning because we have the NATO
Parliamentary Assembly from Europe is in town and I am hosting
them, so forgive me for being in and out.
Ms. Feiner, I was listening to some of my colleagues. So,
the OxyContin part of the opioid crisis began, apparently,
south of the border; is that right?
Ms. Feiner. Thank you for that question.
You know, the opioid crisis began with prescription opioids
and, largely, with Purdue's misconduct around selling
OxyContin. And I think we can look to the----
Mr. Connolly. But they were located south of the border,
right, Purdue's U.S. headquarters?
Ms. Feiner. No, they were not. They were located----
Mr. Connolly. Oh.
Ms. Feiner [continuing]. right in New York.
Mr. Connolly. Oh, my lord. Oh, well, goodness. I wouldn't
know that from their questioning.
So, the source of OxyContin, the production of it must be
south of the border, right?
Ms. Feiner. Nope. Right in the United States. I believe
that there----
Mr. Connolly. Oh, my gosh.
Ms. Feiner [continuing]. plants are in Rhode Island and
North Carolina.
Mr. Connolly. So, it is not Mexican or Central American
doctors writing these prescriptions; it is actually good-old
American doctors north of the border?
Ms. Feiner. You are correct.
Mr. Connolly. Oh my gosh. Because, you know, listening to
some of my good friends on the other side of the aisle, I had a
different impression and I even thought maybe Purdue Pharma,
which really is the heart and soul of the opioid crisis in
America that led to the hundred thousand deaths this last year
alone, I thought it must be based in another country south of
the border, because listening to the rhetoric of my friends.
Well, certainly, the opioid crisis began with the
presidency of Joe Biden, right? I mean, President Biden, we
have to lay this squarely at his feet.
This began about a year and a half ago; is that right?
Ms. Feiner. That is incorrect. I think it started in the
late 1990's.
Mr. Connolly. Oh my gosh. All right.
Well, I am learning something every second talking to you,
Ms. Feiner. Thank you.
So, let's talk a little bit about phrases like
``turbocharge.'' What was turbocharge about? Who came up with
that?
Ms. Feiner. McKinsey. McKinsey actually had multiple
meetings with Purdue in Purdue's offices, at fancy restaurants,
and with the Sacklers. And they told them that the way to
maintain a high volume of OxyContin sales was to turbocharge
the sales engine to motive their salesforce, give them target
lists for the highest prescribers in the country, and have
their sales reps go out and visit them relentlessly, and
incentivize the sales reps to visit them relentlessly, and to
stick to their call plans, which McKinsey assembled. And that
is what turbocharging was; it was to keep the sale of OxyContin
going.
Mr. Connolly. And by the way, just for the record, is
McKinsey headquartered south of the border?
Ms. Feiner. No, it is not.
Mr. Connolly. Is it located in----
Ms. Feiner. Right here in this country.
Mr. Connolly. In this country, OK.
And did that turbocharge program, then, sort of morph into
something called ``Evolve to Excellence''?
Ms. Feiner. It was all part of the same plan to increase
OxyContin sales at the time that, at the same time, that
regulators were trying to reduce opioid prescriptions in the
United States.
Mr. Connolly. And if we can put on the screen----
[Slide]
Mr. Connolly. Then something was developed, a rewards
program called ``Wildfire.'' And I even see a picture of our
previous President up there.
And are you familiar with this rewards program, Ms. Feiner?
Ms. Feiner. I am familiar with the idea that McKinsey
looked for many ways to incent sales representatives to
turbocharge the OxyContin sales and this was one of them.
Mr. Connolly. And they used phrases like ``cash prizes that
are significant and meaningful'' as part of the rewards
program, ``enormous prestige,'' and ``celebrity status within
the company'' if you met certain sales goals; is that correct?
Ms. Feiner. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. My time is going to expire, but Mr.
Sternfels, 600,000 Americans are dead. Many people are still
struggling with addiction.
Do you have any regret that you want to share with the
committee?
Mr. Sternfels. Thank you, Congressman.
I regret that we didn't act sooner, sir. And if I could
play this over, I would have put the client protocols in a
decade earlier. I would have reached settlement even faster.
And we would have pivoted from serving the manufacturers,
despite, you know, whatever goals there were, and I already
apologized for that, to actually being part of the solution.
So, if it was a regret, it would have been to act sooner, sir.
Mr. Connolly. That is a comfort to those who lost loved
ones during this opioid epidemic.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
I would, before we close, like to offer the ranking member,
Mr. Comer, an opportunity to offer his closing remarks.
You are now recognized.
Mr. Comer. OK. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
And, again, I thank our witnesses for being here today.
And, Madam Chair, I thank you for having a history lesson for
us today about what happened with big pharma and with McKinsey
many years ago.
But it is really not sincere to have a full committee
hearing about the opioid crisis and not have any witnesses, not
have any discussion about what is going on, on the southern
border, because the fentanyl crisis is the opioid crisis. This
is the drug crisis that is affected every American today, right
now, in the present.
You know, today, we witnessed outrage by Tlaib and Pressley
about opioid overdose deaths in their district. Republicans
share their outrage over opioid overdose deaths. We all have
those in our districts.
We heard Representative Porter express concern that
McKinsey didn't properly disclose their conflicts of interest
when doing contract work with the FDA.
Republicans strongly share her concern. We want full
disclosure of every potential conflict of interest. That is one
role the House Oversight Committee plays; that is why we have
requested so many hearings with respect to the origination of
COVID-19, with respect to Hunter Biden and all the shady
business dealings that we believe have left the Biden
administration compromised with China, which is always at the
root of just about every conflict with have in America now.
We have heard many Democrats express anger with Purdue
Pharma and McKinsey and their past wrongdoings, and Republicans
share your anger.
My question to Democrats is this, you have heard today,
Republicans express our concern, outrage, and anger with the
Biden administration and their open-border policy.
Do you share our concern about the Biden border crisis that
is bringing fentanyl and crystal meth and every drug imaginable
across the border?
If you share our outrage, join us in going to the southern
border, listening to the Border Patrol agents. Join us when we
request hearings and let's have a bipartisan hearing about the
crisis on the southern border and get the appropriate Biden
officials in here to see what they are doing about it.
Let's not just talk about past litigation. Let's talk about
the present and what we are going to do about it in the future.
This is the drug issue that this committee needs to be focusing
on: the fentanyl coming across the southern border.
So, Madam Chair, I will conclude by, again, asking on
behalf of all Americans, for you to hold a bipartisan hearing
on the border crisis that is bringing in so many drugs and has
led to a hundred thousand fentanyl deaths in the last year
alone.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
I thank all of my colleagues and all the panelists for your
participation today.
Over 500,000 Americans have died from opioid overdoses and
that number continues to climb every day. Today's hearing
represents a critical step in ensuring public accountability
for those responsible for the Nation's opioid epidemic; not
just the opioid manufacturers or their billionaire owners, but
their hired guns, who hid behind suits and board rooms.
We now know that Purdue and the Sacklers were relying on
McKinsey's consultants to create the roadmap to flood America
with addictive painkillers. McKinsey pushed the most horrific
advice on how to push more opioids onto our hardest-hit
communities.
Today we learned that McKinsey reaped at least $86 million
in revenue from consulting Purdue alone. They consulted for
other companies on their marketing strategies and over $140
million from the FDA.
Mr. Sternfels, I am very disappointed that you continue to
deny that McKinsey's consulting for the FDA and opioid
manufacturers presented a conflict of interest and you defended
your company's failure to disclose this information to the FDA,
despite the overwhelming evidence of the conflicts presented
today.
What we need now from McKinsey is what you claimed
repeatedly that you support, and that is transparency. We
expect you for fully comply with the committee's document
request by this Friday so that we can see how widely and deeply
your firm's conflicts of interests run.
We, many of us on this committee, introduced legislation
today to address these conflicts of interests, and we intend to
continue seeking legislative solutions to prevent companies
like McKinsey from putting profits over Americans' health and
safety.
We look forward to working with you to get these documents
and we look forward to working with you in passing this
legislation.
I would like to add, in closing, that not only are we all
very grateful to our panelists for their remarks, and I want to
commend my colleagues for participating very, very passionately
today in this very important conversation.
With that, and without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit extraneous
information and to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses to the chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses for their response.
I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
are able.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:52 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
