- PROJECT FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: MAKE IT WORK

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROJECT FEDERAL INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY: MAKE IT WORK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 16, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-103

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available at: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-613 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Mike Flood, Nebraska
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russell Anello, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee on Government Operations Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   Jody B. Hice, Georgia Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         Andy Biggs, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Ro Khanna, California                Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Katie Porter, California
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on September 16, 2022...............................     1

Witness

Clare Martorana, Federal Chief Information Officer, Office of
Management and Budget
Oral Statement...................................................     5

Written opening statements and the statement for the witness are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Six OMB memos regarding cybersecurity; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* GAO guidance regarding reimbursement; submitted by Rep.
Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Ms. Matorana; submitted by Rep.
Hice.

* Questions for the Record: to Ms. Matorana; submitted by Rep.
Brown.

The documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

PROJECT FEDERAL INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY: MAKE IT WORK

----------

Friday, September 16, 2022

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:07 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom; Hon.
Gerald E. Connolly (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Lynch, Khanna,
and Hice.
Mr. Connolly. The hearing will come to order.
This June, the Office of the Federal Chief Information
Officer, led by today's witness, Clare Martorana, published the
Information Technology Operating Plan. This plan outlined the
Office of Management and Budget's strategy to maximize the
impact of Federal IT funds.
As someone who's dedicated decades to championing IT
modernization across both the private and public sectors, I was
heartened to see the plan encompass many of the long-range
priorities of this subcommittee.
During our tenure, we've held 14 hearings, released 14
scorecards, grading agencies' implementation of the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act.
FITARA promotes proper IT practices across Federal
agencies. Every scorecard iteration reflects contemporary
shifts within the IT landscape, evolving as needed with changes
in modernization and cybersecurity best practices to hold
agencies' CIOs accountable for ensuring proper IT postures.
Since the scorecard's inception, agencies have saved an
estimated, according to GAO, $29 billion. There aren't many
bills that can claim that.
Similarly, the Federal Chief Information Officer's new
technology plan provides a solid roadmap to continue the vital
work of improving our Federal IT systems to better serve our
constituents.
Today, we will hear the Federal CIO present her vision for
the future of Federal IT.
This moment is a crossroads in how government operates. The
pandemic fundamentally changed what people expect from their
government and how they access programs, information, resources
from it. We do not want to lose any lessons learned, and we
want to empower Federal CIOs to scale IT solutions that, in
fact, work.
Today we will explore in-depth the Federal CIO's four IT
focus areas: cybersecurity, IT modernization, digital-first
customer experience, and the use of data as a strategic asset.
I'm pleased that cybersecurity remains a top priority for
the Biden administration. In 2020, the SolarWinds' supply chain
cyber-attack blindsided top security experts across the world.
This attack catalyzed the reevaluation and n modernization of
our Nation's cybersecurity strategy.
Since that attack, OMB has reengineered a new risk-based
cybersecurity regime using new metrics to measure and assess
Federal agencies' cyber posture. In December 2021, OMB shifted
government toward a zero-trust architecture, focused on ground
truth testing, observable security outcomes, and automation.
Today we'll hear a lot more about the work OMB has done to
change the culture of Federal IT, and we're eager to dig into
their recently released memorandum on enhancing the security of
the software supply chain through secure software development
practices.
We'll also discuss how the subcommittee can work with OMB
to ensure that we have publicly available data for the FITARA
scorecard, holding CIOs accountable, and empowering them to
implement cybersecurity lessons.
Additionally, as co-chair of the IT Modernization Caucus, I
am quite familiar with the problems caused by agencies' failure
to modernize. A GAO report found that, quote, ``The
consequences of not updating legacy systems have contributed
to, among other things, security risks, unmet mission needs,
staffing issues, and increased costs,'' unquote.
Successful modernization demands constant action and nimble
solutions that keep pace with rapidly shifting IT ecosystems.
I'm proud to have helped successfully secure, for example, a
revolutionary $1 billion for the Technology Modernization Fund.
The TMF reimagined the way agencies could receive financing,
offering opportunities outside of the traditional
appropriations process, facilitating long-term planning, and
providing expert assistance. To date, the fund has awarded, I
believe, almost $600 million to 28 unclassified projects across
17 Federal agencies.
Despite the massive investment, agencies need more. At our
May hearing with TMF's executive director, she noted that 60
agencies have applied for over 130 projects, totaling $2.5
billion in prospective funding, more than double what was
provided by Congress. We must continue to support this fund and
seed agency efforts to ensure that their IT systems are
prepared.
I also want to highlight the Biden administration's
executive order focused on improving Federal service delivering
customer experience. These combined factors are key to
rebuilding the public's trust in the government and preserving
our democracy.
The Federal CIO has told this committee in previous
hearings that improving customer experience is their passion.
We aim to find ways to jointly hold agencies accountable for
making it easier for all people to interact with their Federal
Government through user-friendly websites and careful attention
to accessibility.
Every day, people transition seamlessly between the digital
and physical worlds. The pandemic pushed more of us to telework
from home, scan a QR code, or order dinner at a restaurant, or
zoom with loved ones, or even with your colleagues here in
Congress, also loved ones.
In the same way we depend on technology to serve the
public, serving the public well depends on data. Data ensures
that only those who qualify for Federal benefits can access
them. Data helps agencies create hiring strategies to get the
talent they need to serve the American public. Data helps
agencies prioritize IT investments and finds ways to share
services across Federal agencies.
Today we're interested to hear from Ms. Martorana on how
government can maximize both cost savings and better service
delivery. I will also seek to find opportunities for the
subcommittee to continue to work with the Biden administration
to ensure that our government is meeting this pivotal
technology moment.
With that, the chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr.
Hice of Georgia, for his opening statement.
Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Connolly, Chairman. I
appreciate you calling this hearing. I must say you look good
there in the hearing room. I wish I was able to join you in
person, but I've got a full day here in the district after this
hearing. But I do thank you for calling this--this hearing
today.
As I've said to you before, I really appreciate your
insistence on bringing Biden administration witnesses before
us. So, I appreciate that as well.
And, Ms. Martorana, I appreciate you being here today, and
sincerely express to you my condolences for the loss in your
family, for not being able to join us in July. I hope you and
the rest of your family are doing well as you deal with the
grief of a loss like that.
But as we gather here today, none of us can understate the
importance of Federal information technology. We all know that
it's critical, and I cannot think of any aspect of our
government that does not rely on information technology to
deliver services and the jobs that they are called to do.
There's an underlying assumption that the vast amounts of
funding somewhere in the neighborhood of $100 billion a year
will somehow deliver the intended results. But in my time in
Congress at least, and certainly during my time as ranking
member of this subcommittee, I've learned that it's probably
not wise to make that assumption.
Our hearings just, for example, with the IRS have shown
that simply spending billions and billions of dollars and then
waiting decades does not mean that agencies will get their IT
house in order.
And while my Democratic colleagues claim the source of the
problem is lack of funding, I, quite frankly, reject that
premise. Simply pouring more money into a black hole is not a
solution. What we need is solid oversight that is backed by
reliable information in order to determine the true state of
our Federal IT, to determine whether Federal IT projects are
delivered on time and on budget. All of that requires
oversight. It requires accountability. Whether IT projects
deliver the intended results and whether Federal systems and
networks are secure. I am far from convinced that all of this
is taking place.
In today's hearing, I'm eager to learn more about what
exactly we do know about Federal IT and what ability the
Federal CIO has to drive behavior and improvement. That's a
question that we should know but, frankly, I don't know. So, I
want to have that answer today.
I also want to voice my concerns about what seems to be a
pattern from this administration to ignore the law and the
clear intent of Congress. The law requires OMB to develop
management goals, the cross-agency priorities, or the CAP
goals.
Congress wanted a long-term management blueprint from each
administration for improvement and reform. These not only
should help improve agency performance, but give us here who
are, in essence, the de facto board of directors of the Federal
Government, a map for effective oversight. Yet the Biden
administration has ignored this requirement.
The CAP goals were due in February of this year, but it
didn't happen. And at least I'm not aware of any discussion of
this matter between the administration and this committee. I'm
not aware of any request for an extension. They just simply did
not do what the law requires. And, frankly, this directly
impacted the last FITARA scorecard on perhaps the single most
important issue and category, and that is cybersecurity.
So, look, the administration simply cannot comply with the
law when they want to and ignore it when they want to. There
must be accountability.
And with respect to the Technology Modernization Fund, this
administration is ignoring the intent of the underlying
Modernization Government Act. The focus of the TMF and the
broader MGT, as we'll call it, was to modernize government IT
systems. That meant doing away with the types of ancient
systems that still run and--too many of our vital government
programs. In addition, the tenet of the TMF was that it would
create an efficient cycle.
So, to paraphrase none other than Democratic Leader Steny
Hoyer, agencies were to reimburse the fund ideally through
these savings that were gained from doing away with costly
legacy systems. But the Biden administration has opted for
partial or even minimal reimbursements. I want to know why.
It's also emphasizing cybersecurity and customer experience
projects, which in and of themselves are fine, but doing so
rather than retiring old systems.
Taken together, even if the law requires these practices,
again, it's not that these practices in and of themselves are
bad, but it simply and clearly is not the intent of Congress.
So, why is the administration doing this? We need answers.
Does the savings-based model of the TMF not work or is it
simply inconvenient? This committee needs to know.
And what progress is being made to retire legacy systems?
Is there even a definition of what a legacy system is?
Do we know how well the billions of IT funding are being
used?
Is the Federal IT dashboard, which is supposed to give us
the answer, is it at all reliable?
Where does the underlying data come from? Is it even
accurate data?
Are requirements and definitions uniform? If not, what
would it take for this to be the case?
Finally, what ability does the Federal CIO have to drive
and produce better practices?
The title sounds lofty, indeed, but the GAO notes in a new
report that the Federal CIO position was never even established
in statute. The first reference of a Federal CIO came in a
press release, the actual role of the administrator of the
Office of E-Government.
So, regardless of the title of the Federal CIO, certainly
it would suggest the ability to direct agency CIOs and take a
leading role. So, I want to know: Is that the case? Do you have
that kind of authority?
If Congress attempts to hold the agency CIOs accountable,
as we do through the FITARA scorecard, then should we not also
hold the Federal CIO accountable? But if we do, for what are we
holding that position accountable? We don't even have a job
description.
So, I'm eager to have these questions answered today and in
future conversations.
Again, Chairman Connolly, I want to thank you for holding
this hearing. And, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice.
And you've raised some really good questions. And I saw our
witness shaking her head ``yes'' to some of what you were
saying, so I look forward to getting some answers to those as
well, and that's why we're having the hearing today. And I
thank Ms. Martorana for joining us.
So, we do have one witness, Clare Martorana, who currently
serves as the Chief Information Officer of the Federal
Government.
I would ask--Ms. Martorana, it is our habit, our practice,
to swear in all witnesses before this committee--if you would
rise and raise your right hand.
Do you swear to affirm that the testimony you're about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Ms. Martorana. I do.
Mr. Connolly. Let the record show the witness answered in
the affirmative. And I thank you so much.
With that, you are invited to provide us with a five-minute
summary of your testimony. And, of course, your full statement
will be entered into the record.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF CLARE MARTORANA, FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

Ms. Martorana. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you so much for the
invitation to testify about the state of Federal IT and to
update you on our progress to highlight where we're heading.
The President believes the government needs to deliver for
all Americans, your constituents, and I do too. It's technology
that powers our ability to deliver on this promise.
Through the work of this subcommittee, you've provided
consistent bipartisan support of IT modernization, reducing
wasteful spending, and improving project outcomes. You've
advocated for Federal CIOs to have a seat at the table. Now we
need to give them a voice upstream in the decision-making
process to ensure agencies are making the right IT investments
at the right time, to ensure--to have a simple, seamless, and
secure customer experience.
Over the past two years, customer expectations have risen
to new levels, as the chairman mentioned in his opening
statement. We must keep pace and accelerate even faster. We can
deliver as a government on par with our favorite consumer
brands. By delivering products and services incrementally, with
the right technologists and senior level support, it's not only
possible, it's happening today in the Federal Government.
Veterans can schedule appointments, refill a prescription,
get push notifications for their claims and appeals with VA's
new mobile app. And that new mobile app has a 4.8 out of 5-star
rating, which is incredible.
Recently married residents in five states, including my now
home state of Georgia, who want to update their Social Security
card to reflect their new name can now take care of that online
versus traveling to a Social Security office and filling out
paperwork.
And passengers are now able to use an authenticated mobile
ID during TSA's airport screening pilot, decreasing the
processing time, and enabling a touchless experience.
Through this work, we are demonstrating to agencies and the
Federal work force that change is possible. We are building
trust with the American people when they interact with our
government. And, importantly, we are inspiring others to join
us serving this great country.
As Federal CIO, I have a really unique vantage point and
the honor of bringing together leaders across government to
drive progress. We are collaborating closely on cybersecurity,
which remains our top priority. Working with the Office of the
National Cyber Director and our OMB budget colleagues, we are
assessing where agencies are on their IT journey and ensuring
they are making the right investments to strengthen their
cybersecurity foundation and accelerate IT modernization. This
work will place agencies on a sustainable path to maximize
investments from Fiscal Year to Fiscal Year and from
administration to administration.
Second, we are maximizing the impact of the funds entrusted
to us as center-of-government technologists by aligning our
work around strategic IT priorities, as you mentioned, Mr.
Chairman. Outlined in our Federal Information Technology
Operating Plan, the Office of the Federal CIO, the United
States Digital Service, and our colleagues at GSA are aligning
resources and tech teams to administration priorities and
driving innovation through funding models like the Technology
Modernization Fund.
And third, we are providing technologists with the
executive support needed to have a voice in agency C-suites.
The government experience will improve by having technologists
early and often in agency planning. Technologists are key to
vetting strategies to drive down the failure rate of IT
investments and reduce administrative burden for the Federal
work force so they can work smarter, not harder.
With each new product and service we launch, we're closing
a chapter on the paper process, sadly, the main way that we are
still conducting much of our business across government. Paper
is not only slow and antiquated, it's inaccessible to the
digital world, it's a burden for the Federal work force to have
to process, and it does not meet the bar for modern service
delivery. We must and can do better.
Working together, we have the ability to drive digital
transformation across the Federal enterprise. Partnering with
agencies, our industry partners in Congress, we can deliver to
the American people the government they deserve.
So, thank you so much for the opportunity to testify today,
and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Ms. Martorana, and we're
glad to have you.
And we will now turn to questions. And the chair recognizes
the distinguished Congresswoman from the District of Columbia,
Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton, for her five minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. I thank my good friend, Chairman Connolly, and
I appreciate this important hearing.
We all know that the Federal CIO is responsible for
overseeing government IT security, and that includes
everything, budget and planning, and all the rest of it.
During the pandemic, we saw a further acceleration of
government's reliance on Federal information technology to get
individuals and families and businesses, to get them what they
needed from government. These changes made it paramount that
the Federal CIO sets enterprise-wide policies and structures
that help agencies get IT right.
Ms. Martorana, with so many responsibilities, how do you
determine your priorities? And what are your current priorities
as the Federal CIO?
Ms. Martorana. Thank you so much for that question. You
know, I fulfill many statutory responsibilities on behalf of
the Director of OMB. The role is overall oversight of
information security, management of IT resources,
implementation of eGovernment services. And I also serve a role
to convene across IT--across the entire IT enterprise of the
Federal Government.
So, we determine priorities based on both the environment
that we're operating in when the administration began. We were
in the midst, to your earlier comment, Mr. Chairman, on
SolarWinds and the devastating impact that that had, not only
to the nine impacted agencies but to every single Federal
agency. Because when we do have a cyber event, we do have to
both investigate and potentially remediate across our entire
enterprise, because if one of us is impacted, all of us are
potentially impacted.
So, the role of the Federal CIO is really helping Federal
CIOs in agencies manage this very complex operating environment
with a complex set of rules, regulations, binding operational
directives. And it is really incumbent upon this role to make
sure we are playing an oversight role, that we are measuring
where we are able to, that we are sharing best practices across
agencies.
Every Federal agency and CIO that I work with, we're all
trying to solve the same problems. We don't want to start from
a blank piece of paper. So, when one agency goes on an IT
modernization journey, for example, we want to make sure that
we share those best practices across the entire Federal
enterprise.
Ms. Norton. Well, may I ask you: How do you plan to
operationalize CIO's leadership and accountability across
Federal agencies?
Ms. Martorana. Yes. Currently, Federal CIOs are responsible
for making sure that their environment is safe, secure, and
that they are fulfilling FITARA, FISMA, and the President's
management agenda. So, we are receiving an enormous amount of
data from Federal CIOs, which is really an important part of
our entire--both our oversight mission at OMB as well as
Congress' oversight mission.
Ms. Norton. Well, as you know, empowering CIOs and then
holding them accountable for using their authorities
effectively is the goal of our subcommittee, its biannual
FITARA scorecard.
So, may I ask you: How will you work with Congress to
provide the public data and information that will help you in
your efforts to highlight IT leadership and accountability?
Ms. Martorana. Yes. We work very closely. We try to be
transparent in the reporting, so we have an IT dashboard which
is publicly available. We also publish out in each agency's
strategic plan. IT is a critical component of all of those. So,
we are able to get a view, not only across the Federal
Government from the compliance and reporting perspective, but
also from the operational perspective.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Ms. Norton.
The ranking member, Mr. Hice, is recognized for his five
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Martorana, as you know, and I mentioned just a little
while ago, OMB is required to issue the cross-agency priority
goals with an administration's first budget submission. That
would have been February of this year, and for some reason, the
Biden administration did not submit the CAP goals on time. And
at least to my understanding, I'm not aware of whether it's
issued the CAP goals even now. And as I referenced just a few
moments ago, during the FITARA scorecard hearing in July, the
lack of the CAP goals prevented this subcommittee from
receiving an accurate assessment of agency cybersecurity
readiness.
So, my first question to you is really simple and that is:
Why is the administration not complying with the law? Why are
they not issuing the CAP goals on time?
Ms. Martorana. Thank you for the question. I do--I did hear
a little bit about what happened after the FITARA hearing, and
we take our role being responsive to Congress and the American
people incredibly seriously.
It is my understanding that OMB is technically in
compliance with GPRA. We are required to designate CAP goals,
which we did on August 9 of this year. They are publicly
available on performance.gov. We are required to do that by the
end of the full first fiscal year, and that is this year. So,
we are technically in compliance.
But your point is really valid. We need data to make sure
that we have transparency, that our data is accurate, that it
is available and, again, transparent, and actionable. So, I am
in agreement with you that this is a responsibility that we
have, and we are working hard to fulfill that responsibility.
Mr. Hice. Well, I would challenge a little bit that----
Ms. Martorana. Sure.
Mr. Hice [continuing]. that they're in compliance. The--
they're clearly not in compliance. The CAP goals are due in
February--that is not complicated--and they were not there. We
could not perform our job in this subcommittee of Oversight in
July with the FITARA scorecard because this administration is
not in compliance.
We take it seriously. I know you said you do, and I don't
have any reason to question you, but we in this committee take
our job seriously, and we expect to have the information we
need in order to do our job.
The Biden administration is ignoring the intent of Congress
with respect to the Technology and Modernization Fund. The
primary focus of TMF, as well as the underlying Modernization
Government Technology Act, the primary focus was to make
meaningful progress in retiring legacy systems. I mean, that's
what we're trying to do. I personally have been in government
agencies that are still using DOS programs.
Ms. Martorana. Yes.
Mr. Hice. For crying out loud, this is unacceptable. We
have got to retire these old legacy IT systems. And this--the
whole thing was to create savings which would then be used to
reimburse the Fund.
But the Biden administration is only requiring partial or
even minimal reimbursement in emphasizing cyber projects and
customer experience projects. Again, in and of itself, nothing
wrong with that, but it's not the intent of Congress.
So, you know, the question obviously is: Why should we
believe that under your leadership the TMF has become nothing
more than a slush fund?
Ms. Martorana. I really look forward to having a very
robust conversation with you about this. The TMF board has
always required repayment. We are focused on investing in
projects that we know have a high likelihood of success. So,
what we do is we actually have redesigned the entire TMF
process.
When I joined, we had three staff on the GSA side that were
mostly doing financial administration of the TMF. We have, in
the last year, put technologists on the TMF PMO so that we work
closely with agencies in the beginning of their initial project
proposals. We review them, and we review them with a set of
complex guidelines.
Are they--do they have the staff on the ground to do the
work? Do they have the right procurement vehicles in place to
do the work? Do they have the right contracting partners in
place to do the work? What exactly--how are they designing the
project that they are undertaking?
We have seen many IT failures across government mostly
because we have not taken the time up front to build an
incremental plan to do IT modernization.
So, I would look forward to working with you and your staff
and doing a detailed review of any and all of the projects that
we are supporting under TMF. I think within the next year you
are going to see such dramatically improved outcomes from the
TMF projects, because we are managing them in a completely
different way than we did previously, by having technologists
up front in every single part of the investment.
We review our investments quarterly. If people are not
hitting their milestones, we do not give them additional
funding. We have brought all of government together. If teams
are failing at a component, we rally people together to be able
to support them with the subject matter expertise that will
help them be effective and efficient.
So, I look forward to speaking with you and your staff at
any time about the way that we are changing fundamentally the
delivery and the outcomes for TMF. But we are staying core to
IT modernization and government, and repayment is a very
critical part of that for the Fund.
Mr. Hice. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I hope we'll have an
opportunity for further questions since there's so few members
that are here.
But, Ms. Martorana, I appreciate your answer. But, quite
frankly, I'm not convinced at all that you answered my
question. But I hope we'll have an opportunity to speak
further.
Mr. Connolly. Let me assure the ranking member we will. We
will. So, we'll have another round.
And if the--if I may followup just real briefly for
clarification on one of the questions the ranking member asked.
You--the Office of Management and Budget has allowed sort of
partial repayment from TMF. Is that correct?
Ms. Martorana. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Connolly. And the legal validation of that authority
was, in fact, either provided by or guidance was provided by
approving that practice by GSA. Is that correct?
Ms. Martorana. By both GSA and GAO----
Mr. Connolly. And GAO.
Ms. Martorana [continuing]. reviewed our repayment.
Mr. Connolly. But if I understood your answer to Mr. Hice,
but the intent, despite partial repayment, is full repayment.
Ms. Martorana. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. OK. Just wanted to clarify that for the
record. So, the fact that there have been partial repayments is
not a substitute for the ultimate full repayment, but it's
providing more flexibility.
Ms. Martorana. Correct. And we also, the appropriation--the
American Rescue Plan appropriation was an emergency
appropriation. We were dealing with dire circumstances in
several agencies related to cybersecurity, and they did not
have the ability to reprogram money quickly enough in order to
meet the need at the agencies.
Mr. Connolly. OK.
Ms. Martorana. So, TMF plays a really critical role in that
way as well.
Mr. Connolly. OK. I know we'll come back to that, but I
just wanted to clarify that part of it. Thank you.
The distinguished gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch,
is recognized for his five minutes of questioning.
Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member.
Thanks for doing this hearing.
We've been here before, and I do share some of the
frustration with the lack of progress.
Ms. Martorana, thank you very much for your efforts. Thank
you for your service.
The last time we were together on FITARA, I had asked about
the Log4j vulnerability. As you may remember, CISA reported
that that vulnerability, which affected millions and millions
of servers, was one of the worst vulnerabilities discovered in
many, many years.
Now, during our last hearing on this, we still didn't have
a lot of information, and I did not get a satisfactory answer.
But it'll be a year in December that we--we warned people
about--the government warned this--people about this
vulnerability. And I'm wondering what the level of progress has
been in terms of trying to fix all of the--all of the
vulnerabilities that have been discovered because of this Log4j
code vulnerability.
Do you have any type of assessment or report on that? I
understand that the fix is rather cumbersome and complicated,
so it's not like you just do a patch. It's a very complicated
process. And because Apache Log4j is so--it's open source, so
all these--all these software developers sort of imported it
and now have, you know, lent themselves to that vulnerability.
I do also want to, before you answer, I'm also disappointed
that it was Alibaba that discovered the vulnerability and not
our folks. Doesn't give me much confidence. But, you know,
after the fact, I think Mandiant and CrowdStrike suspected that
it was actually Chinese hackers that were able to implement
this vulnerability across so many of our systems, including the
government.
So, where are we in cleaning up this mess?
Ms. Martorana. Yes, thank you so much for that question.
You know, cyber threats facing Federal agencies and the
software that underpins the work of our Nation has to be
developed in a resilient and secure manner. So this week, we
released OMB memorandum, enhancing the security of the software
supply chain through software--secure software development
practices. And that is a critical part of how we are going to
direct agencies to make sure that we're only using software
from producers that comply with secure software development
practices and standards.
So, Log4j is quite complex. I think Director Easterly said
it was one of the most challenging software vulnerabilities
that she had seen in her career. And Federal agencies still
continue, as does the private sector, to try and deal
specifically with Log4j and the associated challenges in
actually determining where it is, how it's being executed, and
how it can be remediated.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Well, I understand. You know, we've got
some lessons learned, right? So, we're not going to do that
again. I appreciate that. But it's an outstanding vulnerability
that's still extant, and I'm just worried about the situation
with that process. It's--you know, the problem is locating the
vulnerability and then implementing the fix. So, that's taking
a long time. And I'm not hearing any timetable or percentages
in terms of where do you think we are in, as I said, cleaning
up that mess.
So this is, again, a year later. So, I'm still asking the
same question, and I'm not really getting an answer that's
helpful. I do----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Lynch, if I may interrupt. I'm going to--
if you wish, I'm going to extend your questioning for another
five minutes.
And then, Mr. Hice, we'll come back to you also for another
five minutes. OK?
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I
really do appreciate it. Thank you.
Ms. Martorana. And----
Mr. Lynch. So--go ahead. I'm sorry.
Ms. Martorana. And, Mr. Lynch, I would--I will direct--take
your question and direct it, working with my colleagues at
CISA, and get back to you with some more specificity around
timelines and percentage of remediation that's being completed,
if our colleagues at CISA have that data.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
And what I might suggest is, let's just take the government
vulnerability, because this is so widespread, so many companies
imported that software, that maybe--maybe we can just get the--
our arms around the damage to government servers and clean that
part of it up. And then, as you say, we've cleaned up our
supply chain and acquisition process. Maybe we can firewall
this thing. But maybe we can do that.
And the best use of our time might be to do a classified,
and you can tell me then or CISA can tell me what the
vulnerabilities are right now, in a secure setting, and at
least make me a little more comfortable that we're actually
making progress, if those answers can't be given publicly.
The second piece I had is I know that--I know that
President Biden chose to discontinue some of the--some of the
practices, cyber practices that were implemented by the
previous President. And I'm wondering if that transition, where
are we with that? And what's the nature of our changes in terms
of, you know, gathering data and that practice?
Ms. Martorana. Yes, I was fortunate to serve in the last
two administrations. And we have not stopped focusing on
cybersecurity. I have not seen anyone take their foot off the
gas. This is a team sport. And while we might have to look at
different ways to collect data, the burden that we put on
agencies by constantly asking for manual data calls is really
burdensome and we don't always get clean data. We don't
certainly get machine-readable data which would allow us to
automate some of our reporting.
So, I think we have a real opportunity to continue to
invest in getting more real-time reporting based on better
tools that would be available both from at the agency level and
also at the OMB level, so that we are not manually compiling
these data-sets trying to, you know, clean the data, make sure
that it is accurate and also then actionable so we can make
really informed decisions from it.
So, I look forward to continuing the work on that, and I
think that that is something that will carry through. It
carried through previous administrations, and it will carry
forward into the next administration.
Mr. Lynch. All right. Can you at least tell me--so the
metrics have changed in terms of, you know, data gathering from
the Trump administration to the Biden administration. I'm not
sure, you know, where we are in that transition and how
successful that's been so far. But what's the nature of the
transition? Is it tightening or refocusing? Can you help me a
little bit with that?
Ms. Martorana. Yes. We are consistently looking at the data
that agencies are providing us and trying to figure out the
best way that we can assess risk from that agency data-set. And
so we will constantly refine the data as we both deal with
different threats, as well as make informed--different and
informed decisions and also make progress.
So, I think that we will never have a single set of data
that will accurately reflect the threat environment that we're
dealing in, but we will continually refine that. But it is
really critical that we are--continue to be transparent and
responsive to Congress. So, I think that is our foundational
operating model.
And I do understand there was frustration with this CAP
goal issue, but I can really assure you that the data that we
are collecting will be more accurate, it will be more
actionable, and it will help us work together to make sure that
we're making the right investments to help these agencies
remediate many of these really critical security issues.
Mr. Lynch. OK. Well, thank you for your efforts. And we'll
continue to talk and--but I do appreciate your efforts.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for your courtesy.
Thank you to the ranking member as well. Thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Lynch. Thank you so much.
The ranking member is recognized for a second round of
questioning.
Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Martorana, can you give me a definition of a legacy
system?
Ms. Martorana. I'll give you my definition of a legacy
system. A legacy system is a system that does not meet the
mission needs of an agency.
There are circumstances where an older system, if it is
able to be patched, if it is available, high availability,
sometimes we are able to run on some legacy systems that
actually have still--have operational viability. But where--
where I consider a legacy system that wholesale needs IT
modernization is a system that is failing an agency's mission
so that we cannot deliver the right services to the American
public.
Mr. Hice. Does anyone else share your definition?
Ms. Martorana. I think a lot of my IT colleagues share that
same definition.
Mr. Hice. We need--you know, look, and it's a good
definition. I don't have any problem with your definition. But
we don't have an official definition. Somehow you have your
definition, somebody else has theirs. And, you know, the next
question obviously is: How good are we doing at retiring legacy
systems? We're spending hundreds of billions of dollars and
we're not--we seem to get nowhere in retiring these old
systems.
A scale of 1 to 10, 10 being perfect, how well are we doing
on retiring legacy systems?
Ms. Martorana. I--that's a tough question to answer. I
would probably give us a 5 out of 10. I think that it is----
Mr. Hice. I think you're being very gracious, but I'll
accept that.
So can--where can we get a pretty accurate appraisal of the
billions of dollars in IT funding, how it's being used?
Ms. Martorana. I think the IT Dashboard is the first
foundational place to look at what those investments are. Also,
each agency budget has very--has specificity online items
related to IT projects. Also, programs within those agencies,
there's also specificity on IT investments.
Mr. Hice. OK. So, let's talk about the Federal IT
Dashboard. It's supposed to give us all the answers. Is it
reliable?
Ms. Martorana. It is reliable as it is up, running, and
operating. But systems are only as good as the data that is
input into them, and it is----
Mr. Hice. Exactly. So, where is that data coming from?
Ms. Martorana. Federal CIOs. It is their responsibility to
enter data into the IT Dashboard on behalf of their agency and
their program.
Mr. Hice. But we don't know how accurate that information
is.
Ms. Martorana. You know, I think going back to my opening
statement, talking a little bit about paper, these are manual
processes, right? We have--in many technology areas, we've
advanced so far. Having machine-readable data, having APIs and
automated ways of collecting data, analyzing data, and creating
actionable insights from that data, these are all manual data
calls that agencies are submitting.
And I say we can do better by investing in some of the
tools at agencies so that all of us that have oversight roles
are able to make more informed decisions from the data-sets
available.
Mr. Hice. Well, I would agree with you that we've got to do
more, and we can do more.
Is there--just a kind of a yes or no, because I've got a
couple more questions. Is any of that data verified? Is there a
third-party independent group verifying the information on the
Dashboard?
Ms. Martorana. My team spends an enormous amount of time
doing that verification. It is one of the reasons that we are
oftentimes late in meeting our deadlines is that these are very
manual processes that rely on humans looking at the data,
finding anomalies, reaching back out to agencies, cleaning that
data so that we have a data-set that is more accurate and
actionable.
Mr. Hice. OK. So, you bring up your position. And I did
have questions with that too, you know, with the ability that
you do or do not have to actually produce change. I'm curious
about that. And I see my time is running out. So, I'm going
give you three questions that I would like for you to respond
back to the committee so that I don't take more than the
generous time the chairman has given right now.
But question No. 1: Can you supply this committee with a
copy of your job description?
Second, who established that position? How did the process
come about that the Federal CIO position was established?
And then, third, do other CIOs recognize this position? And
do they, for lack of a better word, submit to your proclaimed
authority?
If you could submit an answer to those questions here in
the next week or so, I would appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Martorana. I'd be happy to. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice.
And, Mr. Hice, if I could piggyback onto your request, I
would add: And what is the relationship between your office and
the CTO? How does that work?
Because my recollection is those offices were created by
President Obama, and we had Vivek Kundra and Aneesh Chopra from
Virginia as the first two holders of those offices, CTO and CIO
respectively. And they had a great working relationship.
But to Mr. Hice's point, has it subsequently been more
refined and delineated? I assume, of course, it has. So, I
think we'd want to know that as well in your responding to Mr.
Hice. And if you'll get the answers to the chair, we'll make
sure that they are distributed to Mr. Hice and to other members
of the subcommittee.
I thank you, Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. The chair now recognizes himself for his line
of questioning.
Mr. Hice raised the question, and it's a good one. Do you
believe that Congress should codify your office, your role in
law so that it's not a position that could be dismissed with or
abolished by some subsequent executive branch without
consultation and consent of Congress and that you'd have
statutory standing, obviously, in terms of your roles and
responsibilities?
Ms. Martorana. IT is such a critical part of how we operate
the Federal Government and deliver services. I think that
continuing to make sure that C-suites at every agency have
capabilities, in addition to the CIO--in my private sector
experience, I worked with other executives. While they didn't
have the responsibilities that I had, they had a keen
understanding and exposure to technology and the problems that
we were trying to solve together to support our business or, in
the case of government, mission.
So, I think that continuing to focus on IT, Federal IT, and
cybersecurity and how we can be best partners, both in
supporting agencies doing their mission and our oversight, our
critical oversight roles, I think we can continue to improve
there. So, I would leave it to the committee to----
Mr. Connolly. Well, I must say I'm biased in favor of
codifying things in law because that gives it standing, that
regularizes oversight, that empowers people in your job. And
all of that's very important, frankly, in a large bureaucracy,
both here in Congress and in the executive branch, as I know
you struggle with every day in terms of are you empowered.
And that goes to a different question. One of the--one of
the scorecard items we have for FITARA that we added was: Who
does the CIO report to? Now, background, before your time, but
when we wrote FITARA 7 or 8 years ago, there were--we
estimated, among 24 Federal agencies, there were 250 people
with the title CIO.
Now you know from your own private sector experience, and
mine as well, I mean, generally, corporations have one CIO. The
Federal Government as a Federal Government has one CIO, but
agencies have multiple CIOs. And that can create confusion and
delusion of responsibility and accountability.
So we didn't--we didn't change that in law because we
wanted to respect the culture and not be too radical. But we
wanted to move toward a primus inter pares, right, that there'd
be one primary CIO. And we felt empowerment, just like we're
talking about codifying your job, was about reporting
sequences, right? We want the primary CIO reporting to the
boss.
How do you think we're doing in sort of spreading that
word, and how do you think we're doing in terms of evolving a
management hierarchy that makes sense from any kind of
management point of view, especially given your private sector
experience?
Ms. Martorana. FITARA has been critical in getting CIOs
into the right conversations at the right time. So it--the work
of the subcommittee has been mission critical for CIOs.
Each agency has a unique structure, right? There are
organizations that have that main headquarter CIO, and then
they have component CIOs. So, I really think that it comes down
to how technology is thought of as the decision-making process
happens in an agency, right? You have to partner with your
mission partners, with your program partners from the
inception.
So, there are high-functioning agencies that are federated,
and there are small agencies that have a single CIO that are
also successful. But I think this is an area we can continue to
work together on and really improve our overall delivery of IT
across the government.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. I--again, we respected the culture. But
I will remind you, there are very large corporations that also
have many divisions that are disparate, and they have one CIO.
So, we need to guard against the multiplicity of CIOs that
contributes to managerial confusion and lack of accountability,
at the end of the day. So I--our view is we want to see every
primary CIO report to the head of the respective agency because
he or she is then empowered, and everyone then knows it.
Let me ask about FedRAMP. Congress, the House, has put a
priority on FedRAMP. We've passed FedRAMP legislation five
times on a bipartisan basis, five times. The first bill in this
Congress--and I managed it--in January right after the
insurrection was FedRAMP.
And we continue to hear lots of complaints from the private
sector about how FedRAMP, which was designed to be a low-cost,
quick, efficient way of being certified to provide cloud
services to the Federal Government, is anything but. It's
complicated. It's duplicative. It forces people to reproduce,
you know, documentation, certification processes already
approved by some other Federal agency. And it costs a lot of
money. And that is a barrier, especially to smaller, more
innovative companies that simply can't afford to risk that
money, not even knowing if they'll be certified.
Now, that's not how it was supposed to work. And by the
way, we talked about codification. FedRAMP is also a creature
of the executive branch. It has no basis in statute. And our
bill would, of course, change that too, and give it
codification in law so that it has standing.
What's your take on what's wrong with FedRAMP and what we
can do to try to get it back to its original intent?
Ms. Martorana. Yes. I really appreciate your efforts in
this area because it is absolutely important to the
codification of that program.
We're on a path to really make sure that FedRAMP is the
most robust marketplace it can possibly be, but it is not
meeting the need today; that, to your point, there are many
small companies, there's innovative software that we would love
to be able to have go through a FedRAMP program, but it is cost
prohibitive for some of these small organizations.
So, we have actually asked members of my team to work
collaboratively with GSA and the program team and really roll
up our sleeves. We need to fix this to make sure that not only
we are supporting the supply chain issues, making sure there's
secure software development, but also making sure that we can
meet the speed of the need of Federal agencies to have some
innovative technology available to them with the umbrella
security of the FedRAMP seal of approval in a way.
So I fully applaud that, and we are spending time on that
in my office.
Mr. Connolly. So, one of the things I commend to you, you
might want to take a look at, we wrote--which I think is
absolutely necessary--we wrote a new standard that said
presumption of adequacy. So, if you've been approved at one
window, Federal window, to provide those services, it is
presumed that you have already demonstrated adequacy for other
windows.
Now, that doesn't preclude a specialized need, but you
shouldn't have to start all over again de novo. I mean, that's
part of the problem.
Ms. Martorana. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. It's costly, duplicative, and in some cases
eliminates people from even trying. And who knows what we're
losing as a Federal client, right, from those services.
So, I think that's a very important standard, and my hope
is our FedRAMP bill this year, fifth time will be the charm and
we'll finally get it into law. But I think it's really
important that we do that.
Legacy. I wanted to go back to Mr. Hice's question about
legacy. And then my final question will be on TMF.
But I heard your definition of legacy, but I'm not sure I
agree with it. I mean, first of all, the word ``legacy''
implies old, right? I mean, the word has meaning. And so
something that's a legacy comes from the past. And it isn't
just ``doesn't meet my needs today,'' because that could be a
new system that just doesn't work.
So I think we have to--I think we need to be a little more
specific in what legacy means.
Now, let's take IRS. IRS has--they have some systems that
use COBOL. And I've talked to people, vendors and some IRS
employees, that say, ``You know, it still works though. And, I
mean, it's good and it's reliable, and we're nervous about
replacing it with something new that may not work, or, you
know.''
But the problem is, over time, a legacy system needs
enormous maintenance, it's energy inefficient by definition if
it's 40 years old or older, and the number of people who know
how to use the language required is dying out.
So, I take the point I think you made, and others have made
that, well, you've got to distinguish, they're not all the
same, and I agree.
But aren't we concerned that legacy systems by definition
bring a lot of inefficiency, they're costly and they're risky,
because not only can they break down and thus our constituents
are not served, but they're also hackable, right? Not all of
them are easily encrypted and protected.
And so moving to a new generation of technology to replace
old legacy mainframes really ought to be a general goal, not a
mindless goal but something we push pretty hard.
What is your view about that point of view?
Ms. Martorana. Legacy is--it's a tough subject. We should
be operating the United States Federal enterprise on the most
modern technology available, full stop. If we are going to
deliver digital transformation for the American people in our
lifetimes, we have got to improve the foundational
cybersecurity as well as operating presence of our technology.
That takes investment over, you know, years and years for
us to get out of this tech debt that we have across almost
every single agency.
I did a mainframe migration project when I was at OMB. We
had mainframes at risk in a subbasement. The challenging part
was, we weren't able to recognize the cost savings as quickly
as I would've hoped in my private sector experience.
So you had to start, first reengineer all your business
processes, because you can't just lift and shift and do exactly
what you did on the mainframe without interrogating the way
that you do business, because newer systems are differently
efficient, and they potentially have the opportunity for us to
really leapfrog.
So, you want to make sure that you're thinking about the
business process and not just moving old, antiquated, because
that's the way we did it 25 years ago, to the cloud, for
example. You want to interrogate all of that along the way.
But I had originally planned, once we were able to get the
new mainframes up and running that were cloud ready, doing all
of the steps that we needed. I thought we would be able to
sunset the old equipment. So, get rid of operations and
maintenance cost and all of the ancillary costs and staffing
that had to be burdened managing those systems instead of
moving up with the new systems.
It took years of compliance activity that we needed to go
through in order to actually get those offline and stop paying
for both. So, we were really challenged in recognizing cost
savings.
And I think that would be something it would be really
worthwhile for us to partner together on interrogating, going
through some of the programs that we've seen do this very
efficiently and other ones maybe that took a little bit longer
and see if we can come up with some best practices and really
share them more widely across the Federal enterprise.
Mr. Connolly. So, I think you've done a great job setting
the goal about legacy. That's clear and unambiguous, and I
think that's a good new standard--or maybe it's not so new, but
it's declaratively stated. So thank you.
And just my final--and I don't mean to impose on time--but
I just wanted to clarify some things that Mr. Hice and others
have raised.
TMF, the Technology Modernization Fund, was directly
related to this whole question of retiring legacy systems and
upgrading technology. Is that correct?
Ms. Martorana. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. And we provided a billion dollars and we
celebrated that. Is that correct?
Ms. Martorana. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. However, replacing a big system at a Federal
agency could be multiyears and multibillions of dollars, just
that one system or that one agency. Is that correct?
Ms. Martorana. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. So, a billion dollars is great in
incentivizing people to--and here's the--why do we need--
because Mr. Hice raised this question, it's a fair question--
why do we need extra money? We're spending almost $100 billion
a year in IT that we know of, maybe more. Why do you need more
money to incentivize agencies to retire their legacy systems?
Ms. Martorana. Yes. TMF was really--the billion dollars for
TMF was a down payment. The three years prior to the American
Rescue Plan, the last year, TMF only saw one proposal. So,
obviously something wasn't meeting the need of agencies if only
one agency came forward with an IT modernization project for
TMF.
So, the billion-dollar down payment on kick-starting--re-
kick-starting TMF gave us the opportunity to really rethink the
way that we were thinking about our projects and funding them.
And in addition, the payment flexibility gave us the
opportunity, it allowed agencies not to self-select out. Many
of them selected out of the original TMF because of what we
just spoke about with cost savings taking longer to recognize.
So, I think that we're on a really good path to showing
significantly improved outcomes on the programs, and I really
hope that we continue to get the investment, because we are
standing up something that is going to be transformative. It's
a catalyst in helping agencies get started on some of these
complicated projects.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Hice, I see you're still on. If you want
to jump in at this point, take a few minutes to either ask
additional questions or comment. I certainly want to be fair to
you. So you're recognized.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I was going to
ask if I could have just a couple more minutes.
Ms. Martorana, during our hearing in May on TMF,
Congressman Biggs observed that in order to perform appropriate
oversight this committee needs access to certain written
agreements between agencies regarding the Technology
Modernization Board; quite frankly, things like reimbursement
requirement schedules, status of repayments. In fact, quite
frankly, I think all of these things should be publicly
available.
So let me just ask you: As chair of TMF Board, will you
commit to providing this committee with that type of
information and, quite frankly, even make that information
publicly available?
Ms. Martorana. Thanks for that question.
I believe GSA, in response to the May hearing, did provide
everything that was requested by the committee. So, I will
followup. I'm happy to followup with my colleagues at GSA about
that.
We are working on----
Mr. Hice. Will you make that information available?
Ms. Martorana. We are working to upgrade the TMF website so
that we can continue to be more transparent about the
investments that we are making. So, I do commit to us working
on publishing out some of that data on the TMF website. But
happy to----
Mr. Hice. OK. My question is really twofold. I'm not asking
for some of that information, but all of that information,
first of all, to this committee, and second, publicly. But
primarily, to begin with, this committee needs access to that
information.
Ms. Martorana. I absolutely will commit to us being as
responsive to Congress as we should be and provide you, the
committee, what you need.
As far as----
Mr. Hice. No, no, no. Listen, I don't want you determining
what we need. I want this information, and I'm asking you to
provide it.
Ms. Martorana. And I'm concurring that I am agreeing with
you and will provide the information that you have requested.
It was my understanding GSA had already done that. So full
stop----
Mr. Hice. OK. Thank you. Thank you very much for your help
with that.
And my last real question. Cybersecurity is a notoriously
decentralized issue in the Federal Government with various
senior-level officials playing very important roles. We've seen
the National Cyber Director, Chris Inglis, for example, and
CISA Director Jen Easterly, just to name a couple.
But now, with you as the Federal CIO, do you have a
substantive seat at the table when it comes to protecting our
Federal agency information systems? That to me is a very
important issue.
And if you do have a table there, what are your
responsibilities? What does that consist of? What is your
relationship with other IT-related cybersecurity offices and
officials? That type of thing.
Ms. Martorana. Thanks for the question.
The National Cyber Director is the principal adviser to the
President on cybersecurity policy and strategy. I am
responsible for overseeing Federal cybersecurity programs and
ensuring that they align with the national cyber directive
strategy.
The Federal Chief Information Officer, Mr. Chris DeRusha,
who is on my team, is also a deputy in the National Cyber
Director Office for Federal cybersecurity.
This is an area where we have worked really closely in the
last year, since the National Cyber Director Office has been
stood up, to work collaboratively across the executive branch,
and we work really closely with the CISA team.
And I feel like we--this is an area--you've probably heard
that--many of us say that cybersecurity is a team sport. This
is a team sport where I feel like we are winning as
collaborators.
We still have risk to our Federal Government, but I think
in this specific area the National Cyber Director role has been
critical, and we have been very successful at working to
safeguard the Federal enterprise by working so collaboratively
with CISA, the National Cyber Director, and----
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
And I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Hice. So, do you have a seat at the table?
Ms. Martorana. Absolutely. And my--Federal CISO is dual-
hatted to the--on to the National Cyber Director team. So, we
not only have--I not only have a seat at the table, we work
together every single day in that dual-hat role to make sure
our teams are completely coordinated.
Mr. Connolly. So thank you, Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Ms. Martorana.
And, Chairman, if I could just kick it back to you, but say
thank you again for hosting this hearing and for leading us in
this.
This is an extremely complex discussion. All of us realize
that cybersecurity is a major issue that must be addressed.
I think collaboration, it is one thing. We've got to get
beyond that. We've got to address the problems. We've got to
get rid of legacy systems. We've got to improve this. We've got
to have accountability.
And, Ms. Martorana, I look forward to having further
discussions with you, and we'll look forward to doing that.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice, and I certainly agree
with you about accountability.
Let me also at this juncture, before I call on the
gentleman from California, I have one, two, three, four, five,
six, six memos from OMB that provide guidance on cybersecurity
dating back to August 2021. And I would insert them in the
record at this point.
I would also insert into the record the GAO guidance with
respect to reimbursement we discussed a little earlier on TMF.
Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Connolly. We've been rejoined by the gentleman from
California, Mr. Khanna.
Mr. Khanna, you are recognized for your five minutes of
questioning, and we're going to be generous in that five
minutes if you need it.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Chair Connolly. I will try to be
brief. You continue to show exceptional leadership on
everything concerning technology in our government.
I particularly appreciate Ms. Martorana as the head of IT
in appearing. And your strong and thoughtful leadership and
your time in government make our government more
technologically savvy and proficient.
I've been discussing with the chair and with many people at
the White House, senior leaders, about the creation of a
Federal chief customer experience officer or an equivalent
position directed to improve government service.
The White House is very excited about the idea. They
recognize, President Biden and others have, that it's more than
customer experience. It's about more than technology. It's
about making sure that we are serving people.
And that's been the secret to a lot of Silicon Valley's
success. It's about making sure that the community is working
together, that we have the right mail and telephone services.
So, Ms. Martorana, I just want to make sure we have your
commitment, which I imagine we will, on working on this to make
it a success and make sure we can get this win for President
Biden.
Ms. Martorana. If anyone knows anything about me, they know
that customer experience is--has been what I've spent the
majority of my career working on, making sure that we are
delivering the right products and services to the people that
need them and that they can engage with them seamlessly
regardless of their abilities. It is absolutely the cornerstone
of what we work on.
It's also really a critical third--if you think of
cybersecurity as the foundation, IT modernization and customer
experience, they all work together in IT. I have never worked
on a successful project that did not think of all of the
dimensions both----
Mr. Khanna. Terrific. So, I just wanted--so you'll work
with us then on this legislation on the Federal chief customer
experience officer. We've been working with folks at the White
House on it, but I want to make sure, since you're integrally
involved, that we can have your help with it as well.
Ms. Martorana. I'd be happy to join any conversations
related to it.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. Well, we'll look forward. I
appreciate your commitment to support it and work on it, and
really appreciate your leadership, and our team will be in
touch. And the chairman has been extraordinary on this.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Khanna, and I hope I can quote
you in all of that praise.
All right. Thank you for joining us today. And thank you
for championing customer experience, because I think that's
very important. And, in fact, I'm proud to be a cosponsor of
the Federal Agency Customer Experience Act. So, we'll be
talking about that as well.
In closing, I want to thank Ms. Martorana for joining us. I
want to commend my colleagues for their diligence and their
dedication to this set of issues.
It doesn't make headlines. It's not sexy. Everything hinges
on technology. Everything. All of our programs, all of our
aspirations, all of our goals, all of our objectives, all of
our noble purposes rise or fall on the IT platform ultimately
and its security. And those are investments critical to the
American people and for our mission. So thank you.
Without objection, all members will have five legislative
days within which to submit additional written questions for
the witness. And I would ask that those questions come through
the chair and the answers come through the chair.
Mr. Hice gave you three questions that he would like
answered and I modified one of them. And if you need us to put
that in writing, we will; or, if you don't, if you could just
try to get back to us, I would very much appreciate that.
And thank you again for joining us today.
And thank you to my colleagues and our staff.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:28 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
