- DEFENDING THE U.S. ELECTRIC GRID AGAINST CYBER THREATS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEFENDING THE U.S. ELECTRIC GRID
AGAINST CYBER THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 27, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available at: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-371 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Dan Rebnord, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on National Security

Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts, Chairman
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin, Ranking
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,          Minority Member
Georgia                          Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Jackie Speier, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 27, 2021....................................     1

Witnesses

Mr. Puesh M. Kumar, Acting Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response Department of Energy
Oral Statement...................................................     4
Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director for
Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Mr. Joseph H. McClelland, Director, Office of Energy
Infrastructure Security, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Statement for the Record by the American Public Power
Association and the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association; submitted by Rep. Lynch.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Kumar; submitted by Rep.
Lynch. (No response)

The documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

DEFENDING THE U.S. ELECTRIC GRID
AGAINST CYBER THREATS

----------

Tuesday, July 27, 2021

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on National Security
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:11 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Stephen F. Lynch
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Lynch, Welch, Johnson, DeSaulnier,
Wasserman Schultz, Speier, Langevin, Grothman, Gosar, and
Comer.
Also present: Representative Langevin.
Mr. Lynch. This committee will now come to order. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
committee at any time. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
Good afternoon, everyone. Before we begin, I would like to
thank each of our witnesses for testifying before our
subcommittee today. I would also like to thank my colleagues
who are participating at today's hearing, both remotely and in
person.
If you listened to the news over this past year, there's a
good chance that you have heard about one of many cyber attacks
that have targeted a high-profile technology company, research
institution, energy pipeline, or even the Federal Government.
Today, we will examine how this latest uptick in hacking
attempts could affect the vital component of our critical
infrastructure, and even U.S. national security, and that is
the vulnerability of our electrical grid.
The electrical grid is the backbone of daily life here in
America. It provides energy to heat our homes, power our
hospitals, and charge our smartphones. It also is a priority
target for state and non-state cyber adversaries. A successful
attack on the electrical grid could have devastating
consequences on U.S. national security and our economic
interests.
Last month, Secretary of Energy, Jennifer Granholm,
confirmed that cyber adversaries have the tools and
capabilities necessary to shut down our electrical grid.
In a recent statement, the Department of Energy warned, and
this is a quote, ``The United States faces a well-documented
and increasing cyber threat from malicious actors seeking to
disrupt the electricity that Americans rely on to power our
homes and businesses every day.'' In response, President Biden
has taken decisive meaningful action since assuming office to
strengthen our national cyber defense and protect our critical
infrastructure.
For example, in April, President Biden announced a 100-day
plan led by the Department of Energy and the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA, to strengthen the
security and resilience of U.S.--of the U.S. electrical grid.
And in May, President Biden issued an executive order that will
modernize our national cybersecurity defenses and improve
information-sharing between the U.S. Government and private
sector, which is ultimately responsible for operating and
securing the electrical grid.
I want to applaud and I am grateful to President Biden for
recognizing the urgency of this threat; however, significant
vulnerabilities continue to persist. And the Biden
administration should consider whether additional regulations
or policy initiatives are needed to strengthen the cyber
defense and resiliency of our electrical grid. For example, as
a growing number of network consumer devices connect to
electrical distribution systems, these devices create
additional gateways that hackers can exploit to gain access to
the grid. These vulnerabilities are exacerbated by the fact
that Federal cybersecurity standards do not currently apply to
distribution systems, and are, instead, only mandatory for
certain power generation and transmission systems.
Even those mandatory reliability standards that apply to
electric generation and transmission systems do not fully
incorporate leading cybersecurity guidance from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology.
In addition, many key components of the electrical grid are
produced, or rely upon parts produced by international
suppliers. This equipment is vulnerable to tampering or
espionage by foreign actors. Some of this equipment, especially
large power transformers, can take over a year to produce,
transport, and install. Even in an emergency, making the U.S.
electrical grid heavily dependent on overseas manufacturing.
Last, but certainly not least, multiple Federal agencies
and state and local entities, each with its own role, its own
responsibilities, and its own authorities are all tasked with
protecting the electrical grid. This creates ample opportunity
for bureaucratic stovepiping and can undermine the incidence
response to any events.
To that end, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
about how they are working together in sharing information to
ensure malign cyber actors cannot slip through the cracks. With
that, I would like to thank our witnesses for their service and
for testifying before our subcommittee on this critically
important issue. And I will now yield to my friend, the ranking
member from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you very much. And thank you for our
witnesses for showing up today. There's an issue with far-
reaching repercussions, something that scared me for a long
time. An attack on the energy grid would be devastating for
Americans and our national security. Hours, even hours without
power would cause chaos. Extended disruptions could pose
serious consequences to our national defense. Cyber attacks are
growing in frequency. Particularly, scary ones from state-
sponsored groups in Russia and China. It would appear to the
casual observer that these actors are testing us, testing our
defenses, our response, our reaction.
Our defense must effectively and efficiently identify and
disrupt potential attacks. Our response must harness the powers
of government and the private sector to mitigate the fallout.
Our reaction must be swift and strong to future attacks.
Each of you, each of our witnesses plays a vital role in
the Nation's cyber defense. This hearing is a welcome
opportunity to hear from all of you, and learn more about how
our government operates in space, as well as what the fallback
position is going to be if any of these attacks are effective.
It's a balancing act between the government authority and the
operation of private industry. The answer is not more
unilateral costs of regulations--many more unilateral
regulations. The answer lies within current authorities
available to you and, frankly, your ability to work with each
other. I hope we can hear more about the collaboration today.
In closing, I would like to say, hopefully, in the future,
we can take up other security issues, the origin of the COVID,
the Chinese biological weapons program, dangers of a nuclear
Iran, a botched Iran deal, and President Biden's border crisis.
I have been down there four times. I would love a hearing on
that. It's a huge number of people crossing the border. We're,
right now, at about 70,000 people a month. What is further
disturbing is the vast number of illegal immigrants President
Biden has been releasing in our country, well over 160,000
between Border Patrol and HHS.
The committee's held hearings after hearing during the
Trump administration operating missions with the border. I have
been down there four times. You would have a blast having a
hearing on that. I hope, Mr. Chairman, we can work together to
investigate these issues. I yield back and look forward to our
witnesses to tell them.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. I have one important
procedural matter. Without objection, the distinguished member
from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin, is recognized and waived on to
the committee for the purpose of participating and questioning
these witnesses. Mr. Langevin is a senior member of the House
Armed Services Committee where he serves as chairman of the
Subcommittee on Cyber Innovative Technologies and Information
Systems. Mr. Langevin has led on a number of key pieces of
legislation related to cybersecurity, including a bill to
establish a position of National Cyber Director in the White
House. He is also a commissioner on the Cyberspace Solarium
Commission, and is a co-chair of the congressional
Cybersecurity Caucus. So, welcome, Mr. Langevin.
Now, I would like to welcome our three witnesses. Today we
are joined by Mr. Puesh Kumar, who is the Acting Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Office of Cybersecurity,
Energy Security, and Emergency Response at the Department of
Energy. We are also joined by Mr. Eric Goldstein, who is the
Executive Assistant Director for Cybersecurity at the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency at the
Department of Homeland Security. And we are also joined by Mr.
Joseph McClelland who is the Director of the Office of Energy
Infrastructure Security at the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.
So, to all of our witnesses, thank you for your willingness
to appear and to help the committee with its work. We look
forward to your testimony.
It is the custom of the committee to swear our witnesses.
So, would the witnesses please stand and raise your right hand
so that we can swear you in.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Let the record show that the witnesses have each answered
in the affirmative. You may be seated. And thank you. And
without objection, your written statements will be made part of
the record.
With that, Mr. Kumar, you are now recognized for five
minutes of your summation of your written testimony.

STATEMENT OF PUESH M. KUMAR, ACTING PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, OFFICE OF CYBERSECURITY, ENERGY SECURITY, AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE, ON BEHALF OF DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Kumar. Thank you, Chairman Lynch. Chairman Lynch,
Ranking Member Grothman, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
behalf of the Department of Energy to discuss the
administration's continuing efforts to secure the Nation's
energy infrastructure, helping to ensure that all Americans may
rely on a resilient, secure, and clean energy system.
The energy sector provides critical resources, electricity
and fuel that we all depend upon. As we recently witnessed with
the Colonial Pipeline incident and impacts from extreme weather
in Texas, disruptions to our energy system can have devastating
impacts to the U.S. economy, and the livelihoods of millions of
Americans. DOE's Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and
Energy Response, commonly referred to as CESER, plays a leading
role in addressing the continuously evolving risks facing the
energy sector, including the growing cyber threats that pose a
strategic challenge to the United States.
Over the past few years, we have all witnessed an increase
in the frequency and sophistication of attacks by a range of
actors from cyber criminals to nation-states. As part of the
Federal Government's coordinated efforts to proactively
protect, defend, and assist the energy sector with the
preparedness and response to all hazards, DOE is designated as
the Sector Risk Management Agency, or the SRMA, for the energy
sector, and is the coordinating agency for Emergency Support
Function 12 under the national response framework.
Through these roles, DOE works across the Federal
Government. CISA and FERC are certainly on speed dial, as well
as our partners at the state, local, territorial, and Tribal
levels.
Further, we have a strong relationship with the U.S. energy
sector owners and operators. DOE and DHS serve as co-chairs of
the Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council and the Oil and
Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council. The Sector
Coordinating Council structure allows the government, a growing
state, to work closely with the industry to prepare for and
respond to national level disasters, or threats, to critical
infrastructure. Collective preparedness and collective response
are at the heart of our work.
With that in mind, there are five priorities that I have
set for the CESER office to really ensure that we are targeting
our resources on the critical issues that are facing the U.S.
energy sector. The first priority is to increase the visibility
of cyber threats, targeting industrial control systems of
energy companies. This includes enhancing the government and
industry's ability to detect and deter cyber threats.
As you mentioned, Chairman, we just launched the 100-day
initiative for industrial control systems. And the goal there
is to really start to get visibility into a part of the energy
system that we haven't had as much visibility on before. Really
starting to see the cyber threat actors in that environment and
be able to quickly collaborate with them.
The second priority is to identify supply chain threats,
and disclose vulnerabilities in the energy sector, both in
their hardware, but also the software and the digital supply
chain.
One of the efforts we have underway at CESER right now is a
program called Cyber Testing for Resilient Industrial Control
Systems. The idea behind the program as is commonly referred to
as CyTRICS is to partner with manufacturers and suppliers for
the most critical components in the energy sector, so that we
can test for hardware and software vulnerabilities before those
systems are ever deployed in the energy sector. And we're
having tremendous success along those lines.
The third priority is to encourage the concept of security
by design, and ensuring that cybersecurity is just built into
the relevant research and development and demonstration across
DOE and our national laboratories. It should be core component
of everything we do.
To that end, we are focused on an effort we call cyber-
informed engineering. The goal is to develop a framework so
that when we have our engineers designing the next generation
energy systems, cybersecurity is a core component of those
early designs so that we're not trying to bolt on cybersecurity
after the fact, but we're really building it in as a
requirement to any design that we build in the energy sector in
the United States.
The fourth priority is capacity building in the industry
and the state, local, territorial, and Tribal communities.
Working to strengthen things like threat information sharing,
exercising with a sector so we're prepared to respond. And
also, work force development is another key priority for us.
And we just released an updated tool for the industry called
Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model, C2M2. We just released
version two last week. The C2M2 model lets companies assess the
maturity of their cybersecurity programs and make targeted
investments in their programs going forward.
And, finally, the fifth priority is to ensure that when an
incident does occur, regardless of hazard, CESER is ready to
support the sector, and mitigate impacts and ensure the safe
and sufficient restoration of the Nation's energy
infrastructure. We do this through the deep subject matter
expertise of energy systems across the DOE complex, including
headquarters, national laboratories, power marketing
administrations, the Energy Information Administration, and the
National Nuclear Security Administration. We're able to bring
the different resources to the table in support of the
response--in the case of a cyber response and work closely with
our partners at CISA and FBI to ensure that we can have a
coordinated response like we did with the Colonial Pipeline
incident. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Mr. Goldstein, you are now recognized
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR
CYBERSECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, ON BEHALF OF DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Goldstein. Thank you. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member
Grothman, members----
Mr. Lynch. Can you turn your mic on?
Mr. Goldstein. It's on, but I will move it a bit closer.
Mr. Lynch. OK.
Mr. Goldstein. It should be better.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member Grothman,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the chance to
testify today on behalf of CISA. And thank you for your focus
on this critical issue and bringing us here to discuss the work
that we have done so far and the need to make further progress
in addressing risk to the Nation's energy grid and broader
critical infrastructure.
Cyber intrusions targeting organizations across all sectors
of the economy reflect that is now an urgent threat to our
national security, economic security, and public health and
safety. As the lead agency for civilian cybersecurity, CISA
seeks to actively reduce risks and reduce vulnerabilities
across critical infrastructure in close partnership with sector
risk management agencies, like the Department of Energy. In
this role, we're particularly focused on reducing risk to
national critical functions. Those services that are so
essential to the American people that degradation of them would
lead to debilitating effects on our economy, our security, or
our ways of life.
Of course, the energy sector is essential to numerous
national critical functions. Not only the power itself, but, of
course, its dependencies: water, telecommunications, the
ability to move around our communities.
Through a close partnership with DOE and our private sector
partners, we seek to improve cybersecurity at a national level.
And we do this in five principal ways: First, we seek to share
timely and actionable information across the country with
partners in the energy sector and across sectors to ensure that
every organization has the information they need to secure
their networks against current and emerging threats.
Second, we provide voluntary services, such as
vulnerability assessments, red-teaming, penetration tests to
help organizations understand vulnerabilities in their
networks, and fix them before an adversary can intrude and
cause a compromise.
Third, when an incident does occur, we provide incident
response and threat-hunting assistance and coordinate the
national asset response to cybersecurity incidents to mitigate
the event and bring it to a swift resolution.
Fourth, we provide active detection tools to help companies
on a voluntary basis, detect threats on their networks.
And fifth and finally, we conduct cross-sector analysis to
understand how a cyber intrusion can cascade across sectors and
impact national critical functions.
And as my colleague at DOE noted, we are doing a lot of
this work today under the auspices of the White House's 100-day
Control Systems Plan, in which we are focus on improving both
security practices and the ability to detect threats across
critical entities in the energy sector.
Going forward, it's clear that we have more to do. It is
clear that we must act urgently to address this increasing
threat to our national security. We are looking to drive this
progress at CISA in a few ways.
First, we continue to work urgently on a voluntary basis
with government and the private sector partners to gain
visibility into cybersecurity threats and intrusions across the
country. With this visibility, we are able to disseminate more
actionable and timely information, we're able to provide more
tailored response, and we're able to understand the breadth of
risks affecting entities in this country. We look forward to
working with Congress on enabling incident reporting
legislation that will provide CISA with this needed visibility.
And we're also looking to more broadly deploy our detection
tool, such as the CyberSentry Program, which allows us to use
commercial tools and government information to expand
visibility into risks affecting the Nation's most critical
infrastructure.
Additionally, we must continue to mature our voluntary
partnerships with government in the private sector. We are
shortly launching our newly renamed joint cyber defense
collaborative as established in last year's NDAA to formalize
our work between government and the private sector around
mitigating and understanding emerging cyber campaigns affecting
our country.
And, last, we must recognize that we are not going to, in
the near term, prevent every cybersecurity intrusion. And we
must focus on resilience and functional continuity. To this
end, the Cyber Response and Recovery Fund, an initiative
recommended by the Cyberspace Solarium Commission, and recently
passed by the Senate, will significantly help CISA have the
capacity to help entities respond and recover when damaging
intrusions occur.
We know that the problem is severe, and trends are not
pointing in the right direction. We are doing more, and we must
act with urgency in managing this threat we are facing. CISA is
prepared to lead this national effort in coordination with the
SRMAs, with Federal law enforcement, our partners across this
country. I will look forward to working with Congress in so
doing. Thank you again for your time. I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Mr. McClelland, you are now
recognized for a five-minute summation for your testimony.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH H. MCCLELLAND, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ENERGY
INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY, ON BEHALF OF FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY
COMMISSION

Mr. McClelland. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member Grothman,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the privilege to
appear before you today to discuss defending the U.S. Electric
Grid Against Cyber Threats. My name is Joe McClelland. I am the
Director of the Office of Energy Infrastructure Security at the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. I come before you as a
commission staff witness, but I should note my remarks do not
necessarily represent the views of the Commission or any other
individual commissioner.
In the Energy Policy Act of 2005, specifically, through
Section 15 of the Federal Power Act, Congress entrusted the
Commission to approve and enforce mandatory reliability
standards for the Nation's bulk power system. Section 215
requires the Commission to certify an electric reliability
organization, or ERO, that is responsible for proposing for
commission review and approval reliability standards, or
modifications to existing reliability standards to help protect
and improve the reliability of the Nation's bulk power system.
The Commission certified the North American Electric
Reliability Corporation, or NERC as the ERO. By statute, the
bulk power system does not include electric distribution
facilities. Section 215 of the Federal Power Act provides for
stakeholder input into the ERO's development of reliability
standards for the bulk power system. This process works
relatively well to develop standards to address traditional
operations and planning-related reliability events that may
cause grid failures, or blackouts, such as from improper
vegetation management, or failures associated with the
operation of protection equipment. The nature of the national
security threats from adversaries' intent on attacking our
Nation's electric grid significantly differ from reliability
vulnerabilities that have caused regional blackouts and
reliability failures we have seen in the past. Widespread
disruption of electric service can quickly undermine the U.S.
Government, its military, and the economy as well as endanger
the health and safety of millions of our citizens.
To help mitigate these advanced persistent and rapidly
evolving threats, the Commission uses a two-pronged approach
with regard to grid reliability, employing mandatory
reliability standards to establish foundational practices,
while also working collaboratively with industry the states and
other Federal agencies to identify and promote best practices.
While the NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection, or CIP
reliability standards are the foundation of the commission's
work to address cybersecurity, there are additional measures
that can and should be taken to further improve the industry's
cybersecurity posture, considering these rapidly evolving
threats. That is why the Commission established OEIS. OEIS
partners with other Federal agencies, states, and industry to
develop and promote best practices for critical infrastructure
security. Working with these entities, OEIS helps identify new
and emerging threats, informs the private sector of them,
performs voluntary cybersecurity evaluations, and assists with
mitigating actions.
For example, OEIS conducts voluntary architecture
assessments of interested commission jurisdictional utilities'
computer networks that can control the operations of their
facilities. Conducted onsite, these assessments are specific to
the organization, reviewing everything from the configuration
of legacy equipment to the application of state-of-the-art
protection systems.
Another example is that OEIS works with the Office of
Director of National Intelligence, specifically, the National
Counterintelligence and Security Center to conduct briefings
and exchange information with state and industry officials
about the current threats the industry is facing and what can
be done to address them.
More broadly, OEIS works with the NERC Electricity
Information Sharing and Analysis Center to rapidly issue
bullets and alerts informing industry of specific
vulnerabilities and threats, as well as best practices that can
be used to defend against them.
As a final example, OEIS assists with the planning and
execution of tabletop exercises, and participates in joint
security programs with other government agencies.
Last month, OEIS assisted the National Guard units
participating utilities in the New England states to conduct
Cyber Yankee, a simulated cyber attack on system networks. This
red-teaming exercise helped the New England utilities and
National Guard units to prepare for these threats, including
practicing government assistance to the utilities as part of
the defense and recovery efforts. Exercises such as these are
critical to maintaining readiness and ensuring our ability to
respond to cybersecurity attacks.
In conclusion, cybersecurity threats pose a serious risk
being to the bulk power system and its supporting
infrastructures that serve our Nation. These are complex,
persistent, and fast-evolving issues, and they won't be solved
easily, and they will require a great deal of coordination and
communication. Therefore, the Commission has adopted this two-
pronged approach to best address the important security
matters. Thank you for your attention and the opportunity to
testify today. And I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for five
minutes for questions. Our adversaries are targeting all facets
of the American life with frequent and increasingly
sophisticated cyber attacks. In just the past few months, cyber
attacks have frozen a major oil pipeline, shut down the world's
biggest meat producer, and compromised one of the largest email
servers in the world.
In a June 6 interview, Secretary of Energy Jennifer
Granholm said, and I will quote her, ``There are thousands of
cyber attacks in all aspects of the energy sector.'' And she
added, ``It's happening all the time.'' Secretary Granholm also
acknowledged that our adversaries, foreign nations, and
criminal groups have the cyber capabilities to shut down the
U.S. electric grid. We know that this threat exists because our
adversaries have demonstrated it already.
In 2015, Russian intelligence agents used a sophisticated
cyber attack to cripple industrial control systems of the
Ukrainian electrical grid, shutting off power to hundreds of
thousands of people in the dead of winter. In that case,
thankfully, power was restored to most consumers in a matter of
hours.
However, the message was clear, Russia is willing and able
to target its adversary's electrical infrastructure. But it's
not just Russia that we need to worry about--China, Iran, North
Korea, and numerous sophisticated cyber criminal groups all
view the U.S. electric grid as a priority target.
So, Mr. Goldstein, how would you describe the current risk
of a major cyber incident on the electrical grid in the near
future? Give me sort of a landscape assessment of where you
think we are right now, to the best of your ability?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, Mr. Chairman. I think your
description of the threat environment is apt. I think we have
an environment today where there are many organizations
throughout this country and across sectors of critical
infrastructure that have not universally deployed these sort of
strong security controls and managed no insecurity weaknesses
that we know that our adversaries have the technical ability to
exploit. This puts us in a position where the possibility of a
highly damaging cybersecurity intrusion affecting a national
critical function, such as the provision of power to the
American people, is certainly a possibility.
Mr. Lynch. Let me ask you, just on that point and this is
for the entire panel. I doubt very much that we have a single
point of failure, but as we saw with the Colonial Pipeline, you
have got some infrastructure that--some pieces of
infrastructure that are so critical to--in that case, it was
the East Coast. But is this an assessment that there are
several points of vulnerability, or geographically speaking?
And when you say certain entities are not using proper
cyber hygiene, let's say, is that something that, as Mr.
McClelland has pointed out, is that a standard that's
recommended, or is it something that is actually required?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly. So, I will defer to my colleagues
at DOE and at FERC respectively for an assessment on points of
failure in the grid, as well as on the mechanisms that could be
utilized through FERC authorities. What I would note is that,
you know, if all organizations do not urgently focus on
understanding not only the vulnerabilities in their network
that exists today, but also on the tactics, techniques, and
procedures that we are seeing adversaries, whether nation-
states or criminal gangs utilize, and don't urgently invest in
putting in place controls that meet what we see our adversaries
doing, then we are at urgent risk of a cybersecurity intrusion
that could result in degradation of a national critical
function, of which there are many, but certainly the energy
sector is one.
This is why it is so urgent for all organizations to put
cybersecurity investment at the top of their list recognizing
that, you know, investments must be weighed against other
considerations. But at CISA, we are urgently focused on making
sure that all entities across critical infrastructure are
focused on putting in place these strong controls and
mitigating those known vulnerabilities that we know could be
exploited to cause significant harm.
Mr. Lynch. I am sorry. Mr. Kumar, Mr. McClelland, could you
take a whack at that question well.
Mr. Kumar. Absolutely, sir. Thank you for the question. I
think that's a really important question, because I truly do
believe that the cyber challenge is a national security
challenge that we are facing on a daily basis as you mentioned.
It becomes even more complex when you think of the electricity
sector that has over 3,000 electric utilities across the United
States, and how it's all connected. This becomes even more
complex and challenging. And, so, we need to be addressing this
through three different ways. The Department is looking at it
from three different tracks: One, what are those policies that
we need to look at? Are those policies in coordination with our
colleagues at FERC?
Two, what are tools and technologies that we can put on the
grid that can detect these threats before they result in
impacts? We need to continue investing in a lot of that R&D.
But then, the last one is when it does happen, just like
with Colonial, how do we respond? Respond swiftly and have the
backups necessary to immediately recover from a response. We
are thinking about it from all three perspectives, and we need
to continue to do more.
So, we at the Department are certainly working with FERC in
terms of really understanding the bulk power system. So, how do
we help the regulators at the Federal level understand the
threat so that our standards are risk-based? So, as we see the
threat evolve, so does the standard. We're doing the same thing
with the states. So, the jurisdiction of regulatory standards
through the distribution systems are in the hands of states.
And, so, our approach at the Department is to work with the
public utility commissions and the public service commissions
at the state level to ensure that they, No. 1, understand the
threat. As my colleague, Joe, mentioned what we're trying to do
is help them understand the threat at both the unclassified and
classified level to inform how they work with their utilities
at the state level.
The second thing is often the state, or the states, don't
have the resources to actually make these informed decisions in
terms of how much a cybersecurity investment is appropriate.
So, what we have been doing is developing tools. So, the tool
that I just mentioned, C2M2, Cybersecurity Capability Maturity
Model. The utility is used to decide on investments in
cybersecurity. We are providing a similar version of that tool
to the states to use to gauge the cybersecurity of the
utilities within their state. And, so, we need to do this
three-pronged approach to continue pushing cybersecurity
forward, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Great. Mr. McClelland.
Mr. McClelland. I refer to a couple of quick quotes on the
annual threat assessment. This was issued on April 9 of 2021.
``We continue to assess that China can launch cyber attacks
that, at a minimum, can cause localized temporary disruption to
critical infrastructure within the United States.''
Regarding Russia, Russia continues to target critical
infrastructure, including underground, underwater cables, and
industrial control systems in the United States, and in its
allied countries. As compromising such infrastructure improves,
and, in some cases, can demonstrate its ability to damage
infrastructure during a crisis.
And then, last, I just refer you to the task force on cyber
deterrence. This was in 2017. And this is just a precursor to
your answer. So first, major powers, Russia and China, have a
significant and growing ability to hold U.S. critical
infrastructure at risk via cyber attack. This emerging
situation threatens to place the United States in an untenable
position. Although progress is being made to reduce the
pervasive cyber vulnerabilities of U.S. critical
infrastructure, the unfortunate reality is at least for the
next decade, the offense of cyber capabilities of the most
capable adversaries are likely to far exceed the United States'
ability to defend key critical infrastructures.
So, back to my statement, my opening statement, FERC uses a
dualfold approach. If you imagine two geometric shapes, a
pyramid, foundationally, that's where we put the cybersecurity
standards. These standards are developed in the open, and
they're deliberative, and they're iterative. Our adversaries
are capable of reading the standards and adapting those
standards, even before they are put into place, which is spoken
to by our intelligence community assessments.
However, at the apex of the pyramid, that's where the
nation-state threats lie. It's a matter of information sharing
between the agencies and between the industry to make certain
that they can address these threats. And those threats really--
sorry. I am sorry. I see the time.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, thank you. The chair now recognizes the
Ranking Member Mr. Grothman for five minutes for questions.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Kind of what you said there, Mr.
McClelland, is kind of a little bit scary. So, you feel today
that our grid is vulnerable, and most people probably think it
is, but you think it's significantly vulnerable to cyber
attack?
Mr. McClelland. I would say that the worldwide threat
assessment from DNI--the current threat assessment certain of
our adversaries have the capability to target and disrupt these
services.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I think our cyber posture is three parts:
it's defense, it's response, and reaction. If there were a
successful attack on a significant part of the United States,
do we have a fallback position? Or how we quickly do you think
we could get back our grid?
Mr. McClelland. I think that depends on the attack. You
know, was infrastructure simply interrupted? Were their
services interrupted? For instance, was it a denial of service
attack? Or were the adversaries able to gain access to the
networks, and, particularly, the operational technology
networks, and at that point, damage or destroy equipment that's
necessary to operate the power grid?
Mr. Grothman. That's kind of the question. If they damage
equipment, do we have fallback position here? Would we have to
build something new? I mean, what would happen if part of the
grid you picked in that part of the United States is destroyed
or disabled, how long would you be able to--before be able to
get the grid up and going again?
Mr. McClelland. Well, the industry does operate to an N-
minus-1 contingency, which means it can suffer the single
largest contingency on the grid and continue operations. So, it
can continue to provide power if it loses the single largest
contingency. If there are multiple contingencies, those can
result in prolonged outages. And those outages depend on the
extent of damage to the equipment and the availability of that
equipment.
Mr. Grothman. OK. So, you feel one attack, we always have a
backup, and more than that, we could have big trouble?
Mr. McClelland. I am sorry. Would you repeat?
Mr. Grothman. Do you feel we have enough to handle one
attack without being a disaster, but if we have more than one,
we have huge trouble? Is that accurate?
Mr. McClelland. If it's beyond the N-minus-1 contingency,
then the power grid service can be interrupted. That is
correct.
Mr. Grothman. Mr. Goldstein, do you agree with that, or do
you want to comment on the same question?
Mr. Goldstein. Sir, I will defer to my colleagues at the
American DOE for their assessment. I will be resilient of the
grid itself.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Mr. Kumar.
Mr. Kumar. Thank you for the question, sir. So, there's
both the benefit and a concern when you have 3,000 electric
utilities in the United States. The concern is certainly the
complex nature of how it is all connected, and how we need to
ensure that the cybersecurity posture across the board is
raised up. But that complexity is also--it's a resiliency.
Because of the different types of networks that are set up
across the different utilities, what you can also have is some
sort of resiliency built in because it's not going to be able
to go--traverse from one utility to the next as easily.
With that said, to answer your question more specifically,
you know, the concern that I have is more focused around supply
chain threats. It is much like we saw with SolarWinds, where it
took one supplier that was across 16,000 organizations. That's
the threat that I am concerned about, and that's where I am
focused on is what are those critical components, critical
manufacturers and suppliers that are across the energy sector?
And if they are impacted, then they can actually be the attack
vector into these utilities. So, that's where a lot of my
concern is right now in terms of addressing the supply chain
threat, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Do you feel we have enough defense right now
to prevent that or no?
Mr. Kumar. In terms of--the perspective we have is,
currently the assessment that my colleague from FERC mentioned
is we think that there is the capability to have a temporary
and localized disruption to energy supply per the DNI's
assessment. But in terms of the resiliency, I do think the
sector does have resiliency built in, N minus one criteria that
Joe mentioned is really important.
But in terms what we do right now is we practice the
response. So, if this were to happen, how do we get either a
spare transfer in, or another piece of equipment quickly in?
So, that's something that we are constantly doing with the
sector in terms of preparing for that type of incident.
Mr. Grothman. I understand you might not be able to speak
to this, but I want it on the record. It's important we don't
let malign actors get away with these actions, especially if
they are affiliated with nation-states like Russia or China. If
something happened like you were describing, how quickly do you
think we would be able to--say, one utility had huge problems,
how quickly do you think we would be able to get the grid in
that area or that factory up and running again?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, thank you for that question. It's a complex
problem. It really depends on the type of attack vector. Is it
a piece of software that's critically used? Is it a piece of
hardware? And that's going to factor into how we respond as a
government to really respond to this type of incident.
Unfortunately, there isn't a great answer until you start to
see it.
Now, with the SolarWinds type of incident, what we're
focusing on is working with the GEs, the ABBs, the large
industrial control system manufacturers, to ensure that there
is backups and redundancy built into these systems so that we
can go to a backup plan. And so, that is an area that we have
been working with the sector on, and the concept is called
spare tire. Can we go to a manual mode if we can't rely on our
digital systems?
Mr. Grothman. It seems to me that private companies, if
there were not threat of attack, would not invest as much as
they have to if there was an attack, right? If seems the
question is for good of society as all, we need a fallback
position. Do you think there's some role for government there
or not?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, I appreciate the question. I feel like
government does have a role in terms of really working with the
sector to bolster the defenses. This is why we launched the
Industrial Control Systems Initiative because we really need to
start looking at cyber adversaries in those critical systems,
and then be able to correlate that information from our end. We
want to correlate it with our colleagues at CISA from a cross-
sector perspective, and then we want to correlate it with our
intelligence community, so we can get a feedback loop back to
the sector. And we need to continue pushing on this and
incentivizing cybersecurity across the board.
Mr. Grothman. I would like to thank the chair for his
generosity.
Mr. Lynch. Absolutely. The gentleman yields back. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for five
minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank the witnesses, too. The National Institute of Standards
and Technology cybersecurity framework includes guidance and
best practices that are, of course, widely regarded as
foundational elements.
Mr. McClelland, why do the North American Electric
Reliability Corporation Standards not fully integrate the NIST
cybersecurity framework?
Mr. McClelland. Thank you for the question. In August 2019,
GAO submitted a report to Congress comparing the NERC CIP
standards to the NIST framework. In that report, GAO concluded
that the CIP standards did not cover some of the NIST framework
requirements. In response to that report, FERC staff began an
investigation to benchmark the NERC CIP standards against the
GAO framework.
It's important to note right at the onset that the two
bodies don't necessarily compare equally. And just a few
examples, the NERC CIP standards focus, specifically, on
operational technologies necessary to ensure operations to the
bulk power system, where the NIST framework focuses on both IT
information technology and OT operational technology. The NERC
CIP standards do not necessarily reflect best practices.
They're foundational standards, and they're foundational
practices, but----
Mr. Welch. What do we have to do in order to get to a place
where we have some confidence that we'll be able to resist
these attacks?
Mr. McClelland. So FERC, after the analysis, FERC did issue
notice of inquiry. It was in June 2020.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. McClelland. It, specifically, identified categories of
function to the industry for open comment, asking whether or
not the NERC CIP standards could improve in comparison to the
NIST framework.
Mr. Welch. So, what do you think? Do you believe the gaps
in the current reliability standards do present a risk to the
bulk electrical system?
Mr. McClelland. The comments were received. I just need to
finish that quickly.
Mr. Welch. I'm sorry.
Mr. McClelland. So, in September, we received comments. Now
it's the subject of an ongoing proceeding. So, I can't speak
any further about it. But I can tell you that the matter is
under active consideration by the Commission, having received
comments from any interested party and comparing the NERC CIP
standards to the NIST framework.
Mr. Welch. The bottom line, though, is that we really got
to get some resolution on that in order to have a higher degree
of confidence that we can resist the cyber attack, right?
Mr. McClelland. Again, I just cannot comment on an ongoing
proceeding. I couldn't give any perspective on that proceeding.
I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Welch. All right. Let me ask this: On the NERC
reliability standard, as I understand it, they're only
mandatory for bulk power systems of over 1,500 megawatts of
power. And there's some possibility that there could be a
number of attacks that are on separate systems, but the
aggregate can well be over 1,500 megawatts. And we don't have
the information about how we would resist that attack. Does
FERC now have any information? And has the agency assessed the
impact of a cyber attack on geographically dispersed power
systems?
Mr. McClelland. Yes, FERC is--that's another matter that is
under active consideration at FERC. Again, it's the content of
an internal deliberation, so I can't speak to it. But it is an
important aspect, and FERC has identified that as such.
Mr. Welch. So, where do we need to be to improve our
confidence about our capacity to protect the grid? I mean, we
got to get to the bottom of these questions, right?
Mr. McClelland. Right. And these are subjects of active
proceedings at FERC.
Mr. Welch. All right. Well, thank you very much, gentleman.
Mr. McClelland. Thank you.
Mr. Welch. I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. I'm just--I'm a little bit frustrated that we
can't get at these answers because we have a proceeding
elsewhere. What's the nature of your--the privilege that you're
claiming here?
Mr. McClelland. As an active proceeding, one that's under
deliberation, as a staff member, I cannot comment on the merits
and the timing of that active proceeding. And this isn't----
Mr. Lynch. I don't think he was asking you about a certain
proceeding. He was asking you about how to protect the power
grid for the country.
Mr. McClelland. It was in comparison, for instance, to the
NERC--I am sorry, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it was in
comparing the NERC CIP standards to the NIST framework. And
this is an active proceeding at the Commission. It's under
deliberation.
Mr. Lynch. So, if we went into classified session, would
you be able to discuss it then?
Mr. McClelland. I could not, Mr. Chairman. Because the
content and timing of a deliberation at FERC cannot be
disclosed.
Mr. Lynch. OK. We're going to have to have you back then.
The chair recognizes the gentleman--I apologize to the
gentleman that it was not fruitful.
Mr. Welch. No, you better stated my puzzlement, and I
appreciate that.
Mr. Lynch. Oh. Absolutely. The chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar, for five minutes.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you are aware, the
administration released 100-day plan in April to address
cybersecurity shortcomings within our electric grid. The plan
tapped the Department of Energy as the lead for its
implementation rather than the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, or CISA. Some experts like Damon Small,
technical director for security consulting at NCC Group North
America, has pointed out that while the current plan takes a
generation and transmission of bulk power into consideration,
it fails to consider distribution. Original equipment
manufacturers, or OEMs that supply industrial control systems,
should be a part of that conversation as well.
Joe M. Weiss, a noted control systems cybersecurity expert,
argues that the real danger to the grid does not lie in the
networks, but rather in the industrial controllers and the
hardware, like the transformers and turbines. And that the
electric grid is vulnerable to electronic triggers buried in
bulk, power equipment that is predominantly sourced from China.
Contributing to this danger, engineers who manage the
industrial control systems used to be responsible for their
cybersecurity, but now has surrendered that function to
computer engineers, why it is argued that these systems are
vulnerable for being disrupted by bad actors without the normal
IT alerts being founded.
The Chinese Government is installing a back door and a
large transformer destined for our substation in Colorado. And
a SolarWind attack is proof of the supply chain attacks that
were not detected by IT network monitoring our threat
intelligence. This needs to be our focus.
Mr. Kumar, what percentage of the U.S. energy grid includes
components manufactured overseas?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, thank you for the question. And
understanding the supply chain of our critical energy systems
is very important to us. To that end, the President issued an
executive order really focused on America supply chains. And
one of the key components of that is looking at those critical
components, like transformers, as you rightfully noted, that
are so critical to the reliability of our electric grid, and
where are we manufacturing a lot of those components? And one
of the key things that we have seen with large power
transformers, as--sir, you certainly recognize, as we don't
manufacture the large power transformers in the United States
anymore. And that is a huge gap that we have as a country.
And so that is something that we're certainly going to be
looking at in terms of where we are producing a lot of these
critical, critical components on the U.S.--in the U.S. energy
sector as part of some of that report.
Mr. Gosar. So, to answer my question, zero are made here in
the United States? They're in foreign countries, right?
Mr. Kumar. So, when you talk about large power
transformers, today, large power transformers are built abroad.
You are absolutely right.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you. So, was it necessary for the Biden
administration to suspend President Trump's EO restricting the
procurement of foreign electric equipment? Couldn't Secretary
Granholm have been reviewed the executive order without
suspending it? Mr. Kumar?
Mr. Kumar. Thank you for that question, sir. Again, the
supply chain security is of the most is a critical component of
our energy sector, as I mentioned during my----
Mr. Gosar. I understand, but isn't it--well, it wouldn't be
plausible, much better off that the Secretary didn't suspend
President Trump's initiative, because it would have helped us
along this pathway?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, what we found was we got feedback from the
private sector that they were looking for additional
clarification. So, one of the things that we have done is we
want to take a more holistic approach.
One of the other things that we took into account was we
had SolarWinds happen last year. SolarWinds really changed how
we're thinking about supply chain threats across the board.
And, so, what we wanted to do was have consistent policy that
actually helped move the ball forward. And, so, this pause in
that policy allowed us to seek input from the private sector,
interagency, and others to really develop a stronger policy
related to supply chain security. So, that's where we're
focused. And we just received input through our RFI process.
And we're in the process of reviewing all of the RFIs so that
we can come back with a stronger approach. And I would be happy
to followup with you on that, sir.
Mr. Gosar. Yes, so, I guess my point in time here is, is
that no we're suspending a lot of the necessary supply chains
here in this country that can be manufactured, whether it be
electronic pieces, whether it be the rare earths and copper
manufacturing process pieces for these transformers and in
these big aspects.
So, I mean, it seems like we're in a negative transfer
abyss. That is, we're chasing our tail around and around and
around. We don't have the supply chains. We don't have the
critical elements to build them. We don't have the
manufacturing to build them. This is a complex issue. And time
is of the essence. And it doesn't seem like we're going to be
getting anywhere quick unless we fast-track this. Is that your
understanding?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, so in the interim, where we have been
focusing all of our efforts is working with manufacturers
directly. So, we just signed partnerships with ABB, Hitachi,
Schneider, and Schweitzer. And they have come on board with DOE
to test pieces of their equipment. Because reality is, a lot of
this equipment, whether it's hardware or software is sourced
globally. And so what we really need to get to is really
working with the manufacturers and suppliers to actually
engineer out a lot of the cybersecurity concerns.
So, we actually have had a lot of positive success with
those manufacturers to ensure that we can actually test their
equipment down to the chip level, and down to the firmer level.
So, we have had a lot of success on that. And we're going to
continue to do that, and we look forward to participation by
some of those other manufacturers to come to the table, whether
they're manufacturers of large power transformers, or SCADA
equipment, or relays. Those critical components, we want to
partner with them. We want to help them really ensure that they
know the pedigree of their software and hardware before this
equipment ever gets deployed on our electric grid.
Mr. Gosar. And one more last question, Mr. Chairman. So,
what other agencies are we working with, or are we siloing
this? It seems like this is a very complex issue that
transcends in different agencies. So, isn't there a great
process here to work functionally with all the agencies to have
a cohesive, well-planned, thoughtful process?
Mr. Kumar. Thank you for raising that. I think it's one of
the reasons that the sector risk management agency structure
works so well in this country. Because what happens is, if
we're focused on something from an energy perspective, we want
to ensure that our partners at CISA are aware of those
vulnerabilities and threats, because we want them to be looking
at them across the board. We want them to be looking at
chemical industrial control systems and industrial control
systems in other sectors. So, we partner very closely with our
colleagues at CISA.
In fact, last year, actually earlier this year, we released
a really critical vulnerability in relays that was being used
in a specific manufacturer. And how we released it was in close
coordination with our partners at CISA to get the word out
there, once we had worked with the manufacturer to find a
patch.
So, you are absolutely right that we need to be working
collaboratively, and that's how we do it with CISA. But we're
also working with our colleagues at FERC to help inform their
process. And then, of course, we work with the intelligence
community because we want them to know where are the threats,
where are risks in these groups of proponents so they can help
us through their own missions to really help us address these
risks.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Kumar. And I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thanks for your indulgence.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. Just a clarification
on the gentleman's question and your answer. The large
transformer manufacturers who are no longer operating within
the United States, are they U.S. companies, or are they foreign
companies?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, it's a mixed bag in terms of----

Mr. Lynch. So, we do have U.S. manufacturers that are
manufacturing large transformers overseas?
Mr. Kumar. So we have, for example, ABB, Hitachi.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Mr. Kumar. They're producing more of the medium voltage
transformers in the United States right now. And so there are
some manufacturers that are making transformers in the United
States, they are just not the large power transformers. And so
one of the things we would like to do is partner with them to
really encourage a lot of this domestic manufacturing of those
transformers. But there are other transformers that are being
built by other countries out there as well, and I would be
happy to followup with you with the list of those companies.
Mr. Lynch. All right. Thank you. Thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Speier, for five minutes. Welcome.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask Mr. Kumar to begin. Since 85 percent of our U.S.
electrical grid relies on parts and equipment from overseas, I
mean, it's prime to be somehow manipulated or compromised as a
result. And I know FERC has approved a new supply chain risk
management reliability, but I don't know if it goes far enough.
So, first of all, let me ask you, Mr. Kumar, are you also
working with the NSA and their interface with their corporate
entities outside of the intelligence community?
Mr. Kumar. Congresswoman, absolutely. We want to take a
whole-of-government approach. These challenges, particularly
when it comes to supply chain challenges, are too great. We
have to be leveraging the authorities, the capabilities, and
the expertise across the government. And so we're absolutely
working on the intelligence side with our colleagues. In the
broader intelligence community, NSA is certainly included. But
also in terms of protecting critical infrastructure, this is
where we need to be partnering with other agencies, such as
CISA, who helps us all be connected in these efforts as we look
at our supply chain.
I do want to raise up an issue you mentioned, I think it's
an important one, and that's looking at a lot of our components
and particularly just new components that we're putting onto
the grid. This is where we think it's of the utmost important
to employ a philosophy in the United States of security by
design, and the concept is we really need to be looking at the
next generation systems.
So, to that end, what we have done is we've collaborated
with DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy as
we start to look at wind turbines, solar panels, nuclear
generation, and, of course, fossil energy. How do we ensure
that the R&D being done on those systems has cybersecurity
embedded into it? So, this is a mandate that the Secretary,
Secretary Granholm, has asked CESER to lead across the board,
that cyber is a core component of everything that the
Department does, through the R&D at headquarters but through
our national laboratories as well.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein, can you tell us about the programs that CISA
has undertaken to warn critical infrastructure owners and
operators about risks specific to foreign-produced equipment
and software?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly. Thank you for that question. As
my colleague at DOE noted, CISA really focuses on understanding
broad cross-sector risks to the Nation's critical
infrastructure in close collaboration with the SRMAs that bring
unique sectoral expertise for entities within their purview.
At CISA, we manage the Information and Communications
Technology Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force, which is a
public-private body intended to bring together the producers
and developers of much of the platform technologies that we see
ubiquitously utilized across sectors in order to understand the
risks posed by certain technologies and also, most critically,
to drive best practices to reduce supply chain risk throughout
the life cycle.
Ms. Speier. So here--excuse me. Here's my question, though.
You can have the wherewithal to provide this support and
information to these many operators around the country, but if
they either don't know about it or don't avail themselves of
it, they become that much more vulnerable to foreign attacks.
So, what are you doing to somehow lure them into a discussion
and a training that will provide them that kind of information?
And then, second, have you created a list of banned
foreign-produced equipment and software that is known to pose a
threat to the U.S. critical infrastructure cybersecurity?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly. As to the first question, our
hope is that luring is not required. Our hope is that by
communicating effectively with critical infrastructure across
this country through the multiple information sharing groups
that CISA administers in coordination with the SRMAs and our
other partners in government, we are able to share timely and
actionable information about vulnerable hardware and software
that may need to either be mitigated or replaced.
And our focus here really is on the vulnerabilities as
opposed to the foreign providence in the first instance. And by
sharing information about vulnerable technology assets, that
then enables an infrastructure owner-operator to take concrete
steps to address a particular risk in their environment.
To your second question, ma'am, there is not currently a
list maintained by CISA of banned technology assets for
critical infrastructure. It does bear noting that Congress
recently created the FASC, which is an interagency body
intended to assess the risk of foreign-produced vulnerable
devices in Federal networks and has the authority to issue
exclusion orders for those assets. That body is active now, and
presumably an exclusion order issued by the FASC could be taken
up by sectors across critical infrastructure or by sectoral
regulators.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you.
Let me just conclude by urging all of you to recognize that
we are the last to respond more often than not. Huawei was
operational in this country for over 10 years before we finally
got the message that they shouldn't be allowed to do so. ZTE is
yet another example. We are very late in doing what we should
do early on, and I just hope that you recognize your
responsibility to act swiftly when there is either known or
suspected foreign intrusions and/or equipment that poses a
problem to us.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Johnson, for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this very important hearing.
And if I can pull my questions up here.
OK. It was not long ago that a cyber attack on Colonial
Pipeline, a company located not far from my district, disrupted
the lives of millions and threatened our economy. This was just
one of the many recent attacks which have raised serious
concerns about America's ability to defend its critical
infrastructure and economy from cyber threats. But these
attacks have also presented opportunities to learn and to
harden our defenses.
One lesson is crystal clear: Information sharing between
the government and the private sector is absolutely essential
to defending our Nation against cyber attacks. This is
absolutely true for electric utilities, and for this process to
work, private utility companies must quickly and fully disclose
any cyber intrusions on their systems to the Federal
Government.
Mr. McClelland, I understand that under current NERC
reliability standards, electric utilities are required to
report certain cyber incidents to the Federal Government. Is
that correct?
Mr. McClelland. That is correct, Representative.
Mr. Johnson. And can you describe for me the types of
incidents that must be reported and why utilities are not
required to report all incidents?
Mr. McClelland. The attacks--as I understand the
requirements, the standard, the attacks require the utilities,
the applicable utilities to report either successful cyber
intrusions or cyber incidents that may not have constituted a
cyber intrusion but they were threats to the utility system.
Mr. Johnson. How effective has this requirement proved to
be in practice?
Mr. McClelland. The requirement is relatively new. I'm not
familiar with the results, but I'd be happy to take that as a
question for the record and provide a followup answer for you.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you. I appreciate that.
And to all of the witnesses, does the government have data
on incidents that go unreported?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, Congressman. It's a great and
important question, and the answer is we don't have enough
data. We know that there are still across sectors a number of
intrusions today that are not reported to the U.S. Government,
either to CISA, to an SRMA, or to Federal law enforcement, and
this presents a few problems.
First, it precludes the government, including CISA, from
offering assistance to the victim. It limits our ability to
develop actionable information that could be used to protect
other victims before similar events occur, and it limits our
ability to understand the extent of national risk, for example,
adversary campaigns that are emerging across sectors of the
economy.
As you may be aware, CISA recently worked with TSA to
establish a security directive requiring reporting of incidents
affecting certain pipelines to CISA, but even so, this sector-
by-sector approach may in itself not reach the breadth of
reporting that the U.S. Government needs to understand national
risks.
And for that reason, we very much look forward to working
with Congress to ensure that there's incident reporting
legislation passed into law that would provide the breadth of
reporting needed to understand and manage these significant
threats.
Mr. Johnson. Well, Mr. Goldstein what mechanisms does the
government have to enforce these reporting requirements? How
often are they used and how effective are they?
Mr. Goldstein. I'm very sorry.
Mr. Johnson. Do I need to repeat that question?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. If you wouldn't mind, that would
be great. I appreciate it.
Mr. Johnson. OK. What mechanism does the government have to
enforce these reporting requirements? And how often are they
used and how effective are these enforcement requirements,
enforcement mechanisms?
Mr. Goldstein. Got it. Thank you, sir. It's a great
question.
So, one challenge today is there is no blanket reporting
requirement for businesses or critical infrastructure in this
country. Instead, these reporting requirements are generally
sectoral and enforced by the unique authorities of a given
regulator. And so, for example, the enforcement authorities
that FERC may be able to levy would be dramatically different
than the TSA or the Federal Reserve Board. And so absent a
common reporting regime and a common mechanism of enforcement,
it is difficult to assess the efficacy and to ensure that the
breadth of reporting is coming in to CISA and thereby to our
partner agencies.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein.
From CISA's perspective, are the current NERC reporting
standards comprehensive enough or do we need additional
mandatory reporting requirements for electrical utilities?
Mr. Goldstein. So over--as a broad question, there are two
challenges with reporting requirements today. The first is,
because they have developed sector by sector, they have
divergent requirements, for example, the definition of an
incident, as well as the timeframe for reporting and the
content of a report. And then, as we've discussed, the fact
that they are currently sectoral means that they are incomplete
and do not cover the breadth of organizations that should be
reporting to the Federal Government when they have an intrusion
that could impact the sort of national critical function that
we care so much about.
Certainly, the existing NERC standards, as my colleague
noted, are fairly new. Our understanding is that they do
provide the necessary degree of data and that reporting does
come to CISA as defined in the regulation, but, of course, you
know, there may be other aspects of the energy grid for which
additional reporting would be beneficial to help the U.S.
Government understand the breadth of risks, which is a
commonality that we see across sectors.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Goldstein, should electrical utilities be
obligated to give CISA access to systems to conduct forensic
analysis in the wake of an attack?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, Congressman. Our perspective is
that it is critically important for the U.S. Government to have
access to information about cybersecurity intrusion subsequent
to a security incident. This allows us to glean information
that we can use to protect others. It also allows us to
understand if the intrusion is correlated to, for example, a
nation-state campaign that's affecting multiple sectors.
One way of enabling that information is by providing CISA
with the ability to conduct incident response or threat hunting
services for a victim. That is a service that we are ready,
willing, and frequently provide. But it is also the case that
if a victim organization chooses to bring in one of the many
highly qualified commercial incident response firms, that is
perfectly reasonable as well. The key part is that CISA then
gets information from that incident response that we can use to
do our job and protect others.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Any additional authorities necessary to respond to and
deter any cyber attacks?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, Congressman. So, I think we've
discussed here the main one, which is broader requirements for
incident reporting for significant cybersecurity incidents
across this country. That will go a long way toward helping,
not only CISA, but our partners at the SRMAs and Federal law
enforcement understand the breadth of cybersecurity risks we
are seeing and take urgent action response.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I believe my time has expired, and I
appreciate the additional time.
Mr. Lynch. OK. The gentleman yields back.
Let me just ask, to followup on the gentleman's question.
In my district, we had a couple of incidents where a gas line
inadvertently released gas into the general community. We had
the FBI come in. I didn't have them come in, but they came in
pursuant to the pipeline operator's request.
Would the FBI be a--would they have a data base, or would
they be a repository of some of these incident reports if they
are called in to investigate?
Mr. Goldstein. So, we work extraordinarily closely with the
FBI every day. We conduct joint incident response together. We
notify victims together. You know, our general rule as a
government is a call to one is a call to all, and I think that
actually now works very well in practice. But even the FBI,
even given their breadth of personnel in the field offices
across the country, still has certainly insufficient visibility
into cybersecurity intrusions. And so some entities today call
CISA, some call the FBI, some may call an SRMA.
You know, we need a cohesive approach to this problem as a
country that is going to ensure that we actually understand the
nature of the threat we are seeing, we understand how our
adversaries are breaking into networks across critical
infrastructure, we are helping to prevent similar attacks
before they occur, and we are understanding the potential
impacts of critical functions before they manifest and result
in service disruptions that could harm the American people.
Mr. Lynch. OK. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the distinguished gentleman from
Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin, for five minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I want to thank you for the accommodation allowing
me to waive on to the committee for the purpose of asking
questions at the hearing, and I want to thank you for your
leadership on cybersecurity. I know how serious you take this
issue, and we appreciate the leadership of these gentlemen and
the work that we have been able to collaborate on together.
Likewise, I would like to thank the panel for their
testimony this afternoon, the work that you're doing to try to
protect the Nation against cyber threats, especially those of
significant consequence.
That said, Mr. Kumar, I just wanted to followup on a line
of questioning. You talked about the different power generation
piece of equipment, some that are produced here, others, the
larger ones, that are produced overseas, if I understood all of
that correctly. And given the fact that these are not like
batteries that sit on a shelf and you just, you know, pop one
in and out easily if something becomes disabled, and
understanding the Aurora threat, where for the first time back
in 2007 saw how a cyber attack through a data intrusion could
cause physical damage to a turbine, would not it be wise to
have a, say, industry strategic national stockpile of
additional power generation equipment of a certain number that,
were a turbine or series of turbines be destroyed, that we
would have the ability to reconstitute quickly as opposed to
these things take months to build, ship, and install, and not
having some on hand? Have we done any of that? Are we thinking
about it in those terms?
Mr. Kumar. Thank you for the question, sir. So, the
Department did do research in this case. We looked at whether a
strategic transformer reserve made sense in the country. So, we
actually did a series of reports, and we worked very closely
with our industry partners to really look at what are the
challenges when it comes to bringing in these critical pieces
of equipment, as you rightfully identified. And so what we
found through a lot of that reporting was we should be thinking
about strategic transformers and the sharing of transformers.
And so to that end, since writing some of these reports,
the industry itself has set up three different programs in the
electricity industry to really share transformers during an
emergency. It's Grid Assurance, SpareConnect, and the STEP
program. These programs allow one utility to share a
transformer with another utility. Grid Assurance goes a step
further. It actually goes beyond just transformers. It's
looking at relays and other critical equipment.
So, our hope is, as we start to identify these critical
pieces of equipment, particularly ones perhaps that are long
lead kind of equipment, how do we inform that back to the
private sector so they can continue developing these mechanisms
to have these types of reserves.
The government's role, another portion that we feel like we
need to address and help with is these large power transformers
are 200 to 300 tons, and what we often find is the logistics of
moving a transformer at 20 miles an hour, maybe less, across
from one part of the country to the other is a huge challenge
of moving such a large piece of equipment. So, the focus we've
had is working with our colleagues at the Department of
Transportation, of course the states, to really understand the
logistics of moving these large power transformers from point A
to point B.
The other piece that I referenced earlier, sir, is that we
need to really look at domestic manufacturing. How do we
incentivize some of that domestic manufacturing of these
critical components in the United States? I know that is a key
focus of Secretary Granholm as we start to develop this report
regarding America's supply chains, and so there's going to be
more to come on that.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I think it's an important issue to
address.
Director Goldstein, thank you for being here. As you know,
I'm a big proponent of the Joint Cyber Planning Office
currently being stood up at CISA, and I think the JCPO will be
critical for bringing the interagency, including the Department
of Energy and the private sector, together to coordinate
planning and exercises to protect critical infrastructure like
the grid.
So, Director Goldstein, can you give us a status update on
JCPO? In addition, how do you view the planning and exercise
function of the office fitting in with other operations and
analytics functions carried out by CISA?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you for the question, sir. And as
always, thank you for your work on behalf of our national
cybersecurity mission. We are deeply grateful every day for it.
We continue to make progress in implementing critical
function which, as you note, is going to be foundational to our
ability to prioritize, plan for, exercise, and then execute
coordinated cyber defense operations with government and the
private sector. We are preparing now for our initial launch of
the organization, which will involve multiple private sector
companies as well as our partners across the interagency, and
we intend for that work to be really a pilot for what this
effort will be able to do when it scales forward.
The way that I would think about this for broader
integration is this will be our effort to, in the first
instance, understand what are the most significant risks that
we care about managing as a national cybersecurity community,
with CISA, of course, at the helm for civilian cyber defense;
how do we develop plans jointly with the interagency and with
industry to understand how we mitigate the plans----
[Audio interruption.]
Mr. Lynch. Someone's got a live mic. We ask all members to
mute.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. My apologies.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. You may proceed.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you.
Once we have our list of prioritized risks, develop joint
plans with government and the private sector, exercise those
plans in the same joint manner between industry and the private
sector, and then when a risk manifests, execute those plans to
ensure that we are taking collective action to mitigate risks
to entities that could be harmed.
So, if we think about layering this in with our existing
model for cyber defense operations, you know, we could envision
a planning sprint focused on certain risks through the energy
sector, where we would ensure that CISA's asset response
capabilities, DOE's expertise as the SRMA, and then our
partners in industry, but not just industry in the energy
sector, but cross-sector entities in the private sector, are
all coming together saying, when the bad day that we've
discussed today occurs, how do we take joint action to ensure
not only that we're minimizing the impacts to the energy sector
but we are understanding and proactively addressing cross-
sector impacts; bringing together team members from government
and the private sector to do this work, both in person and via
our analytics platform that we are developing for joint
collaboration, in coordination with the interagency and our
partners across industry.
So, this really will be the formalization of CISA's
critical role in leading civilian cyber defense for the
country, but it's a role that we can't do alone and requires
the robust collaboration from day one with the SMRAs, with our
other partners, including Federal law enforcement and the
intelligence community, and perhaps most critically, the
private sector who, of course, are going to be the executors of
so much critical work to mitigating the risk.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I had two additional questions, but I could
submit those for the record.
Mr. Lynch. You can fire away, Jim, if you want.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
So, Director Goldstein, last year's NDAA also required us
to develop a Continuity of the Economy plan. So, this plan will
govern how we respond to and recover from a significant
disruption to our economy, thinking of in terms of what to
prioritize first if the bad day happens and what do we need to
get up and running first to keep our economy on track, you
know, one perhaps epitomized by a cyber attack on the power
system.
So, our intent in drafting this provision was that CISA,
including the cybersecurity division and the National Risk
Management Center, would play a key role in drafting the
report. Can you give me an update on where things stand with
the Continuity of the Economy plan?
Mr. Goldstein. Excellent. So, certainly, we share your
focus about the need to robustly consider and plan for
Continuity of the Economy under all conditions. I think it is
symbatic underlining much of what we discussed today. I
understand that the administration is still considering the
appropriate way to implement that provision in the NDAA, but
certainly I recognize the urgency and importance of this kind
of work and would be glad to get you an update for the record
on progress in making that decision.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
I really do hope to see movement from the White House study
on this. Maybe even the actual cyber director can take the
reigns. And I hope this subcommittee, Mr. Chairman, will keep
on this issue as well.
The last question I had, Director Goldstein, we've also
discussed the report required by section 9002 of last year's
NDAA in Sector Risk Management Agencies, or SRMAs. As you know,
the report was due July 1. Though I appreciate Director
Easterly was only recently confirmed and might need some time
to review it, our goal, with the clarification of the roles and
responsibilities of SRMAs, was to empower them to fulfill their
jobs, while also ensuring CISA gets the support it needs,
whether in terms of risk data or incident response
coordination.
How do you see, Director, the relationship between DOE and
CISA evolving in light of section 9002 and the forthcoming
report?
Mr. Goldstein. Absolutely. So, we are urgently working on
the report, and we appreciate the patience, as we make sure
that we get it right, because, as you know, this is critically
important work that really is foundational for delineation of
not just roles but also resources, capabilities across agencies
in managing this, a significant risk.
CISA and DOE have an extraordinarily close relationship.
You know, in general, CISA sees ourself--and I should speak to
the mission element of CISA, because CISA, of course, is also
an SRMA for multiple sectors. But the mission delivery portion
of CISA in cybersecurity that I'm privileged to lead, we see
ourselves as a service provider to sectors to give them
actionable information, cybersecurity services, incident
response assistance upon request, and understanding cross-
sector dependencies that could affect the provision of sectoral
functions and, thereby, cause impacts to the American people.
DOE, of course, has extraordinary expertise, as we've
offered today, on understanding both nuance dependencies and
relationships within the sector, the nature in which a
cybersecurity intrusion could impact sector entities, and the
ability uniquely to actually understand productivity that is
manifesting in the sector.
And so our goal working with our partners in DOE is first
and foremost to make sure that we are robustly sharing
information so that the cross-sector information that CISA has,
including information, of course, from Federal civilian
networks, we are sharing with our partners at DOE, we are
sharing with our partners in the energy sector, so that when we
are seeing a threat manifesting in the Federal Government or a
different sector, it can be used to protect partners across the
energy grid.
Additionally, as my colleague, Mr. Kumar, has discussed
today, DOE is engaged in a variety of activities focused on
understanding supply chain risks, resilience issues within the
energy sector. That is all work that CISA is executing at a
cross-sector model to understand risks across the board. And so
the more that CISA and DOE can work together on ensuring that
lessons we are learning from the energy sector can be
generalized broadly and ensuring that we are providing
cybersecurity services to the energy sector in deep
coordination with DOE, the sector will be stronger but, more
importantly, we will be stronger as a Nation.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for the generosity and
the time, and I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Kumar, just to clarify on your answer to Mr. Langevin,
Chairman Langevin, he asked you about these very large
transformers. As a former ironworker, I've had the opportunity
to try to move some of those transformers. It is a traffic-
stopping operation. I appreciate the difficulty. But I think
the wider question is about redundancy. And so, we don't have
to move transformers around in order to get them online.
Is there--so rather than looking at it from an inventory
situation where we have transformers that can be brought in,
what about redundancy where we have capabilities or the
capacity that can be brought online for very, very important
national security purposes, especially here in the D.C. area? I
mean, where do we stand on that in terms of redundancy that
might be brought online in the event that one of these large
generating facilities gets taken down?
Mr. Kumar. Sir, thank you for that question. It's--really
the concept of resiliency and redundancy are really core to how
we're thinking about these problems. We first must understand
the risk to the sector and then start to build some of that
resiliency and redundancy into it, so that if you do have a
situation, as you mentioned, with a transformer going down, how
do we ensure we still have those critical functions, those
critical facilities, like military installations that continue
to serve power to those installations.
So, what we're looking at is we're really looking at an
all-of-the-above strategy. One of the options that we're
thinking about is what's the role of solar, wind, energy
storage, nuclear generation that can be brought in to actually
create a microgrid and actually develop resilience into cities
and states and, in particular, serve the critical facilities,
like military installations.
So, we really need to build in that resilience into the
grid so that if we do--if we are impacted by an incident, we
can have another source of generation to continue having us
going forward. So, that's how we're really thinking about this
problem broadly.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the very patient gentlelady from
Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, for five minutes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, according to a March 2021 GAO report,
electrical distribution systems, the systems responsible for
delivering our electricity from transmission lines to consumers
and businesses across America, quote, faced significant
cybersecurity risks. And as more and more homes, businesses,
and smart devices are connected to electrical distribution
systems, the exposure and complexity of these systems grows,
rendering them, quote, increasingly vulnerable to cyber
attacks.
The electricity in many large cities across the United
States is provided by a single distribution utility. If a
distribution utility servicing a major city like New York or
Miami were to be the victim of a cyber attack, the consequences
could be devastating. In fact, GAO found that--and I quote--
even if a cyber attack on the grid's distribution system did
not impact the bulk power system, such an attack could still
have significant national consequences.
Yet, despite this, distribution utilities are not subject
to any Federal cybersecurity regulations. The NERC reliability
standards apply only to electrical generation and transmission
systems, while distribution systems are regulated at the state
and local level.
Mr. Kumar, given the growing cyber threats to distribution
systems, do you think there should be mandatory Federal
cybersecurity standards for electrical distribution systems?
Mr. Kumar. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. This
is certainly an increasing and complex threat. As you
rightfully talked about, we are integrating more and more,
whether it's distributed energy resources, we're connected
more, and it's all happening at the distribution level. And so
what we are focused on, we, as DOE, do not have the regulatory
authority in terms of the distribution system. I would
certainly defer to my colleague at FERC regarding regulatory
authorities. But where we're focused is the states do have
regulatory authority over the utilities at the distribution
level.
And so where we've been focusing our efforts on really
educating the state public utility commissions about the
threat, No. 1; then, No. 2, providing them with the tools that
they can use to then look at the cybersecurity investments of
the utilities at the distribution level within their cities,
states, and communities.
And so that's where we're focusing a lot of our efforts is
to really help those states who have the ultimate regulatory
authority to do more in that space.
We also offer a tool called C2M2 that is applied to
distribution, transmission, and generation facilities. Any
utility of any size can use this tool to gauge its
cybersecurity posture today, and they can actually see where
they land in terms of their cybersecurity posture and then make
the necessary investments to their cybersecurity using these
tools that we provide to the states.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK. And I would like to hear what
Mr. Goldstein thinks.
Mr. Goldstein. So, as a general point--and thank you for
that question, ma'am. I do appreciate it.
As a general point, efforts that we can take as a country
to drive adoption of better security controls would lead to
improvements to our national security, economic security,
public health and safety. There are a number of roads that we
can take to that outcome, and I would defer to the sectoral
expertise of my colleagues at DOE and FERC to consider which
incentives are most appropriate for distribution entities. But,
in general, we know that we need to take steps to catalyze
urgent investment in better security. Certainly, regulation and
standards is one path to that end. There may be other
incentives that could also enable the same investment.
And I would just note one example. You know, there are
certainly bills proposed in Congress that would enable broader
cybersecurity grants that is also an additional method to
catalyze more cybersecurity investment and certainly one that
CISA supports. And so the end state that we seek is better
security. I think given the nuances of a given sector and even
given entities within a sector, the particular package of
incentives to reach that goal may differ.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. OK. And continuing in the same risk
category, despite growing cyber risks to electrical
distribution systems, GAO also found in its March 2021 report
that DOE's current cybersecurity strategy for the electric grid
does not fully address risks to distribution systems. DOE
officials have argued that the Department is prioritizing the
security of the bulk power system, asserting that a cyber
attack on a distribution system would likely be, quote, less
significant than an attack on the bulk power system.
However, GAO also found that DOE has not conducted any up-
to-date assessment of the impacts of a cyber attack on
distribution systems or whether such an attack could affect the
wider bulk power system.
Mr. Kumar, how can DOE be sure that an attack on one or
more electrical distribution systems would be relatively
insignificant if it has not studied the likelihood and
potential impacts of such an attack? And will you commit to
conducting an updated assessment of the potential scale and
impacts of an attack on electrical distribution systems and
report your findings back to Congress?
Mr. Kumar. Congresswoman, I appreciate the question. We are
absolutely focused on the distribution system. I've read the
GAO report, and we are taking actions today to really look at
the distribution system.
One of the key things that we're doing today is we've
partnered with our Energy Efficiency and Renewable Office and
our Office of Electricity to really think about the
distribution systems and how do we embed security by design
into those next generation systems at the distribution level.
We're also working with our state PUCs, as I mentioned, and
the goal here is really understand the threats. And what we
find is there may be a mismatch in understanding what the
threat is so that we can then inform requirements.
At a very basic level, you know, we are encouraging things
like the NIST cybersecurity framework that Congressman Welch
had mentioned. We think that's a great tool to actually look at
your cybersecurity posture as a utility, whether you're a
distribution utility or a transmission utility.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Well, I mean, I appreciate your
commitment to looking at the GAO report, and once you do that,
will you commit to conducting an updated assessment of the
potential scale and impacts of an attack on electrical
distribution systems and report your findings back to Congress?
Mr. Kumar. We can do that, ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I guess, if you don't mind, 30 more
seconds.
Mr. Lynch. Of course.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
Distribution systems are the systems on which Americans
rely to bring electricity to their homes and businesses,
because I know that's not terminology I'm familiar with, so
providing a definition is pretty important. You know, those are
the systems that light our streets and run our trains.
In Florida, we actually experienced a close call earlier
this year when hackers breached the computer system operating a
water treatment plant and boosted chemicals to dangerous
levels. And now, luckily, a human operator was able to
intervene before any damage was done. But this frightening
attack demonstrates the damage that can be done if a malignant
actor wants to impact public safety.
So, it's critically important for DOE to conduct a
cybersecurity assessment of our electrical distribution systems
so we can address any persistent vulnerabilities before they
can be exploited and people can be harmed. So, I appreciate the
opportunity to talk about that at this hearing.
I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back. Her points are well
taken. Thank you.
As we close, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Wisconsin for any concluding remarks.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. I'd like to thank you for having this
hearing. You know, we didn't have a huge turnout here, and it's
the type of hearing that I guess is kind of boring, except for
all of a sudden it was the most important hearing we ever had
if something disastrous would happen sometime in the next year.
Is it OK if I ask Mr. Kumar just one more question?
What you said kind of concerned me. It concerns me in a
wide variety of places the things we don't make in this
country, but I wondered if you'd share with us where the large
transformers are made. And if we were subject to a cyber
attack, is there anything we would need to repair the damage
that is not made in this country?
Mr. Kumar. Sure. Thank you for that question. I can take
that back in terms of where the large power transformers are
made and provide that back to you in terms of a QFR, if that
works for you, sir.
Mr. Grothman. That's fine and wonderful.
OK. Again, I'd like to thank you for being here. And I've
often felt that this sort of thing is such a very important
issue, and it's never going to be in the paper until some
disaster happens and then people say, where was Congress. So,
thanks for having it and maybe----
Mr. Gosar. Glenn? Glenn, would you yield? This is
Congressman Gosar.
Mr. Grothman. Sure.
Mr. Gosar. Mr. Chair, one of the things--I know it says
cybersecurity is the issue today, but what about when a foreign
actor owns the utility that accesses the grid? I mean, I'm
thinking about a lot of these solar fields that are operated by
foreign actors. And what oversight do we have for them? Because
you could actually have a systemic shutdown from within the
owned grid system because of that access. Have we ever
considered any of that, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Lynch. I'd refer that question to our witnesses.
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly. Thank you for the question, sir.
So, there are certainly processes in place. I would call
out the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States,
or CFIUS, that is intended just for this purpose, to assess the
national security risk of foreign investment in critical
infrastructure or other assets that could be critical to
national security, economic security, et cetera. I certainly
cannot speak to foreign investment in any particular energy
entity or utility, but the U.S. Government does have structures
in place to evaluate this sort of foreign investment and bar
acquisitions or put conditions thereupon if national security
risks are identified.
Mr. Gosar. That's if they're identified, right?
Mr. Goldstein. I'm sorry, would you remind repeating that?
Mr. Gosar. Yes. That's if they're identified. If they run
under the radar, I mean--I mean, it depends a lot on the state
oversight, if I'm not mistaken, right?
Mr. Goldstein. So, in general, it is certainly the case
that risks would need to be identified as a part of the
assessment process. There are processes in place to assess, to
identify foreign acquisitions. There are reporting requirements
thereof, and there are processes that are administered on an
ongoing basis to assess the risks posed by such acquisitions,
and, again, preclude acquisitions or put conditions thereupon
if such risks are deemed dilatory to national security.
Mr. Gosar. I will followup with some questions to find out
that systematic oversight. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks, Glenn.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Grothman. That said, maybe sometime we can do something
in the future on this, maybe in a more secure location, but
thanks again for having the hearing.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman.
Before we close, I have a quick housekeeping matter. I'd
like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
written statement submitted by the American Public Power
Association and the National Rural Electric Cooperative
Association.
So, without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. I think at this point our witnesses have
suffered enough. So, in closing, I want to thank our panelists
for their remarks. I want to commend my colleagues for their
participation in the important conversation that we have had
about the vulnerability of our electrical grid.
With that, without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions. And I know there are some questions outstanding that
we've had commitments during the hearing. But in any event, all
members will have five legislative days within which to submit
additional written questions for the witnesses through the
chair which will be then forwarded again to the witnesses for
their response, and I ask our witnesses to please respond as
promptly as you are able.
And, with that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
