- FITARA 13.0

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FITARA 13.0

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 20, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-61

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available at: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-682 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Vacancy
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russell Anello, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee on Government Operations Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   Jody B. Hice, Georgia Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         Andy Biggs, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachsetts       Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Ro Khanna, California                Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Katie Porter, California
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on January 20, 2022.................................     1

Witnesses

Panel 1

Ms. Ann Dunkin, Chief Information Officer, Department of Energy
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Mr. Guy Cavallo, Chief Information Officer, Office of Personnel
Management
Oral Statement...................................................     7
Ms. Carol C. Harris, Director, Information Technology and
Cybersecurity, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................     9

Panel 2

Mr. David Powner, Executive Director, Center for Data-Driven
Policy, MITRE, Former Director, Information Technology and
Cybersecurity,
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................    11
Ms. Suzette Kent, CEO, Kent Advisory Services, Former Federal
Chief
Information Officer
Oral Statement...................................................    13
Mr. Richard Spires (Minority witness), Principal, Richard A.
Spires
Consulting
Oral Statement...................................................    15

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

No additional documents were entered into the record for this hearing.

FITARA 13.0

----------

Thursday, January 20, 2022

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m., via
the Zoom video platform, Hon. Gerald Connolly (chairman of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Lynch, Khanna,
Porter, Brown, Hice, Keller, Clyde, Biggs, and LaTurner.
Mr. Connolly. The committee will come to order. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
committee at any time, and I now recognize myself for an
opening statement.
For the past six years, this subcommittee has maintained
steady and bipartisan oversight of agency implementation of
FITARA, the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform
Act.
In addition to other critical IT-related statutes and
executive branch IT priorities that are incorporated into the
biannual FITARA scorecard, we have provided vigorous oversight.
In practice, the scorecard is a tool for Congress, chief
information officers, agency heads, and outside stakeholders to
understand how Federal agencies across the enterprise of
government are performing in various IT acquisition categories.
Since the scorecard was first released in 2015, it has
driven positive change in information technology system
acquisition and management across 24 Federal agencies, and it
is estimated by GAO that it has saved taxpayers more than $20
billion in improving the security of Federal IT systems. There
aren't a lot of other bills that have saved the Federal
Government that much money.
This subcommittee, regardless of who is in the majority,
has held more oversight hearings on FITARA in the last seven
years than on any other Federal piece of legislation. As we
will hear today from the Government Accountability Office, the
scorecard has served as an effective oversight tool since its
very inception.
From November 2015 through December 2021, agencies
receiving C or higher grades increased from 29 to 100 percent,
and for the most recent scorecard, 50 percent of the agencies
received an A or B.
To continue driving progress, the scorecard needs to evolve
to reflect the changing nature of IT services and to guarantee
that we are accurately assessing modernization and IT
management practices of Federal agencies.
The goal here is to incentivize progress, not to get a gold
star on our foreheads. At today's hearing, the subcommittee
will hear diverse perspectives on the scorecard including
opportunities to upgrade its categories and metrics for more
focused and objective measurement of agencies' performance.
Since the July 2021 FITARA 12.0 scorecard, seven agencies'
overall grades increased, four decreased, and 13 remained
unchanged. These grades resulted in all agencies receiving a
passing C or higher grade for this round's scorecard.
In the data center consolidation category, every agency
received an A grade based on the scorecard's current
methodology. As such, the fourteenth scorecard will retire this
methodology when it is released later this year.
Today, the subcommittee grades agencies using each agency's
quarterly data center submission to the Office of Management
and Budget and weights that data center grade according to the
subcommittee's priorities.
I want to congratulate agencies for getting all A's in this
category. But that is not to be construed as a mission
accomplished moment, by any means.
Given the subcommittee's oversight history on Federal data
center consolidation, we approach this accomplishment with a
bit of a jaundiced eye.
We look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on ways
the subcommittee can continue to hold agencies accountable for
the efficient data center consolidation and transition to the
cloud.
Data center consolidation category is one example of a
larger trend that points to the need to upgrade the scorecard.
While no agencies earned an F grade since 2018, on average less
than 10 percent of agencies are achieving an A grade and 53
percent are showing no change to their overall grade over time.
That's not progress.
Agencies appear to be less motivated to improve grades,
perhaps, because of the methodology used to calculate some of
the metrics. For example, two of the metrics are graded on a
curve, which can be received as counterproductive to an
agency's ability to demonstrate improvement during the
scorecard cycle.
A variety of factors including methodology, data
availability, agency motivation, and the cycle of the scorecard
have resulted in stalling grades for many agencies.
The subcommittee is at an inflection point, and the time is
right to modernize this oversight tool. The Federal Government
spends more than $100 billion each year on IT investments.
GAO has found that, historically, the projects supported by
these investments have often incurred multimillion-dollar cost
overruns and years-long schedule delays. In addition, they may
contribute little to mission-related outcomes and, in some
cases, fail altogether.
Congress enacted FITARA on December 19 of 2014 to ensure
focus, discipline, and consistently effective management and to
codify existing administrative initiatives to improve Federal
IT managed by Federal CIOs.
Key pillars of the FITARA scorecard including cybersecurity
and IT modernization remain on GAO's high-risk list,
highlighting the need for vigorous and continued oversight on
these issues.
To conduct such oversight effectively, the FITARA scorecard
must accurately reflect the progress agencies have actually
made in their IT efforts, which will, in turn, motivate
agencies to prioritize meaningful changes.
This subcommittee is prepared to lead the way on FITARA's
evolution. Expected updates to agency IT data, reporting
requirements, and upcoming revisions to the IT dashboard
provide an opportunity for us to enhance and upgrade the
scorecard itself.
Moreover, FITARA 13.0 marks only the third time in the
scorecard's history when government had only two acting CIOs--
the Department of Interior and the Department of Health and
Human Services.
All the rest have been made permanent or confirmed. So, we
have a cadre of permanent CIOs who we count on as trusted
partners in driving transformational change to improvements at
agency IT systems.
Congress must use metrics that empower and incentivize CIOs
to improve Federal IT and we must collectively avoid
bureaucratic gaming by cherry picking metrics that enable
agencies to inaccurately inflate performance. Working in lock--
because the goal is to capture real progress or not.
It is not to get a gold star on the forehead by kind of
playing games with the metrics nor is it to get a scarlet
letter on our back because we fail to meet some goals. We want
to better capture how are we doing, how can we improve, what do
you need.
Finally, the subcommittee will not waver in its continued
oversight of agencies' IT acquisition and management. We must
continue to reap dividends from modernizing legacy IT systems,
migrating to the cloud, maintaining strong cyber postures.
Congress and the administration must work together to
prioritize IT modernization and cybersecurity across the
Federal Government to maintain our commitments to everyone we
serve, especially now during a pandemic.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Representative Hice?
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and you have got me
curious what your tie is this morning.
Mr. Connolly. It is Franklin Delano Roosevelt. My sister
got it at Hyde Park at his Presidential library.
Mr. Hice. Very nice. I would like to see it----
Mr. Connolly. And he is--as you know, he is the Georgia
connection at----
Mr. Hice. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Thank you, Chairman Connolly, and I appreciate this
opportunity to yet again monitor the massive Federal Government
IT spend, and I also want to extend our thanks to the witnesses
who are--to both panels who are here with us today as we
discuss the thirteenth--for the thirteenth time the most recent
iteration of the FITARA scorecard.
I would like to touch on two areas that stand out on the
current scorecard. First is the data center consolidation and
then the Enterprise Information Solutions, or EIS.
First of all, does the data center consolidation matrix
still serve a purpose today? I think that is a fair question,
something that we really need to consider.
And, certainly, absolutely, don't get me wrong, Mr.
Chairman. The early stages of FITARA, no question this metric
was relevant, it was forward looking, and it dealt with
efficiencies and savings within our agencies.
But with all the agencies now receiving an A on this
current scorecard, I think it is a fair question as to whether,
indeed, we have reached a point of diminishing returns and need
to legitimately consider where do we go from here.
And, Mr. Chairman, you and I have talked about this many
times. I appreciate your strong feelings about this issue and
your view that the good grades, perhaps, reflect a good move in
the right direction.
But I am eager to hear today from our witnesses as to
whether there are valid reasons for us to, perhaps, shift our
focus elsewhere and go to the next level.
With respect to the Enterprise Information Solution metric,
again, I think we have to ask what's happening. Fifteen of the
24 agencies are failing, and I hope we can get answers as to
why this is the case and how this subcommittee can get things
back on track.
Beyond the current scorecard, I believe it is time to take
a hard look at how FITARA can evolve from this point. During
last week's FISMA hearing, I specifically asked the GAO witness
whether the current FITARA metrics give an accurate picture of
the agency's security posture, and the clear answer was no.
So, I think, again, that is an indication that we need to
evolve and go to the next step, and I am curious as to the
panelists today what their thoughts in that regard may be.
Of course, we are all aware of recent cyber-attacks such as
SolarWinds and Log4j. We have got ample illustrations as to our
vulnerability. Not that we need reminders. There is plenty of
them out there.
But security is, absolutely, one of the top areas for
oversight. We need to keep that as our priority and we here in
the subcommittee need a clear picture as to how safe agency
systems actually are. I think that is a concern for all of us
and we, I believe, need to perhaps evolve more into that
direction.
As we look forward, taking advantage of the effort to
update the underlying FISMA law, we should reexamine the
scorecard metrics and think about how cyber assessments can
better serve our purposes, and there are, certainly, areas that
are not reflected in the scorecard that I believe we at least
should consider, such as the state of Federal IT modernization,
such as work force issues.
Another point is customer satisfaction. All these things we
have discussed in the past. But are these IT dollars actually
delivering results for our constituents? Again, I am eager to
hear from our witnesses today on all of these and other issues.
I think a related question is, is twice a year the right
cadence for this review? Does a six-month interval actually
give agencies enough time to change course if they need to? Are
there other reasons to move this, perhaps, to an annual event?
So, I look forward to working together--Republicans,
Democrats, Federal agencies, private sector, all stakeholders--
to improve our oversight mechanisms to ensure Federal IT is
efficient and safe.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your commitment to
this issue and I look forward to today's testimoneys. And with
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice, and I want to assure you
that I agree with you. I think we have to update the scorecard
to make sure that it is accurately capturing progress or lack
thereof, and identifying issues as they evolve, too, including
new issues. And I don't think anyone could look at current
Federal performance and say, everyone deserves an A and
everything is going wonderful. And so we need a scorecard that
captures the good, the bad, and the ugly.
And I, certainly, look forward to working with you and
making sure that as we modify, you know, the scorecard, it is
done with an eye toward capturing what matters in an accurate
way. So, thank you.
Let me introduce--we have two panels, and what I am going
to do is kind of consolidate them. We will go--the reason being
I am very worried about the weather, and I am very worried
about votes, and we are going to lose members once votes are
called. And I also don't want to have to recess the hearing if
I can help it and put a burden, especially, on the second
panel.
So, on our first panel we have Ann Dunkin, who is this
chief information officer for the Department of Energy; Guy
Cavallo, chief information officer for the Office of Personnel
Management; and Carol Harris, who, of course, is with us again
as the director of information technology and cybersecurity
from the Government Accountability Office.
On our second panel we have three friends who are very
familiar to this subcommittee and to Congress: Dave Powner,
formerly of GAO, now executive director of the Center for Data-
Driven Policy at MITRE; Suzette Kent, former CEO--I am sorry,
former CIO for the Federal Government and now CEO of Kent
Advisory Services; and Richard Spires, formerly a CIO for the
Federal Government in several agencies and now principal of
Richard Spires Consulting.
If all six of our witnesses would virtually rise and raise
your right hand to be sworn in and unmute yourself.
Do you swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
[Witnesses are sworn.]
Mr. Connolly. Let the record show that all six of our
witnesses answered in the affirmative, and I thank you so much.
Without objection, your written statements will be made part of
the record.
And with that, Ms. Dunkin, you are recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF ANN DUNKIN, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY

Ms. Dunkin. Good morning. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Hice, and distinguished members of the committee, it is an
honor to appear before you representing the Department of
Energy.
On behalf of Secretary Granholm and Deputy Secretary Turk,
I thank you for providing me this opportunity to testify about
DOE's implementation of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act.
I would like to thank the subcommittee for its leadership
and bipartisan oversight of agency implementation of FITARA,
which has enabled us to make real progress at DOE, progress
that I am excited to buildupon as the department's CIO.
I am thrilled to return to government as DOE's CIO and to
work again with my highly capable and mission-driven Federal
colleagues. I report directly to the secretary and deputy
secretary, and I have their full support to drive change and
make enterprise decisions as I implement FITARA across DOE,
accelerating our technology, innovation and cybersecurity
efforts across our unique operating environment.
Although we have made significant progress, I acknowledge
that we still face challenges. I am committed to driving
progress on this important work and I look forward to working
with you to do so.
DOE's governance framework, with the highest body chaired
by Deputy Secretary Turk, is our vehicle for fully implementing
FITARA, helping to ensure our IT and cybersecurity programs are
strong enough to support and enable Secretary Granholm's three
major priorities: combating the climate crisis, creating clean
energy union jobs, and promoting energy justice.
As the DOE FITARA program continues to mature, including at
our national laboratories, Power Marketing Administrations,
plants, and sites, we will continue to focus on the following:
enhancing our visibility to IT-related resources and
investments, supporting CIO and IT management authorities at
all levels, improving our cybersecurity posture, implementing
new and updated policies for managing IT, and strengthening
governance and oversight processes.
That is the big picture. Zooming in, I want to highlight
the progress we are making in a few key areas.
DOE is working to close seven more data centers by 2025,
adding to our total of 146 data centers closed so far. I am
committed to enhancing the energy efficiency and sustainability
of our remaining data centers. The MGT Act is critical to the
innovation efforts I am leading at DOE and in my capacity as
the CIO Council's Innovation Committee chair.
Across the Federal Government we use DOE's existing Working
Capital Fund for some IT acquisitions and we are exploring the
creation of another for IT modernization.
DOE continues to make progress toward improving our
cybersecurity posture. Various security needs within DOE's
mission space present unique cybersecurity challenges requiring
our risk management program to be flexible and allow for risk-
based decisionmaking to enable our mission.
The department is leveraging the Department of Homeland
Security's continuous diagnostic and mitigation program to
obtain additional security tools, including most recently
Hardware and Software Asset Management.
These capabilities will provide added visibility to support
risk-based decisionmaking. DOE has also made investments in
vulnerability management, big data analytics, crowd sourced
penetration testing, and enhanced training initiatives.
We are looking forward to the new Fiscal Year 1922 FISMA
risk-based approach to cybersecurity, which will allow DOE to
focus on our highest priority mission areas and risks.
Another major priority for DOE is our work force. We are
implementing a multi-pronged approach to compete for talent and
I am proud to report that we recently launched the Omni
Internship Alliance, a paid internship program for students
from overburdened and underserved communities that will help
build the cyber and IT talent pipeline that we need.
Looking ahead, I am encouraged by recent history. The
government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic showed that we
can move at the speed of need when lives depend upon it and
when we remove cultural and process constraints.
While pandemic-induced crisis is not a path forward, this
experience has inspired us to double down on our efforts to
improve DOE's IT and cybersecurity posture, to remove barriers
to innovation at scale, and to lead change across the Federal
Government.
I said before that FITARA helps CIOs make government
better. I still believe that FITARA laid the groundwork for
CIOs to change cultures and enable greater collaboration and
agility, and I am committed to driving that forward.
Drawing on these lessons we have learned about accelerating
real transformational change, I am confident that with my
team's commitment, dedication, and passion, and with the
leadership of Secretary Granholm and Deputy Secretary Turk, we
will achieve significant results.
I pledge to you today that we will be relentless in our
work to strengthen the department by continuing to effectively
promote FITARA, and I look forward to working with each of you
as we proceed.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
and I will be pleased to address your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Dunkin, and kudos on still
pursuing data center consolidation. I am glad to hear there are
seven more you are focused on. Thank you.
Mr. Cavallo, you are recognized for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GUY CAVALLO, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, OFFICE OF
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

Mr. Cavallo. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the invitation today to discuss
FITARA and how it has helped drive OPM's modernization efforts
to enhance our service delivery to Federal employees, retirees,
their families, along with other Federal agencies and our
citizens.
It has been 18 months since my predecessor, Clare
Martorana, provided this subcommittee with an update on OPM's
FITARA status. In the time since that hearing, we have
implemented many of the necessary enterprise building blocks to
accelerate OPM's modernization and to further improve our
FITARA scores. We are proud that those efforts are paying off
as validated by our recent improvement to a B+ on the
scorecard.
One of the first building blocks was to assemble a CIO
executive leadership team designed to meet today's technologies
and challenges.
In the past year, I have added a number of key executive
positions, including a chief technology officer, an enterprise
architect, a cloud and cybersecurity senior advisor, and a
digital services team lead.
Additionally, I reclassified our chief information security
officer to become a Senior Executive Service position. Not only
with that, but I have also aggressively pursued hiring our
staff, and I am pleased to announce that we have reduced our
vacancy rate by about 20 percent from the beginning of Fiscal
Year 1921.
With those additional executives and staff in place, my
team are pursuing technology modernization initiatives across
many areas. An important foundation for application
modernization is developing a total life journey map of a
Federal employee's career, from applying for their first
Federal job to being hired, to moving to a different agency or,
perhaps, a different role, to potentially having a break in
service, and eventually, at some point, they will become a
retired Federal employee.
That journey map will help guide us in all of our
modernization efforts at OPM.
Another key transformation effort this last past year was
establishing OPM's enterprise cloud. I am a very strong
advocate of the advantages of leveraging the capabilities of
the cloud to improve the delivery of citizen services, and I
have successfully implemented the enterprise cloud at two
previous Federal agencies, and I am proud to now also have done
so at OPM with the launch of our cloud earlier this month.
Another key modernization initiative was to replace our on-
premises retirement services contact center with a flexible,
expandable, cloud-based center designed to handle the high
volume of inbound telephone calls.
This new service was launched just in September and it has
already improved the contact center's performance and provides
us with the ability to expand call lines as needed.
Next, to increase our transparency and risk oversight of
OPM's technology investments, we reinstated our Investment
Review Board. That board is helping to establish an enterprise-
wide approach to technology, help us eliminate fragmentation,
and to align our IT investments to OPM's core mission
requirements.
A final area that I want to highlight are the steps we have
taken to support the OPM work force in this new hybrid world of
work. Through standardizing on an enterprise collaboration
solution, we can now easily communicate internally and
externally across OPM.
This has further allowed us to reduce duplicative software
costs by consolidating multiple collaboration tools into a
single enterprise solution, thereby saving taxpayer dollars.
Well, the work that I have highlighted here this morning is
just a small subset of what we have already completed. At OPM,
we will continue to use the FITARA framework as we enhance our
IT modernization by implementing an enterprise-wide approach to
technology.
Notwithstanding these efforts, I acknowledge that we still
face challenges modernizing OPM's legacy systems as we continue
to work to improve that customer experience.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on FITARA and for the committee's continued leadership
in measuring the effective use of technology in the Federal
Government.
I look forward to answering any of your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much, Mr. Cavallo.
And Carol Harris from GAO, welcome.

STATEMENT OF CAROL C. HARRIS, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
AND CYBERSECURITY, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Harris. Thank you.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and members of the
subcommittee, I would like to thank you and your excellent
staff for your continued oversight of Federal IT management and
cybersecurity with this thirteenth set of grades. Per your
request, my remarks will focus on the evolution and
effectiveness of the biannual scorecards.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, the first two scorecards focus
exclusively on four major components of FITARA: incremental
development, risk management, portfolio stat savings, and data
center consolidation.
The third scorecard included the CIO reporting path. The
software licensing and working capital fund areas were added in
scorecards five and six, respectively. Cybersecurity was added
in 2019 in scorecard eight, and finally, the Federal
telecommunications transition was added last year with the
eleventh iteration.
There is no question that the release of these scorecards
and your related oversight hearings have made a huge difference
in improving the landscape of Federal IT.
Since the release of the first scorecard in 2015, we have
seen a steady improvement in grades from seven agencies
receiving a C or higher to all 24 agencies in that camp.
Mr. Connolly. I am sorry. I am sorry, Ms. Harris. Did I
hear you correctly that these hearings and our legislation has
made a huge difference?
Ms. Harris. That is correct, sir. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I just wanted to make sure. Sorry. I wasn't
sure I heard.
Ms. Harris. As well as the Connolly Issa Act.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Harris. In fact, half of the agencies have an A or B in
this latest set. The escalation in grades reflect the notable
improvements agencies have made in most of the scorecard
categories.
For example, when software licensing was first added, only
two agencies had comprehensive inventories that were used for
decisionmaking and given an A. Three years later, all 24
agencies received A's in this category.
As such, the category was retired from the scorecard.
Similarly, we have the first ever straight a performance by the
agencies in the data center category. Since 2010, the agencies
have closed almost six,800 data centers and achieved $6.6
billion in savings.
The rate of consolidation has slowed and it will continue
to taper down. Thirteen agencies had zero planned closures in
Fiscal Year 1921 and an additional seven agencies are not
planning for future closures.
Looking at Fiscal Year 1922 and beyond, seven agencies plan
to close 79 more centers and save a total of $46 million.
Consolidation has slowed because we have squeezed as much juice
as we can from this initiative.
In contrast, the vast majority of agencies are not moving
fast enough in their transition off of GSA's expiring
telecommunications contracts. These contracts expire in May
2023.
Fifteen agencies have an F in this category, and it is
worth noting GSA is one of those agencies. As the one
responsible for the successor program known as EIS, they should
be leading the pack as the role model.
The transition previously took three years longer than
planned, and had the agencies transitioned on time they would
have saved about $329 million.
Now, turning to the future of the scorecard, we believe it
needs to evolve in order to maintain its effectiveness as an
oversight tool. On average, roughly, half of the agencies have
had no change to their overall grade, and while it looks like
the agencies have fallen stagnant, I don't believe this is the
case.
Agencies are increasingly less motivated to improve in
areas where they are being graded on a curve and that is risk
management and portfolio stat savings, and, as such, these
methodologies should be changed.
Regarding cyber, this category should be expanded to better
address the ongoing and emerging challenges facing our Nation,
including mitigating global supply chain risks and improving
the implementation of government wide cybersecurity
initiatives.
We have recent work in each of these areas that would
support a potential expansion in this category.
And finally, we should consider adding a category that
directly tackles the legacy IT issue. Roughly, 60 percent of
the more than $100 billion spent on IT annually is put toward
maintaining antiquated systems.
Your persistent leadership on the working capital funds and
the Technology Modernization Fund has helped agencies to be
better positioned to tackle this problem.
The next logical steps should be tracking agency progress
in decommissioning their most critical legacy systems.
We have appreciated the opportunity to be your partner all
these years in developing the scorecard, and we look forward to
supporting your efforts to ensure that it remains an effective
tool in improving the management and security of our Nation's
IT.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my comments, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Sorry. Thank you, Ms. Harris. Thank you for
GAO's long partnership in working with us on the implementation
of this legislation.
We are now going to hear the testimony of Panel Two. We
will be liberal in the amount of time people need because we
are consolidating the two panels because of the weather and
because of the vote schedule.
But I urge people not to abuse that because we want to try
to give everyone an opportunity to participate in the hearing,
because you and I both know once they call votes and it is, you
know, a fly out day, we are going to lose people, and I want to
maximize the opportunity for everybody to participate.
I will, of course, go last so that my colleagues will have
an opportunity to ask their questions.
So, Mr. Powner--an old friend, a familiar face--you are
recognized for your five-minute opening statement. Welcome
back.

STATEMENT OF DAVID POWNER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
CENTER FOR DATA-DRIVEN POLICY, MITRE, FORMER DIRECTOR,
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CYBERSECURITY, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Powner. Thank you, Chairman Connolly.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the
FITARA scorecard.
For the past three years, I have worked for MITRE, a not-
for-profit corporation that operates in the public interest.
Currently, I lead its Center for Data-Driven Policy where we
connect our expertise on topics like acquisition and
cybersecurity to policymakers in both the legislative and
executive branches.
Prior to joining MITRE, I was at GAO where I worked closely
with this committee crafting FITARA, helping with the creation
of the scorecard, and assisting in its oversight. I testified
at the first six scorecard hearings and again at number 10.
I have two overarching points to make this morning, Mr.
Chairman. First, the scorecard has resulted in significant
improvements to Federal IT management, and second, we need to
get similar results in additional areas by updating the
scorecard.
Chairman Connolly, I would like to thank you for your
leadership along the way not only in creating FITARA but also
with your unprecedented follow-through with nearly seven years
of consistent oversight.
The Federal IT community has benefited greatly from working
with you and your bipartisan partners along the way--
Representative Issa, Hurd, Kelly, Meadows, and now Ranking
Member Hice. The progress that has resulted from the scorecard
and your oversight is significant. Here are a few highlights.
There have been billions of dollars saved on consolidating
data centers and duplicative business systems. Regarding
acquisitions, agencies now acknowledge and manage risk better
and deliver in smaller increments.
And the CIO role has really elevated. CIOs who are involved
more in the budgeting and procurement processes and more have a
seat at the executive table.
But now is the time to update the scorecard to get similar
results on more pressing IT and cyber challenges confronting
agencies. Currently, the scorecard has seven areas that are
graded. Three should be retired: incremental, portfolio stat,
and data sets.
The remaining four should be incorporated within one of the
five categories that I am proposing today. Those five
categories are cybersecurity, work force, legacy modernization,
budgeting, and infrastructure. Here is a brief rundown of the
five.
Consistent with your comments, Ranking Member Hice, we need
to update the cyber area by using metrics that are consistent
with the administration's cyber executive order, its zero-trust
policy, supply chain risk management best practices, and those
metrics used by CISA in the industry.
These metrics should be consistent with the revisions this
committee is considering to the Federal Information Security
Management Act, or FISMA.
Second, we need to add an IT and cyber work force category
that provides a comprehensive view of agencies' gaps in
critical IT and cyber areas that tracks progress to build the
appropriately skilled work force. It is critical here that CIOs
work closely with their agency's chief human capital officers.
Third, we need to add a mission modernization category that
provides transparency to our Nation's most important IT
acquisitions and incorporates a customer experience measurement
as well as legacy retirements.
My written statement provides details like using the IT
dashboard to track progress on these acquisitions and having
OMB play a prominent role in ensuring progress. Not addressing
these legacy systems will hinder the administration's ability
to make the desired progress on customer experience and zero-
trust, which are both administration priorities.
Fourth, we need to add an infrastructure category that will
continue to shine the spotlight on having modern and secure
networks with the EIS contract but should also include, Mr.
Chairman, a cloud-adoption metric and move on from a data
center focus.
And No. 5, we should add an IT budgeting category that
continues the pressure on establishing working capital funds
but also incorporates technology business management so that IT
costs are better captured. We need to shed light on the
discipline agencies use in budgeting for IT so that it reflects
actual agency needs for modernization.
One final point before I wrap up. It is critical that the
updates to the scorecard are coordinated with the Federal CIO
and OMB since they have been and will be the source of most of
the data used in the grading process. In fact, as GAO's
testimony highlights, five of the seven areas currently graded
rely on OMB data.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, these five recs are about having
better secured agencies, tackling true mission enhancements,
having a modern infrastructure, a skilled work force, and the
right resources.
Could an enhanced scorecard help in these critical areas?
Absolutely. Future legislation and enhanced OMB policies could
also help.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Hice, we look forward to
further working with you so that our Federal Government has the
right focus, transparency, and measurement to secure and
advance agency missions.
This concludes my statement. I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Powner, and it is very helpful
to hear your thoughts since you helped design the original
scorecard about what we need to do to update that scorecard to
make sure it is relevant in capturing the relevant information.
Suzette Kent, another friend and familiar face, welcome
back.

STATEMENT OF SUZETTE KENT, CEO, KENT ADVISORY SERVICES, FORMER
FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER

Ms. Kent. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and honorable
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to be
part of the discussion today on evolving the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act.
I last appeared before this committee when serving as the
Federal CIO, and today I am talking to you as a technology and
transformation business executive working with both public and
private sector companies around the world, and I am here with
enthusiasm.
It has been a great, great conversation to start off, and
it is very important when congressional leaders dedicate their
time and attention to improving the ways that Federal
technology serves citizens and helps us deliver on agency
mission.
My comments today are going to center on two areas:
evolving what is measured and maybe innovating on how those
things might be measured.
I support a scorecard that brings visibility to the results
achieved and coalesces the focus between the people doing the
work and the people who approve the funding, and I applaud the
accomplishment since the inception of the scorecard and, like
this committee, I endeavor for the scorecard to be something
that really matters to agency leaders and is helpful to the
CIOs and their teams.
It is a great achievement when agencies meet the targeted
goals and we have seen that, but it is also a celebration when
a category can be removed because it is an opportunity to
introduce new metrics that are focused on future expectations,
and in this way the FITARA scorecard continues its legacy of
driving focus on forward progress that your constituents
expect.
The scorecard has served as a mechanism to drive that
continuous improvement. You have heard that already from
multiple witnesses.
But we are also in a new era. Federal technology is the
engine for how remote work is done by our Federal work force,
and digital and mobile channels are now the primary engagement
platform that most Americans use for critical government
functions.
Inside government we have important goals reflected right
now in law and policy, laws like the 21st Century IDEA Act,
evidence-based policymaking. We have executive orders on
cybersecurity, customer experience in AI, and we have the
president's management agenda themes and a Federal data
strategy that span multiple administrations and take a
bipartisan approach to accomplishment.
Yet, the objectives that are defined in these aren't in the
scorecard yet. So, to maintain the impact of the FITARA
process, there are four areas that I would, humbly, submit to
this committee for future consideration. Some of these things
are going to seem familiar.
No. 1, cybersecurity. Last week's FISMA discussion covered
many of the key points. But future scorecards could drive how
we make cyber metrics more timely and reflective of the current
threat environment.
Also, allow us to address the risks in our changing
operating environment including identity and access protocols
and accelerating information sharing, as the EOs point out.
Modernization, second. It never stops, and we know that
evolution of legacy technology, digital capability development,
advancing our disciplines around data, and expanded use of
automated technologies are all part of that modernization
effort.
That continuous modernization also demands changes to some
of the rigid funding and procurement processes to better align
with multi-year initiatives and best practices for modern
technologies, the types of things that you have embedded into
the goals for working capital.
I am also going to call out as the third point digital.
Although digital journey is part of modernization, it deserves
some specific near-term attention because your constituents are
so digitally dependent.
Now is the time to include metrics that highlight our
progress toward digital and mobile native platforms, quality
customer experiences that are on par with what citizens'
experience in every other industry, and we have goals that are
already defined both in law and the EOs that could be elevated
for incorporation into that future scorecard.
And the fourth is work force. We have an opportunity to
signal priority and investment in our most precious resource in
all of Federal IT, the people. Metrics to ensure that priority
is given to skills development and work force performance
should be included because, as we are evolving the technology
ecosystem, we cannot under invest in our Federal work force.
And now, quickly, for the how we measure. As I return to
the private sector, I often see that citizens judge their
experiences with government using the same lens as their
private sector businesses, but they can't take their business
elsewhere.
Maybe we could consider leveraging some external metrics as
well that are widely accepted across other industries that have
long histories. There are CX metrics, cyber scorecards, and
even people measures that could help those inside government
more objectively see how they are perceived by citizens and
accelerate some of our path forward.
Government may never be as leading edge as private sector.
But as you have stated, we can show meaningful year over year
improvements that matter.
I applaud the committee's attention to Federal technology
matters. I appreciate your focus on ways that we continue to
leverage this success to move forward and to continue to drive
improved outcomes.
Thank you for including Mr. Powner, Mr. Spires, and I in
this dialog, and I look forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Ms. Kent, and very
thoughtful. We really appreciate it.
And last but not least--again, a familiar face, an old
friend--Richard Spires?

STATEMENT OF RICHARD SPIRES,PRINCIPAL, RICHARD A. SPIRES
CONSULTING

Mr. Spires. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, and good morning
to you and Ranking Member Hice and members of the subcommittee.
I am honored today to testify in regards to the FITARA and the
FITARA scorecard.
While the FITARA legislation itself has been an aid to
agencies, I believe it has been the oversight of Congress that
has been a driving factor in getting agencies to improve their
IT management.
In particular, the spirit of bipartisanship of this
subcommittee on Federal IT issues has made a very positive
difference. Yet, even with the progress, much work remains to
reach a state of IT management best practice.
In 2015, the GAO placed the whole Federal Government on its
high-risk list for improving the management of IT acquisitions
and operations.
In its latest report published in March 2021, GAO states
that the government has only partially met requirements in four
of the five criteria related to the elements of this high-risk
item, and it is disappointing that the ratings for all five
criteria for this high-risk item did not improve over the past
two years.
The FITARA scorecard has been effective in helping drive
successes in the areas of data center consolidation, software
licensing, and the use of incremental delivery methods.
Now is the time to substantively evolve the scorecard to
address the core IT modernization challenges agencies face, as
highlighted by GAO's audit work following our four
recommendations that can have a significant near-term impact on
agencies' abilities to drive successful IT modernization.
The first one, add an IT planning category. Meaningful IT
modernization starts with good planning. Hence, this category
should reflect the maturity and focus on IT modernization
within the agency's planning function and enterprise
architecture.
To measure this category, existing best practices for
planning and managing IT could be used either by GAO or agency
IGs to audit an agency's IT planning capability to arrive at an
IT planning maturity grade.
Recommendation two--combine the incremental delivery and
transparency in risk management categories under a broader
delivery of IT programs category.
Agency IT modernization occurs through the successful
delivery of IT programs and, as such, there should be a
category that measures the ability of agencies to manage such
programs.
There are well understood and documented best practices
that can be measured to arrive at a composite grade for this
particular category.
Recommendation three--evolve the managing government
technology category to a broader IT budget category. This
category should use the technology business management--TBM--
taxonomy so agencies better understand the cost elements of
their IT budgets.
Agencies could be measured on their adoption of TBM along
with the use of benchmarking of their IT services so they can
compare their performance to other similar-sized agencies and
private sector corporations.
And finally, not surprisingly, evolve the cybersecurity
category. This category does need to be revisited. The existing
FISMA measures and cybersecurity cap goals do not accurately
measure an agency's cybersecurity posture.
The good news is that the recent executive order on
cybersecurity issued in May 2021 can serve as a blueprint for
what Federal agencies should be doing to enhance their
cybersecurity position.
In particular, the EO places special emphasis on agencies
implementing a zero-trust architecture, having holistic
visibility across one's IT infrastructure, implementing secure
guidelines in cloud-computing environments, focusing on
protecting high-value data and system assets, and dealing with
supply chain issues. The EO can serve as a means to more
accurately grade an agency's cybersecurity posture.
To determine the specific measures for a category and what
additional data would be required so that the category could be
properly graded, Congress should convene an advisory group that
would develop recommendations to evolve the FITARA scorecard.
This advisory group should be headed by GAO but include
representatives from the Federal CIO Council, the Office of the
Federal CIO, and from the private sector.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Spires, we are going to--if you could
wrap up because----
Mr. Spires. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Spires. OK. I think I have made my key remarks. So,
thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, and we will have an opportunity to
explore even further, of course, in questioning. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Spires. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. The chair now recognizes Mr. Khanna of
California for his round of questioning, and I thank Ms. Norton
for yielding.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. Thank you, Chair Connolly. Thank
you, Ms. Norton, for giving me the opportunity.
I want to thank both the majority and minority staff for
working with Nancy Mace and me on a bill to ensure that our
Federal Government is prepared to tackle the powerful quantum
computing challenges.
In the future, the challenge is what if people are able to
break encryption, and even though classical computers can't
break encryption now, our adversaries can steal our data in the
hopes of decrypting it later.
It is my belief that the Federal Government needs to think
about how to move our encrypted data to algorithms that use
post-quantum cryptography, and I have been working, like I
said, with Representative Mace and with great input from both
the majority and minority staff in helping us craft this.
NIST, as you know, is working on new standards, which
should be finalized by 2024. I had a few questions for Ms. Ann
Dunkin. What are you doing now to address this threat and what
do you think Congress should do?
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Khanna, thank you for asking
about quantum computing. Quantum encryption is an area of great
concern to us in the Federal Government.
As my role as chair of the Innovation Committee as part of
the CIO Council, we have been addressing quantum computing and
quantum encryption and raising visibility within the community
across the government among CIOs.
We are--have a two-pronged approach, I think, to this
issue. One is that, as you know, there is a risk that data can
be exfiltrated now and then decrypted later, and so we are
emphasizing securing data and trying to ensure that we do not
lose data now that could be decrypted later.
In addition, we are working with NIST and across the DOE
enterprise to understand and develop quantum-resistant
encryption so that, going forward, we will be able to protect
Federal data from quantum computers when they are eventually in
the mainstream.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you very much for that.
Ms. Harris, do you think we should begin to strategize--
study this change and do you know how much it would cost or how
we should prepare for this?
Ms. Harris. Thank you for the question.
We issued a study on the status and the prospects of
quantum computing and communications. I do think that we do
need to do more work in this area as the Federal Government. In
that report, we present four major policy options and potential
implementation approaches.
But, basically, it covers how to address the collaboration
across industries and disciplines as well as countries in
developing quantum technologies.
It also discusses ways to expand the quantum work force,
how to incentivize or support investments in quantum
technology, as well as the need to develop a robust and secure
quantum supply chain.
So, those are areas that we have begun to dive into, and we
are happy to work with you on these policy options and the best
approaches to implementing them.
Mr. Khanna. And I appreciate that, and I am familiar with
your reports and look forward to working on what more needs to
be done.
Ms. Dunkin, if I could ask you one more question. Do you
know which systems at your agency can or cannot be moved over
to post-quantum cryptography?
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Khanna, thank you for that
question. That is not a question I can answer today. We would
be happy to look into that. It is a fairly large lift to
identify that, but we would be happy to do some research and
get back to you.
Mr. Khanna. Terrific. And one more question either for you
or for Ms. Harris. When should we begin to migrate our data
over to post-quantum cryptography? Is now too soon or can we do
it--start to do it now?
Ms. Dunkin. I think, Representative, as soon as we are able
to identify algorithms that will allow us to have quantum-
resistant encryption that we can and should begin to move to
those solutions.
Mr. Khanna. Well, I appreciate it. I appreciate the expert
testimony.
Let me just say, Mr. Chair, that I am appreciative, again,
of Representative Mace working on this and the excellent input
from majority staff and minority staff, and look forward to
working with you and our witnesses and the committee staff on
this legislation.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Khanna, and I look forward to
working with you and Ms. Mace on your legislation as well.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Hice, for
his round of questioning.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will try to
go quickly, and if the panelists--if we could try to answer
quickly. I want to get as many other members on here as well.
Ms. Harris, let me start with you. I mentioned a little
while ago in my opening statement that in the FISMA hearing
last week I asked the GAO witness whether the FITARA metrics
gives an accurate picture of the agency's security posture and,
of course, the answer was no.
So, my question to you, real quickly, can you give some
specific suggestions that this committee needs to just get a
better assessment on the issue of cybersecurity?
Ms. Harris. Sure. So, I think that is--as Mr. Spires and
Mr. Powner had identified, I think using the administration's
executive order on cyber as a basis for how we take a look at
evolving the cyber metric, I think that is a good idea.
In terms of what is currently not captured in the current
metric, IT supply chain is one example. We have done work for
you very recently to take a look at that pulse check across the
Federal Government.
So, we have work that can support either evolving the
metric to expand into supply chain as well as on, you know,
expanding to take a look at more enterprise-wide cyber
initiatives. You know, we have ongoing and recent work that we
could, certainly, support in those areas.
Mr. Hice. Regarding the Enterprise Information Solution
metric, 15 out of 24, as already been mentioned today, are
failing. Do you have any thoughts as to why these grades are so
low in so many agencies and what needs to happen to get back on
track?
Ms. Harris. Yes. So, I think similar to what occurred with
software licensing, it just wasn't a top priority for the
agencies.
When you take a look at the history of the past two
telecommunication transitions, agencies have sort of drug their
feet in this initiative and, really, did not make it a priority
until they were close--very, very close to the deadlines for
closing out those current set of contracts.
So, I applaud this subcommittee for including EIS as part
of the scorecard and we need to just continue to push and put
the heat on the agencies to make it a priority.
Mr. Hice. OK.
Mr. Spires, let me hit you, real quickly, in the context of
evolving the cybersecurity category. You stated in your
testimony, quote, ``Agencies should emphasize effectively
measuring cybersecurity risks associated with cloud development
and moving beyond static compliance-based checklists.'' How do
we do that?
Mr. Spires. Well, thank you for that question, sir. There
are, absolutely, numerous tools now available from companies--
product companies--that can do more real-time monitoring of
what is going on in the cybersecurity environment.
And let me just say, one of the big problems we had with
FISMA and, you know, the law was originally--in the early
2000's past, you know, we got into a bit of a compliance kind
of checklist mentality and we just need to move beyond that.
Things are moving so quickly. Your cybersecurity posture is
changing so rapidly. You need to be able to use automated tools
to be able to help measure that.
Mr. Hice. OK. Very good. Final question.
Ms. Kent, you had mentioned that--well, one thing that I
have brought up several times on these scorecard hearings is
the need to gauge customer satisfaction, and you had mentioned
that we need some metrics to go across other industries--I am
assuming private sector and so forth.
So, can you expand on this a little bit as to how we might
adopt some of these metrics in our government?
Ms. Kent. Certainly. Thank you for that question. We
already have pieces around websites being mobile friendly, 508
compliant.
Do they have data-driven functionality? Do we have secure
connections? Kind of goes to some of the questions that already
have been asked.
Those are things that we might consider, you know, in the
near term and, in fact, some agencies, because they have been
part of law, have already started tracking those themselves.
Specific, you know, as we look at common measures across
industry's ease of use, and that is something that is pointed
out in the EO, and then how effective they are for the intended
service they are delivering, whether it is information or, you
know, a payment or some type of process.
Those types of things are in motion, and we could measure
those very quickly, and in those areas there is metrics that
are already both in government and then widely used outside,
and they are meaningful to constituents.
Mr. Hice. Very good.
Mr. Chairman, we have got some other questions that we will
submit but I want to yield back to other members, and thank you
for this hearing, again.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice.
And, Mr. Hice, I just want to underscore something Mr.
Spires said in response to you, which is, like FISMA, we have
got to really be careful about what metrics we set.
So, for example, you can set a metric in terms of everybody
has to be educated and made aware and everyone goes through a
training course, and that is a metric I can easily meet and I
check that box.
Meanwhile, the real goal--that is only a--that is a means
to an end, not an end in itself, right. The goal here is to
make ourselves cyber secure and, meanwhile, you know, hackings
go up, but we are educating everybody.
So, I think as we look toward our FISMA legislation, you
and I want to be really mindful of avoiding those traps, and I
think Mr. Spires advises us well with respect to that. Thank
you.
The distinguished Congresswoman from the District of
Columbia--and thank you for your willingness to yield to Mr.
Khanna--Eleanor Holmes Norton?
Ms. Norton. Of course, Mr. Chair, and I very much
appreciate these biennial hearings because implementing FITARA
and other IT laws leads to improved use of IT acquisition
practices that will help--that will have ripple effects
throughout the agencies and then, of course, across the Federal
enterprises.
Yet, in some cases, technology has outpaced existing laws
and administrative guidance. Agencies' performance on the
FITARA score side has plateaued.
While the December 2021 scorecard resulted in a 53
percent--in 53 percent of agency grades unchanged, the July
2021 scorecard resulted in a record 75. That is, 75 percent of
unchanged grades.
Ms. Harris, what is causing a plateau in agency progress on
the scorecard?
Ms. Harris. I think, in part, it is the methodologies that
we use for--in at least two of the categories, which were
grading on a curve.
So, agencies are less motivated to strive for continued
risk management transparency and portfolio stat savings when
they don't believe that they can reach, you know, the best
possible grade in those categories.
So, I think that the change in the methodology in which we
go about those two categories, if those categories still
remain, is very important to ensuring that agencies continue to
strive in those areas and not plateau.
Ms. Norton. Ms. Dunkin and Mr. Cavallo, with the exception
of OPM's most recent grade, both of your agencies have
maintained on average a C+ grade on the scorecard. Is this an
accurate picture of your agencies' IT management progress? Why
or perhaps, why not?
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Norton, thank you for that
question.
Yes, I am--I would say that it is a mixed picture as to
whether those metrics are accurate representations of DOE's
progress. I think there are definitely places where the metrics
reflect the need for improvement.
Like, there are a couple metrics, or at least one metric,
where it is not an accurate reflection of DOE's performance and
where DOE is doing a bit better and that is in security where
there is a lot of consolidation of metrics in their pass/fail.
So, I think we are doing a little better in security than
it might look. I think a lot of this is fairly accurate. I
think that other folks who have talked today have mentioned the
metrics that are on a curve, and those make it challenging. If
you can't move up in your peer group, you are going to get
stuck. So, I think it is a mixed bag and we definitely have
work to do with you, and we are going to continue to do that
work.
Mr. Cavallo. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that followup
question. Again, I was pleased to see that we did move up a
full letter grade in the scorecard.
But like Ms. Dunkin said, it is not a total accurate
picture because so many of the measures are difficult to nail
down. I definitely see us making progress at OPM as reflected
by that improved score, and even the scores that we haven't
improved in the time since I have been here, I see us taking
concrete steps that maybe haven't been enough to trigger us up
to the next grade. But we are headed on the right path.
I think on the panel we have heard a number of great
suggestions today of possible other ways to expand the
scorecard. But I do want--I commend the use of the scorecard.
I think it is critical for us to have a common measure
across the Federal Government, and I know I am very interested
in working with--Ann and I are both on the Innovation Committee
of the CIO Council. Definitely, it is hard to measure
everything perfectly.
We will be very happy to help participate on possibly
changing some of those metrics, again, as the chairman started
off the hearing, not for us to just get a checkmark and get a
gold star, but to actually modernize the entire Federal
Government.
Ms. Norton. I would like to get this question in from all
of the witnesses before my time is out. For all of you, how
does the timing of the scorecard cycle impact the accuracy of
grades and the ability to demonstrate meaningful change at
agencies?
I would like that answer from all of you. Timing.
Ms. Harris. I think that looking at the cadence of the
scorecard is something that we should take a look at, and we
are happy to work with you and the subcommittee on that.
I think that, in some cases, the data can be stale because
of the timing of the scorecard, and then in other cases, you
know, we are having to collect information manually from the
agencies in order to populate the grades.
And so that is something that is quite time consuming and
is--you know, given that these scorecards are issued in six-
month cycles, it is a challenge, I think, for some agencies to
be able to demonstrate progress in that--in those short periods
of time.
So, we are very open to taking a look at the cadence of the
scorecard for sure.
Mr. Spires. In my----
Ms. Norton. Yes?
Mr. Spires. In my written testimony, I noted that a couple
of the measures I am recommending are a little more complex,
such as an ability for an agency to deliver IT programs and how
mature they are in that, and I think such a measure would
require an audit from, like, the agency IG.
So, I would be recommending that for that particular
measure, if that were to be adopted as an example, that might
be something you would do yearly. That does not mean you
couldn't have an update every six months and there, certainly,
are measures, I think, that lend themselves to every six
months.
But I think as you look at trying to drive measures that
are around modernization, for instance, there are, perhaps,
more complex measures that would require more time and also
give agencies more time to, if you will, improve, because six
months is such a short time cycle for an agency to make real
change.
Ms. Norton. Any of the rest of you have any answers on that
question?
Mr. Powner. Yes. Congresswoman Norton, I would just--I
would second that. I think initially when the scorecard was
developed it was very important to have a six-month cadence
because the message was the committee was very serious about
this and we were going to do it with this great frequency. I
think the complexity of some of these new metrics that we are
considering an annual cycle would be just fine.
Ms. Kent. Congresswoman Norton, thank you for your
question. I would add that you heard many of the speakers talk
about automating metrics, places where we can both introduce
new metrics and automate those, you know, help the reporting be
more timely and transparent.
And, you know, to Mr. Powner's point, the--it is important
that results from the scorecard and progress or lack thereof
and important issues can inform both budgeting and priority
processes as well.
So, that cadence is important for congressional members to
see what agencies--you know, what results they are delivering
and have opportunity to take action through other processes
where you support either funding or inform other needed pieces
of law.
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Norton, I would just add, I
think that there are some metrics that we are talking about and
that exist that are very complex and time consuming and would
be better on an annual cycle.
As Ms. Kent mentions, we may be able to automate those
metrics. You might be able to generate a hybrid scorecard where
some metrics come out twice a year and others only come out
once a year.
Ms. Norton. If I have any more time, I have another
question for Ms. Harris. Given the----
Mr. Connolly. Actually, I am afraid we have gone over time,
and because of my desire to accommodate everyone before, you
know, the hammer drops----
Ms. Norton. Of course.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. but we--if we have more time,
Ms. Norton, maybe we can return.
Ms. Norton. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, ma'am.
The distinguished gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller,
is represented for his round of questioning.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Hice, and I want to thank our witnesses for participating in
today's hearing.
The FITARA scorecard remains a valuable tool to help
modernize the Federal Government's IT systems in cybersecurity
infrastructure.
Strengthening our Nation's IT infrastructure and cyber grid
is a goal all Federal agencies must work toward. The Federal
Government spends, roughly, $100 billion on cybersecurity and
IT investments each year.
Yet, we still face challenges securing some of our Nation's
most sensitive IT systems. These challenges have been
highlighted by events such as the Colonial Pipeline and
SolarWinds cyber-attacks.
Congress and the administration must now look to cost-
effective strategies to improve our Nation's IT system and
cyber readiness.
A reoccurring problem for veterans across the country is
the reduced operation of the National Personnel Records Center,
which is responsible for providing veterans access to
documentation required to receive certain VA benefits.
The NPRC has accumulated a backlog of more than half a
million vital information requests from veterans and their
families, some of whom have waited for over a year for their
documents. The NPRC has indicated an ongoing effort to digitize
its current system of physical records.
My question would be for Ms. Kent. With reduced personnel
onsite at the NPRC in St. Louis, how do we quickly and
responsibly digitize these records to make them more easily
accessible while ensuring this information remains secure and
protected from a variety of cybersecurity threats?
Ms. Kent. Congressman Keller, I have not been deeply
involved in those sets of activities. But as we have touched
on, there are many of the automated technologies that we can
leverage to digitize records that, by nature of using that
technology, helps us secure the information better and makes it
more widely available to other systems.
And as we talked about, you know, security, it is both the
technology as well as the data in its raw form, and in that
particular situation there is a significant volume, as you
mentioned, that is still in paper form, so it is not readily
available to support veterans and the needs of their family,
and as the wife of a veteran I understand that situation very
keenly.
So, I think we strongly encourage leveraging those
automated technologies and freeing the data to allow quicker,
more timely, and less error-prone servicing.
Mr. Keller. Is there anything Congress can do to help move
that along?
Ms. Kent. When we talk about some of the individual metrics
and things like that, there are opportunities to look at and
measure as part of legacy activities reliance on paper-based
records and how information is provided, and there is elements
in the Federal data strategy that talk about digitizing
information or making information available for broader use,
and those might be some of the elements that we would be happy
to talk about, you know, in committee where having them tracked
on a scorecard would benefit not only this purpose but any
agency that has a significant amount of paper records.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Spires, the Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions
contract is a massive $50 billion contract intended to
modernize agency network infrastructure.
However, I have concerns regarding this high price tag when
a thirteenth FITARA metric--the thirteenth FITARA metric has
identified many more failing grades for agencies compared to
the last scorecard.
Can you speak to the reasons for these failed grades and
how we can move toward a more, you know, a more accurate or
better system?
Mr. Spires. Thank you, sir. Yes, my experience and it even
goes back to the--when we did this last migration to the
networks contract and now we are moving from networks to the
EIS--you know, it is--I think, you know, many agencies struggle
and it was brought up by a couple of the panelists here that
the work force issues that we face within Federal IT.
You know, many of the OCIO organizations do not have all of
the talent that they need to effectively manage their IT, and
that is one of the key issues that we face in Federal IT and it
manifests itself in many ways.
But one of those is in this example. You know, it is a
significant undertaking to migrate from one major networking
contract to another and it takes a lot of work behind the
scenes within these agencies to make that happen, and I think
many agencies struggle with that while they are also dealing
with the day-to-day operations and trying to modernize some
applications and the cybersecurity issues. You know, the work
force issues, I think, are all--are really behind a lot of
where we see struggles with these types of operations.
Mr. Keller. You mentioned something about not having the
talent. I mean, that is concerning, and I am wondering what we
need to do to make sure that we have the talent necessary.
I mean, that is what every American should expect our
government to be able to do. So, what do we do to make sure
that we get the talent to be able to handle these things?
Mr. Spires. Yes, that is a great question and a key
question that many of us have been facing for decades, how do
we up-skill--I mean, get--you know, we have great people in
government. Don't get me wrong. It is an amazing set of people.
But on the other hand, to your point, we have real talent
gaps, particularly in the technology areas and be able to
manage a lot of these technologies, and I think we have to
really do look at that.
And, you know, others have said, hey, there is an area in
the scorecard, that perhaps we should add a category around
this whole issue of the talent--the IT talent within the----
Mr. Keller. Well, I guess I would say that wasn't actually
my point. I heard you say that and that is what brought the
concern up. So, I wasn't--that wasn't my point. I wouldn't know
that, not being in that realm. But if that is something that
you need to look at, I think we should support that.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Keller. And by the way, one
answer to your question is support my Federal internship bill
so that we can try to make sure we are recruiting the skill
sets of the future that we desperately need, and I look forward
to trying to work with you on that.
Votes have been called. We have two more members to be
heard. Pleased to recognize now our newest member but our most
faithful already, the distinguished gentlelady from Ohio,
Shontel Brown.
Representative Shontel Brown?
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Chairman Connolly and Ranking Member
Hice, for holding a hearing on FITARA today, and thank you to
all the witnesses for joining us.
As we heard last week during the FISMA reform hearing,
technology is ever changing and this is why we need
periodically to update critical IT laws that will modernize
Federal technology, strengthen Federal cybersecurity, and
improve the operations of the Federal Government.
So, my question is for Ms. Harris. The Federal Government
has projected that it will spend approximately $111 billion on
IT investments in the Fiscal Year 2022. Of the $111 billion, 57
percent--roughly, $63 billion of it--will be spent on
operations and maintenance of existing systems and about 15
percent, which is about $16 million of it, will be spent on
development, modernization, and enhancement.
Could you describe the difference between these two
categories of IT investment?
Ms. Harris. Sure. So, with the operation and management
or--and maintenance--the O&M dollars--that is spent toward
sustaining systems and, in particular, we have a major legacy
IT issue in the Federal Government.
And so, a large portion of those O&M dollars are spent
toward unsecure and unstable systems that we need to tackle
that issue. The development, modernization, and enhancement--
DME dollars--goes toward investments in new and developing
newer modern systems.
And so, what we want to see is more of those O&M--we want
to see decommissioning of those legacy systems so we free up
those dollars to be able to spend in the DME category.
So, that is really the goal here, and we really need to be
very focused on tackling that legacy issue because that spans
not just a management issue but a cybersecurity challenge as
well.
Ms. Brown. So, Ms. Harris, how might we use the scorecard
to incentivize the agency to invest more in the IT
modernization?
Ms. Harris. I think one thing we should be doing is,
potentially, adding a category that is focused on the legacy IT
issue and I think that there are a number of ways that we can
address that issue.
But, perhaps, one of those is identifying the most critical
legacy systems across the Federal Government within these
agencies and then tracking the progress in decommissioning
those systems, and that might be a potential way to track the
legacy issue and be able to, you know, push the Federal
Government into more modern technologies and modern systems.
Ms. Brown. OK. Thank you very much.
My next question is for Mr. Cavallo. To effectively
modernize and acquire nimble technology we must work to fill
the skills gap in Federal IT and cyber work force.
Unfortunately, GAO has reported that the skills gap in IT
and cyber positions across the Federal Government are
contributing to significant IT management and the acquisition
challenges.
Can you and Ms. Dunkin describe how incorporating the
skills gap analysis into IT and--into your IT and cyber work
force plans?
Mr. Cavallo. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that important
question. We have heard from the other panelists how difficult
it is to make sure that we have the current updated skill sets
in today's government work force.
What I found in my career, by providing the latest in
technologies such as cloud technologies is the best way for us
to attract early career talent.
The chairman talked about his internship program. We have
to push every lever that we can to get today's work force
interested in working in the Federal Government.
At OPM, one of the things that I have done to help retain
the staff, because not only do we have to hire them but we want
them to stay in government, is to implement an extensive
training program and a certification program that either
matches or exceeds what a lot of private sector companies do.
So, I think, you know, giving a great work environment with
the right technologies is one of the ways that we can solve
that problem, and as I highlighted in my oral statement, I have
been able to close our vacancy gap considerably. So, those
steps that I am taking are working.
Ms. Brown. Ms. Dunkin?
Ms. Dunkin. Thank you, Representative Brown.
Yes, so we are doing a number of things at DOE to try and
close that gap. But what I am most excited about is the
internship program that we have put in place.
We call it our Omni internship program, and this summer we
will have 200 students from overburdened and underserved
communities coming out to our DOE sites and plants across the
Nation in cohorts.
So, No. 1, we are paying these students. The government
often offers unpaid internships. These are paid internships.
And second of all, we are providing the support to get them to
our often-remote locations.
So, we are ensuring they have transportation, we are
ensuring they have housing, and we are making sure that they
are part of a cohort so they will carry their experience on,
and then we are going to bring those same students back to
other departments, other parts of the department, each summer
so they get a whole view of DOE and, hopefully, we will turn
those into Federal employees, going forward. So, that is the
first thing we are doing.
Second, we use all the flexibilities we have because not
only is it hard to attract folks to the government, but it is a
slow process. And so when we can use flexibilities like direct
hiring, we can bring people in quickly and not lose those folks
to the private sector that has a faster process.
We are also looking--yes?
Mr. Connolly. I am sorry. Go ahead. Wrap up and----
Ms. Dunkin. Yes. We are also looking at our flexibilities
around pay. That was the last thing I was going to say,
Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. And my time has expired. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Dunkin.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Congresswoman Brown, and sorry to
interrupt you, Ms. Dunkin. I didn't mean to do that.
Congressman Clyde, are you there?
[No response.]
Mr. Connolly. We will return to Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Lynch, welcome. The distinguished gentleman from my
hometown of Boston is recognized for his line of questioning.
Mr. Lynch. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and you and I
know we have been working on this issue for a long, long time.
We have been talking about these legacy systems for 20 years,
and looking at the scorecard, many of these agencies have not
improved much.
Ms. Dunkin, the Department of Energy received a D grade in
cybersecurity and, notably, your agency has met none of its
cross-agency priority goals on cybersecurity.
Similarly, OPM has had a very difficult history on
cybersecurity. We have had some embarrassing vulnerabilities
there and breaches.
Let me ask you--I don't even know where to begin. This has
been such a disappointment. You know, we in government try to
encourage the private sector to be more careful with the data
of our constituents and, yet, the government itself seems to be
the epicenter of vulnerability for much of the important
information that we are custodians of in government.
Can I ask you, Ms. Dunkin, we are dealing with this Log4j
vulnerability now with a system that was already vulnerable,
and now with the Log4j vulnerability on top of that be so
ubiquitous, how are we dealing with fixing that vulnerability
in the face of the dangers that it represents?
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Lynch, thank you for that
question. We are addressing Log4j with great expediency. We
identified the systems within DOE that have potential
vulnerabilities and we have gone through and remediated those.
All of department elements, including all of our national
labs, have reported their results and are either completed in
those--in remediated vulnerabilities or nearing completion of
remediating those.
With Log4j one thing we know is that we don't necessarily
know the entire landscape of potential vulnerabilities.
So, we will continue to be vigilant and aware, and as new
vulnerabilities are identified we will continue to patch those.
We do have a very robust process within DOE to ensure that we
complete that process, and we are working through it.
Mr. Lynch. I got to admit, I think that is happy talk. That
is happy talk.
When I talk to the cybersecurity people, you know--and I
have the wonderful pleasure of chairing the National Security
Subcommittee, and we have received classified briefings on
this--and that is not--that is not what people are saying.
They are saying Log4j goes back to these legacy systems,
and it is so ubiquitous and so difficult that we are going to
be at this for a long, long time just on that one
vulnerability.
So, Mr. Cavallo, what is your approach in terms of--and
where do you think we stand in terms of responding to this
Log4j vulnerability and how long do you think it is going to
take us to clean that up?
Mr. Cavallo. Yes. Thank you, Congressman, for that
question, and I do want to assure you that at OPM we consider--
I used to chair cybersecurity posture for all of our
information systems. It is a top priority for us. As Ms. Dunkin
highlighted and you have highlighted yourself, this is a very
broad and extensive risk availability.
What I would, respectfully, like to request is that I will
be happy to followup in a more secure setting with our exact
status of where we are on that.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, that is a reasonable request and I am happy
to do that.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Chairman, we might want to--and
Ranking Member Hice, we might want to do a classified in order
to really dig down on some of these vulnerability issues and
where we are on this, and I agree with the gentlemen it might
be better to take place in a secured setting.
So, with that, I appreciate your attention to this issue. I
appreciate your good work, and this is one of those issues that
is, truly, of a bipartisan concern.
So, with that, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Lynch, and we can--absolutely,
our two subcommittees could collaborate on that classified
briefing. We will, certainly, defer to your subcommittee on
that matter and be glad to cooperate. So, thank you for your
leadership.
I see Mr. Clyde. The gentleman from Georgia has returned.
So, Mr. Clyde, you are recognized for your--on your
questioning.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that and I
appreciate holding this very important hearing.
This question, ma'am, for Ann Dunkin of the Department of
Energy.
Ma'am, in your testimony here you say FITARA helps to
ensure the Department of Energy's IT and cybersecurity programs
are strong enough to support and enable the vital work of the
department across the three main priorities set by the
secretary: combating climate crisis, creating clean energy
union jobs--and that is not jobs, that is union jobs--and
promoting energy justice.
Now, you know, I thought the Department of Energy was
responsible for the security of weapons-grade nuclear material,
and these are your three top priorities.
Promoting energy justice--what is that?
Ms. Dunkin. So, Representative Clyde, thank you for the
question. Energy justice reflects the president's priority to
ensure that the benefits of our investments in energy accrue at
least in part to underserved and overburdened communities, sir.
Mr. Clyde. So, I didn't know that justice--or that energy
needed justice. You know, I mean, if the department would spend
a little bit more time on maybe the things that are more
important--I understand that your agency received a D for--
grade for FISMA--the FISMA category.
So, has your department's performance or lack of
performance in this area in any way exposed any United States
infrastructure, national security sites, or any soft or hard
targets to cyber-attacks?
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Clyde, I think that is a
conversation that I would also suggest should happen in a
classified environment.
I would be more than happy to talk to you about the
specifics of the DOE's security posture in that kind of
environment. Rest assured that we are vigilant in ensuring the
security of DOE's assets and--but, again, any specific issues
we will want to take to a classified environment.
Mr. Clyde. Well, you know, with a grade of D, that doesn't
give me a whole lot of confidence. You know, I think that the
Department of Energy's priorities are a little misguided here.
I just read those three priorities that you have and,
obviously, one of them is not FISMA.
Ms. Dunkin. So, Representative Clyde, thank you for
pointing that out. Those are the secretary's priorities. Rest
assured that within the secretary's priorities and my
priorities, cybersecurity--FISMA--are very high priority.
We are--we believe that our security posture is stronger
than the FISMA goals--the FISMA score reflects and you will
start to see over the next few months in the quarterly reports
improvements in those metrics as we implement some specific CDM
capabilities that we have not yet implemented.
So, I would ask you to look at those metrics again at three
and six months. I think you will see some improvement, sir.
Mr. Clyde. Well, I look forward to looking at those metrics
and having the Department of Energy prove your statement
because I just don't have the confidence right now in that, and
I look forward to having a classified briefing.
Mr. Chairman, if you are willing to do that, I, certainly,
will participate because, you know, for what the Department of
Energy does this is not a good grade. Not at all.
So, if you would--if you would assist us in that, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member Hice, if you would, I would,
certainly, participate because this is a critical area of
cybersecurity that I don't think is getting the attention that
it should get at the Department of Energy.
So, and with that, I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Clyde, and we will work with
you to try to have a classified briefing, and the same grade on
this subject leapt out at me as well. So, thank you.
The gentleman from Kansas, Mr. LaTurner, is recognized, and
then the chair is going to hand over management of this hearing
to the gentlelady from California, our vice chair, Ms. Katie
Porter, to ring us out while I go vote. Thank you.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Harris, I want to reask a question to see--that I
didn't feel like there was a great answer to that my colleague,
Ranking Member Hice, asked a little bit ago. What are some of
the reasons that agencies may not meet the deadline with the
rollout of the EIS program?
Ms. Harris. Well, some of the reasons are it is not an
agency priority. They don't think about the transition until
the deadline is on the horizon, unfortunately. So, it is really
about proper planning and agencies--in looking at the previous
two transitions, agencies have been poor planners in that
regard.
But I also think Mr. Spires' comments about IT work force
is also----
Mr. LaTurner. Well, what happens----
Ms. Harris [continuing]. very valid in this regard.
Mr. LaTurner. What happens when they fail--when they fail
to transition? What is the consequence?
Ms. Harris. When they fail to--the consequence there,
unfortunately, is one where GSA has to offer a bridge contract
to extend the current set of contracts so agencies are able
to--to be able to have more time to move over to the newer set
of contracts.
And as a result of that, agencies are not taking advantage
of the lower costs and rates and better services from the new
contracts. So, when you take a look at the transition to
networks, agencies lost out on $329 million in savings.
Mr. LaTurner. Talk to me about the national cyber director.
How could the national cyber director be involved to strengthen
Federal agency cybersecurity posture? It is relatively new, and
I would just--I would like your take on that.
Ms. Harris. Well, we are very supportive of that position
and the executive order that is put in place. We have ongoing
work and also we will be starting new work to take a look at
how agencies are implementing that executive order as well as
taking a look at that position.
So, unfortunately, I don't have any more information other
than that at this time for you.
Mr. LaTurner. OK.
Mr. Cavallo?
Mr. Cavallo. If you talk about the--thank you for that
question. Is it about the national cyber position?
Mr. LaTurner. Well, yes. I would love to hear your response
to that quickly as well and then I have another question for
you.
Mr. Cavallo. Sure. Again, as we have heard from a number of
experienced leaders on this panel, measuring cyber is very
difficult, and I think we all can work together to improve
that. So, I am looking forward to see what that additional
guidance is.
In my previous role at SBA, I did two pilots on cyber with
CISA and DHS and OMB on using newer technologies to improve
cyber across an agency. So, I think--you know, I am looking
forward to getting that type of leadership from that position.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you for that.
Can you explain why your agencies failed to meet the
deadline for transitioning to updated EIS contracts, and how
will you prevent work and operational interruptions down the
line as we move closer to the 2023 expiration of the current
contracts?
Mr. Cavallo. Yes. So, and thank you for that question about
the EIS contract. You know, I joined OPM, you know, about a
year ago and that contract was already in competition.
We were very late in awarding it as an agency. In fact, the
first scorecard came out where we had enough--we didn't have a
contract in place to even transition to.
In the time since then we have awarded that contract in
April. I am pleased to tell you that we are actively moving our
network circuits and our telephone circuits now to that new
contract and I fully expect that we will meet GSA's deadline.
So, sir, it was a late contract award. I needed to bring in
additional resources. I have them on board, and we are actively
moving now, and I am confident that we are going to meet the
deadline.
Mr. LaTurner. I am glad to hear that and I am glad to hear
you feel confident about it.
Mr. Chair, I yield back the rest of my time.
Ms. Porter.
[Presiding.] Thank you very much, Mr. LaTurner. I will now
recognize myself for five minutes of questioning.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Porter? Ms. Porter?
Ms. Porter. Yes?
Mr. Connolly. If I could just interrupt, because I am going
to leave. But thank you.
I just want to say before I leave that I think this has
been a very useful hearing. Clearly, we have consensus that we
have got to, you know, make upgrades to the scorecard.
I think it is very important, though, to remember the
scorecard is tied to law. We passed a law that agencies must be
in compliance with. So, we don't want the scorecard to go too
far afield from making sure that the law is being implemented
and that we have got metrics that can reassure us of that.
I think it is also important to note that, you know, the
scores we are looking at need to reflect reality, right. So,
how did we perform, for example, during the pandemic in terms
of customer satisfaction, ability to perform, and I think any
reasonable person would say, well, by and large, pretty well
but there were uneven, you know, patches.
You know, we struggled with passports. We struggled with
small business loans, in some cases, because of the volume and
the changes in programming. We struggled with, certainly, IT
systems at the state level in unemployment insurance.
We struggled at IRS to get those family checks out and
direct payments to the American people during a pandemic where
we were trying to make sure the economy didn't go off a cliff.
So, looking at that uneven performance tells us, obviously,
not all of us deserve an A, that there remain problems to be
addressed and, hopefully, that in the next iteration of the
scorecard we are accurately capturing performance so that we
can make the necessary improvements.
Thank you all so much for participating today, and I now
hand over the gavel to the most distinguished vice chair in the
history of the U.S. Congress, Katie Porter from California.
Thank you, Ms. Porter, for yielding.
Ms. Porter. Thank you, Chair Connolly.
In December 2021, President Biden issued Executive Order
14058, which directs Federal agencies to deliver services to
the public more effectively, more efficiently, and
consistently.
And those--these services that we are talking about include
really important things to the American people like applying
for a loan, giving small business counseling, requesting
documents like a passport or a Social Security card.
Mr. Cavallo, your agency, the Office of Personnel
Management, was one of the agencies specifically identified in
the executive order, correct?
Mr. Cavallo. Yes. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Porter. How is OPM implementing the requirements of the
executive order?
Mr. Cavallo. Great. Thank you for that question.
My predecessor, the current Federal CIO, had already
started OPM on looking at the customer journey and, in fact, we
got a head start on that.
One of the other keys is--so the first thing you want to do
is look at what you are putting your citizens through to be
able to work with your agency--how many times do they have to
re-enter their name and address and things like that that we
can all do better on.
The second part is having a digital services team. I have
hired that team onboard to help lead that modernization effort.
So, we are well on our path. We have a pretty extensive
customer journey map now.
In my testimony, I highlighted that, you know, OPM touches
the Federal employee from before they become an employee to
their employment all the way to their retirement, and we are
looking to streamline and improve that interaction.
Ms. Porter. Great. This, actually, is a perfect segue to my
next question.
In the executive order OPM was tasked, as you just said,
with working with other departments, in part because Federal
agencies and Federal employees touch other departments.
One of the things specifically mentioned was to creating a
more streamlined process for borrowers seeking student loan
relief through the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program.
Can you share any information about how that process is
going, what the streamlined application will look like?
Mr. Cavallo. Thank you for that question, Congresswoman.
I am not all that familiar with where we are on that status
so I would like to get back to you with the details on that.
Ms. Porter. I would appreciate that, and, obviously, you
are just--you know, the Department of Education and other
agencies have a role to play here, too.
But since your testimony, I think, encouragingly suggests
that OPM is doing--is a little bit ahead of the curve compared
to other agencies with the executive order, I think it is
really important that you bring that expertise to bear on this
Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program.
You know, the Biden administration has taken action to
expand the eligibility for that program, broadening the type of
loans that qualify for forgiveness, automatically enrolling
service members and public employees in the program.
So, thousands of people are on the path to loan forgiveness
for the first time, meaning that they are closer to being able
to save for retirement, cover the costs of childcare.
But the changes to the Public Service Loan Forgiveness
Program are temporary. Borrowers have until October 31, 2022,
to make the necessary changes to their loans that are required
for eligibility.
So, Mr. Cavallo, I would love if you could followup with me
on what you learn about when that streamlined application will
be available for borrowers to use, because I don't want to hear
that they are only going to have two weeks or a month because
people need to get their mail and open their mail and read
their email, and even in a streamlined process it takes time.
Is that something you could respond back to me on?
Mr. Cavallo. Yes. Thank you. We will definitely followup
with you on the status of that.
Ms. Porter. Great, because we have nine months to go and I
would like to give the American people some portion of that to
do their part of this process. Thank you so much.
I will now turn to Ms. Harris. How can the FITARA scorecard
accurately measure agency efforts to improve service delivery?
Ms. Harris. I think that is a very good question. I think
that it is something that we need to work very closely with you
and the subcommittee on as well as with OMB to really
collaborate on the data that is available, publicly, because
that is really the main driver for what we can use as a metric,
to what extent data is available, whether it is public or not,
or if it is--and if it is systematic or if it is something we
have to manually collect. So, that is something that we will
have to work with you on.
Ms. Porter. OK. So, you identified two sort of variables
there. One is public, and what is public is currently what can
go into the FITARA scorecard--only public data--and the other
is sort of how easy it is to collect this data on a regular
basis.
I wanted to ask a little bit more about the public data
because I think using that alone can make it really difficult
to measure how well agencies are actually meeting their
obligations.
Mr. Spires, in your written testimony, you said that
nonpublic data in the scorecard would, quote, ``provide a more
accurate grade of an agency's cybersecurity posture.''
Can you say a little more about the benefits of using at
least some nonpublic data in future FITARA scorecards?
Mr. Spires. Yes. Well, thank you. Yes. As was kind of
evidenced by some of the discussion we just had about going
into a classified setting, there is a lot of sensitive data in
and around cybersecurity and an agency's posture and,
obviously, we don't want to--we don't want to have public data
that is going to actually endanger an agency in any way.
And I think in order to get an effective and a
comprehensive score around cybersecurity, we should change
that. You know, I know we want to use public data, but we--I
think that is the one area we should, really, probably open
this up and say probably effective to use some nonpublic data
in arriving at a particular score for cybersecurity.
Ms. Porter. Yes, and I think we all agree that this is
sensitive information. Congress also receives sensitive
information all of the time and we have a lot of protocols in
place to do that, and I think it is important that we think
about making sure that Congress has the tools to do effective
oversight.
Would you say that when you were chief information officer
at DHS that the results of the FITARA scorecard were sometimes
at odds with where the agency actually was, based on the
internal data or the confidential data that you had?
Mr. Spires. Well, I actually served--I was involved in
testifying about FITARA being passed. So, I actually had left
the agency prior to the scorecard existing.
But as someone that has been on the outside looking in and
still very involved in these issues, yes, I think that--I think
many CIOs feel like they are doing better in some areas, maybe
even worse in some areas, than what the scorecard was
reflecting.
You know, as we say, it is difficult and I know GAO has a
difficult challenge here trying to come up with--and you do,
too--come up with effective measures that are based on just
available data.
I would say that some of the--not just my testimony but
some others are saying, hey, let us go after and create some
new data when we need to or gather it in a way that can be more
effective in enhancing the scorecard.
Ms. Porter. That actually goes to my last--not quite my
last question but I am getting there.
Ms. Kent, in your time as a Federal CIO, which IT-related
metrics remained the most relevant over time, and then if you
could also identify where do you think--and I am going to ask
Mr. Powner to respond to this, too, after you--where are there
new or updated--opportunities for new or updated metrics?
I mean, we want to keep things narrow enough that we are
motivating the agency to make progress, but we also have to
make them broad enough to stay relevant as technology evolves.
So, can you just give the committee some information to--
about which ones stay really useful over time and where might
we need to have a more regular updating process?
Ms. Kent. I think some of the categories--so, you know, we
used data center kind of as a proxy for modernization. But that
specific metric, you know, has now kind of met end of life, and
you heard a lot of people talk about modernization, are there
other--it is still a theme, it will be an ongoing theme--are
there other things.
The same in cybersecurity. We are using some of the FISMA
components as a proxy, but we have talked about, you know,
timeliness. So, zero-trust, implementation progress, encryption
status, endpoint detection, information sharing--those may be
things that are more timely, and I think as we look at metrics,
you just touched on the importance of the customer experience.
For agencies to actually understand their progress and for
Congress to understand their progress, there is some
information that we don't currently collect and maybe some of
it, you know, therefore, is not public or doesn't meet the
current paradigm.
GSA did a survey about citizen perceptions of government
websites. There is other places where that information has been
done and already published publicly.
So, maybe there are ways that we can bring those metrics
into the scorecard and be creative in the data that we use to
do that so that not only is it more timely, it is reflective of
an outside looking in, which is how, particularly, in the
customer experience area citizens are judging us.
Ms. Porter. That is really helpful, especially as we think
about making sure this is--that this executive order, which
doesn't always happen despite best efforts and hard work by
people, doesn't always--executive orders don't always translate
into executive action and there is a pathway to getting there.
And, I think, one of my passions in Congress--and I think
we have all know how passionate my chair is about FITARA--but
one of my real passions in Congress is trying to design laws up
front with the right amount of oversight built into them.
And, obviously, FITARA is an oversight law, but I think
this executive order is a good example of thinking ahead at the
time you issue the executive order of telling agencies how you
might be evaluated for the progress you are making on customer
experience, not just to say make a better customer experience
and then mileage will really vary.
Mr. Powner, did you have anything that you wanted to add
about sort of balancing competing priorities between existing
metrics, new metrics, public data and nonpublic data, as we
think about updating the FITARA scorecard?
Mr. Powner. Yes. So, a couple things, Representative
Porter.
I think it is very important, your question about service
delivery and the customer experience. So, it is a major
priority with the executive order and the whole bit.
The legacy challenges we face on, like, benefits that
citizens expect, it is going to be difficult to really knock it
out of the park on customer experience with some of our back-
end legacy systems.
So, that is where, I think, the scorecard really needs to
evolve to improve the customer experience, address the legacy
challenges, but it also addresses, as Representative Lynch
mentioned, some of the security vulnerabilities associated with
legacy systems.
So, clearly, what we heard in today's hearing is we need to
focus on legacy modernization for a number of reasons. The
other thing that came out of this hearing, I think, is there is
plenty of opportunity to focus on new cyber metrics.
I think the administration's focus on the executive order
and zero-trust--if you look at the tenets of zero-trust like
multi-factor authentication, how we encrypt our key traffic,
there is a way to measure that stuff and to really progress our
cyber posture.
And then, finally, we have a gap in terms of a skilled work
force when it comes to IT and cyber folks. We need to find a
way to highlight on the scorecard where we are at with our work
force, what the gap is, and how do we fill that gap. So, those
are a couple of the key things.
But I would say legacy modernization, cyber, and work force
are three things that, clearly, came up on areas of focus down
the road and I think the panel here, there were a lot of great
suggestions on metrics and data that we can pursue, and I just
commend this committee for looking at how we evolve the
scorecard because this is the right way to go.
Ms. Porter. Excellent. And because I really am an equal
opportunity questioner today, Ms. Dunkin, I just wanted to turn
to you in closing and ask is there anything that you would like
to add? Any comments on that modernization--I am sorry, the
work force recruitment issues and how you feel?
I mean, Department of Energy is one of the more sort of
science-oriented agencies. If you guys are having trouble, I
would say it is likely that everybody is having trouble.
Any suggestions on how we might measure that work force
pipeline and how agencies are doing it at finding and
identifying those staff members?
Ms. Dunkin. Representative Porter, thank you for that
question. I think we might have to take some thought about how
we could measure the pipeline for recruitment.
I think, you know, it is a hard--it is something--it is
very hard to measure the talent pipeline. It is easier to
measure sort of the things we are doing to improve the talent
pipeline--for example, ensuring that we are looking in the
right places to get a diverse talent pool, ensuring that we are
providing good pathways into our organizations through
internships, through direct hire, and also dealing with the
issues where pay is just not in a place to attract folks.
I mean, DOE--in our labs, we have the ability to work on
different pay structures. But that doesn't help me with my
Federal staff, right. So, our labs can do one thing. I have
many more constraints in terms of our ability to pay those
folks at the market and so we are looking at those
flexibilities as well.
So, I think it may be easier to get meaningful measurement
out of the activities we are taking on to improve the pipeline
than measuring the pipeline. We do need to look and make sure
we have got a diverse and deep pipeline. But I think the first
piece about what are we doing is the most important thing we
can do, I think. Thank you.
Ms. Porter. Excellent. I think we are ready to wrap up.
Ranking Member Hice, or is there another Republican sitting
in, if you want to make a closing statement I am happy to
recognize you.
[No response.]
Ms. Porter. We all had to go vote. So, that is what
happened to everybody. We apologize. I just--I am in my kitchen
so I was able to vote remotely and, therefore, be able to
continue this hearing.
OK. I am going to go ahead and wrap up and close. I want to
thank each one of you for your remarks, for your flexibility,
too, in coming together in one panel so that we could have as
much time with you as possible and thank my colleagues for
participating in this important conversation.
With that--without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials
and to submit additional written questions for the witnesses to
the chair, which will be forwarded to the witnesses for their
responses. I ask that witnesses please respond as promptly as
you are able.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:53 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
