- BUILDING TRUST AND BATTLING BARRIERS: THE URGENT NEED TO OVERCOME VACCINE HESITANCY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING TRUST AND BATTLING
BARRIERS: THE URGENT NEED TO
OVERCOME VACCINE HESITANCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS CRISIS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 1, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available at: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-369 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Jennifer Gaspar, Select Subcommittee Deputy Staff Director
Beth Mueller, Chief Counsel
Senam Okpattah, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Crisis

James E. Clyburn, South Carolina, Chairman
Maxine Waters, California            Steve Scalise, Louisiana, Ranking
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York             Minority Member
Nydia M. Velazquez, New York         Jim Jordan, Ohio
Bill Foster, Illinois                Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Nicole Malliotakis, New York
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 1, 2021.....................................     1

Witnesses

Joshua Garza, Coronavirus Survivor
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Georges Benjamin, M.D., Executive Director, American Public
Health Association
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Katy Milkman, Ph.D., Professor of Operations, Information, and
Decisions, Wharton School; Professor, Division of Health
Policy, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Oral Statement...................................................     9

Jerome Adams, M.D., M.P.H., Former Surgeon General of the United
States (2017 - 2021)
Oral Statement...................................................    11

Written opening statements and the written statements of the
witnesses are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

Documents entered into the record during this hearing are listed
below.

* Op-Ed in USA Today by Reps. Foster/Miller-Meeks - Urging
Americans to get vaccinated; submitted by Rep. Foster.

* Letter from AAFP; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from ACP; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from American Diabetes Association; submitted by
Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from American Medical; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from American Nursing Association; submitted by
Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from American Nursing Association; submitted by
Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from CSIS; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from CSIS; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from Emory Division of Infections Diseases; submitted
by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from GW Milken Institute School of Public Health;
submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from IDSA; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from National Council on Aging; submitted by Chairman
Clyburn.

* Letter from National Health Law Program; submitted by
Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from NCAPA; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from Redeeming Babel; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from Seattle Indian Health Board Abigail Echo-Hawk;
submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from University of Nebraska De Alba; submitted by
Chairman Clyburn.

* Letter from Whitman-Walker Health; submitted by Chairman
Clyburn.

* Letter from the Robert Wood Foundation; submitted by Chairman
Clyburn.

* Statement from AHIP; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Statement from APhA; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Statement from Chicago Community Trust; submitted by Chairman
Clyburn.

* Testimony from Hispanic Federation; submitted by Chairman
Clyburn.

* Article - USA Today ``He rejected the COVID-19 vaccine and
almost died. Now he's preaching itsvirtues to Congress'';
submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

* Article - USA Today ``Getting a COVID-19 Vaccine is a
Patriotic Act''; submitted by Chairman Clyburn.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

BUILDING TRUST AND BATTLING
BARRIERS: THE URGENT NEED TO
OVERCOME VACCINE HESITANCY

----------

Thursday, July 1, 2021

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:08 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James E. Clyburn
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Clyburn, Waters, Maloney,
Velazquez, Foster, Krishnamoorthi, Scalise, and Miller-Meeks.
Chairman Clyburn. Good morning. The committee will come to
order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
We're here this morning to discuss an issue of broad,
bipartisan concern: the critical need to overcome vaccine
hesitancy so that more Americans get vaccinated against this
deadly virus.
I would like to thank Ranking Member Scalise for joining me
in inviting witnesses to testify at today's hearing. This is
not a partisan issue. The virus is equally dangerous for
Democrats and Republicans, and the vaccines are equally safe
and effective for Democrats and Republicans.
I would like to also thank today's witnesses for taking the
time to testify about this critical issue.
The coronavirus vaccines authorized in the United States
are proven to be safe and effective, and they have enabled our
country to make significant progress in containing the virus
and saving lives.
We have a graph here that speaks for itself. As more and
more Americans get vaccinated, fewer and fewer are dying from
the coronavirus.
Yet too many Americans remain unprotected against this
deadly disease because they are hesitant to receive coronavirus
vaccines. This vaccine hesitancy is allowing the virus to
continue to spread in areas with large unvaccinated populations
and increasing the risk that vaccine-resistant variants will
emerge.
Polls show that up to one in five American adults say they
are strongly opposed to getting a coronavirus vaccine.
Vaccination rates are particularly low in the South and rural
West. In both regions, less than 40 percent of the total
population of multiple states is fully vaccinated. In my home
state of South Carolina, for example, only 39 percent of the
total population is fully vaccinated.
Most concerning, we are still losing hundreds of Americans
to the coronavirus every day. Nearly all of the more than 8,500
Americans who died from COVID-19 last month were unvaccinated.
I want to repeat that: Nearly all of the more than 8,500
Americans who died from COVID-19 last month were unvaccinated.
If more Americans got their shots, we could reduce coronavirus
deaths to nearly zero.
At this critical juncture, we must not lose sight of the
work that remains to fully stop the spread of the virus in the
United States. We must undertake dedicated efforts to overcome
vaccine hesitancy and redouble our outreach and education so
that we can find a way to convince those who are reluctant of
the importance of getting vaccinated.
We must overcome access barriers and address informational
needs, particularly in communities of color, so that we can
make it easier for everyone to get vaccinated. We must identify
innovative ways to increase vaccine uptake.
The Biden administration has made tremendous progress in
making coronavirus vaccines available to all eligible
Americans. They are continuing to work to enhance vaccine
access for all communities and to promote confidence in the
vaccines. Their unprecedented efforts have helped to vaccinate
more than 179 million Americans in record time. But more work
is needed to prevent backsliding on this hard-fought progress.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about the
strategies that are effective to overcome vaccine hesitancy and
increase vaccine uptake and about how we can better inform the
American public and encourage those who may be hesitant to feel
confident in getting these shots.
Once again, thank the members and guests for being here
today. And I now yield to the ranking member for an opening
statement.
Mr. Scalise. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate you
holding this hearing.
Thank our witnesses for coming today.
As Americans move into the Fourth of July weekend,
Independence Day takes on special meaning this year. Thanks in
large part to the vaccines, this is the first holiday weekend
where virtually all of America is back open, free. Families and
friends will celebrate together. Grandmothers will visit and
hug their grandkids. Crowds will gather again for fireworks.
Every one of us on this subcommittee can tell the American
people there is total bipartisan agreement on this
subcommittee: The vaccine ended this pandemic.
So how did we get to the point where America created the
fastest vaccine in human history, manufactured, produced, and
distributed enough vaccine to give a shot to every American who
wants one?
The story really begins 30 years ago, when the United
States Trade Representative began negotiating international
trade agreements in earnest. On a bipartisan basis, for three
decades, USTR made protection of U.S. intellectual property a
cornerstone of those agreements.
About 25 years ago, Congress decided to make a major push
on biomedical research. The Republican-controlled Congress
worked with President Bill Clinton to double the size of the
National Institutes of Health. During the administration of
George W. Bush, Congress made yet another major investment in
NIH, with strong bipartisan support.
And then came former Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman
Fred Upton, working with Diana DeGette across party lines.
Their leadership brought us the 21st Century Cures Act. That
was one of the most proud moments I worked as majority whip, on
a piece of legislation that was bipartisan, working with then-
President Obama. We doubled yet again our commitment to the
NIH. And, just as importantly, we established in that bill the
Emergency Use Authorization process, which these COVID-19
vaccines were ultimately approved based on. These are
provisions, Emergency Use Authorization especially, that helped
save millions of lives.
Operation Warp Speed, of course, then built on those
decades of work. America created the fastest vaccine in human
history. But all Americans should be assured and confident, the
vaccines were not rushed. They were built off a platform
decades in the making, with the best minds in public health and
private sector coming together to create world-class
innovations and breakthroughs in a step-by-step fashion.
If you want to get vaccinated, it is safe, effective, free,
and available.
Today, nearly 154 million Americans are fully vaccinated.
That's about 47 percent of the population. At least 180 million
people, or 55 percent of the population, have received at least
one dose. And remember, we're not vaccinating children under 12
years old. Many Americans, thousands and thousands of
Americans, who contracted COVID-19 also have the antibodies.
We're approaching that elusive goal now of effective herd
immunity.
Every American, again, who wants to get vaccinated can now
get vaccinated.
Scientists have made it clear that we don't need to achieve
100 percent vaccination for effective herd immunity. So, let's
give folks who are hesitant the reassurance that they're not
going to be forced by the Federal Government to do something
against their will. It's ultimately every American's decision.
But we want it to be an informed decision.
First, the vaccine works. Pfizer and Moderna's Phase III
clinical studies found that their two-dose regimens were 95 and
94 percent effective, respectively, at blocking COVID-19, while
Johnson & Johnson's one-shot vaccine was found to be 66 percent
effective in its studies.
All three, however, have been found to be extremely
effective in preventing people from getting severely sick from
COVID. So, even if someone does get sick from the vaccine, the
severeness of that sickness is dramatically reduced.
Since vaccinations began, emergency room visits related to
the virus have declined 77 percent among older adults. As we
saw, the highest percentage of COVID deaths in those early
months were from seniors in nursing homes, especially, and the
more vulnerable populations--diabetes, hypertension.
While some breakthrough infections were reported--that is,
infections that occurred after vaccination--those illnesses
tended to be milder than infections among unvaccinated people.
As we know, no vaccine is 100 percent effective. A very small
percentage of vaccinated individuals will get sick, but that is
not evidence that the vaccination does not work.
Second, the vaccination is safe. Over 324 million doses of
COVID-19 vaccine have been given in the United States from
December 14, 2020, through June 28 of this year. COVID-19
vaccines were evaluated in terms of thousands of participants
in clinical trials. The vaccines met the Food and Drug
Administration's rigorous scientific standards for safety,
effectiveness, and manufacturing quality that is needed to
support Emergency Use Authorization that I talked about
earlier.
Many people experience side effects after receiving the
vaccine. We've seen reports of fatigue, fever, soreness. These
last for a short period of time. A very small percentage of
individuals experience an allergic reaction.
The bottom line is, for the overwhelming majority of
Americans, the benefits of getting vaccinated clearly outweigh
the small risks. COVID is a dangerous virus that has killed
600,000 Americans, but the risk of death from COVID drops
dramatically for vaccinated individuals.
Let's all work together to get the facts out to the people
of this country, particularly populations that have concerns or
hesitancy. Let's present the evidence but also reassure
individuals that this decision is their decision. I believe
that this is the strategy that will ultimately maximize the
number of Americans who choose to take the vaccine.
And as I'm closing, Mr. Chairman, I also would be remiss if
I didn't point out the fact that this committee does need to
hold a hearing on the origins COVID-19. As we've pointed out
many times for over a year, this is a virus that killed over
600,000 people in America, 4 million worldwide. More and more
evidence is growing in the scientific community that this virus
originated in the lab in Wuhan, not naturally occurring from
bat to animal to human.
And, in fact, earlier this week, the Republicans on the
committee, after over a year of calling for this hearing, held
our own hearing. We brought in scientific experts. Every one of
those scientific experts, Mr. Chairman, reported during their
testimony that this vaccine, based on the genetic sequencing
that we now see, started in the Wuhan lab. The evidence is
overwhelming.
If China would've been honest with us in those early
months--and I'm going back to September, at least, of 2019,
well before the first cases were reported, where now we do know
anecdotally that people with flu-like symptoms, both in the lab
and near the lab, were starting to experience those symptoms.
If China would've been honest back then, instead of waiting
until March 2020, hundreds of thousands of American lives
could've been saved and millions of lives globally could have
been saved if they were forthright with us.
We still have many questions to ask based on the testimony
we heard. In many cases, the people who can give those answers
were invited and refused to come forward. Mr. Chairman, with
your subpoena authority, you could compel them to come forward.
So, I will reiterate once again, for the ability for us to
prevent something like this from happening again, the sooner,
the better, we need to have a hearing on the origin of COVID-19
before the full committee.
I'll be happy to get you a copy of the transcript. In fact,
C-SPAN carried the hearing that we held, so we can get you all
of that information. A lot of important scientific information
was presented. There is more scientific information that needs
to come forward from people who refused to come forward.
So, I would urge that we have that hearing, again, and,
with that, I yield the balance of my time.
Chairman Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for his opening
statement, and I look forward--I would like to get a copy of
that, and you and I might be able to discuss that sometime in
the not-too-distant future.
As all of us have just heard, there is a vote on. And we
are going to work together here to make sure that everybody
gets a chance to cast their vote and to return. Mr. Foster has
cast his vote, and he's coming here. He'll be taking my place
while I go vote. And we have several other members who need to
go vote as well.
But before we do that----
Mr. Scalise.
[Inaudible] have someone chair during your absence.
Chairman Clyburn. I'm sure you would, but I think I'd
better keep this gavel on this side of the aisle. Thank you so
much, though. Thanks for the offer.
I'm going to introduce the witnesses so that we won't hold
them up. And then I think Mr. Foster will preside while the
three of us go cast our votes so that we won't miss that, OK?
Let me now introduce our witnesses.
Joshua Garza is a coronavirus survivor from Sugar Land,
Texas. After turning down an opportunity to receive a vaccine,
Mr. Garza contracted a severe coronavirus infection that
rapidly destroyed his lungs. Mr. Garza was placed on life
support and then suffered complete lung failure, requiring an
emergency double lung transplant. After a miraculous recovery,
Mr. Garza has shared his story publicly. He hopes to save lives
by inspiring others to learn from his mistake and get
vaccinated.
Dr. Georges Benjamin serves as the executive director of
the American Public Health Association, the Nation's oldest and
largest organization of public health professionals. He
previously served as the secretary of health for the state of
Maryland. He is a board-certified internal medicine--in
internal medicine, a master of the American College of
Physicians, a fellow of the National Academy of Public
Administration, a fellow emeritus of the American College of
Emergency Physicians, and a member of the National Academy of
Medicine.
Welcome back, Dr. Benjamin.
Dr. Katy Milkman--and, Katy, I hope I'm pronouncing that
correctly--is a professor of behavioral economics at the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Professor
Milkman is an award-winning scholar who has applied her
research to assist states and vaccine providers create
incentives to increase vaccinations.
Dr. Jerome Adams served as our Nation's 20th Surgeon
General. He also served on the White House Coronavirus Task
Force during the previous administration. Prior to becoming
United States Surgeon General, Dr. Adams served as health
commissioner of the state of Indiana and as a vice admiral in
the United States Public Health Service's Commissioned Corps.
Welcome, Dr. Adams.
Sophia Bush is an actress, activist, and entrepreneur. She
has starred on the drama series ``One Tree Hill'' and ``Chicago
PD,'' along with numerous films. Ms. Bush's activism includes
supporting the empowerment of women and girls, fundraising for
those affected by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, and serving
as founder and board member of I Am a Voter, a nonpartisan
movement to increase voter participation. Most recently, Ms.
Bush has used her platform to educate others about the
importance of vaccinations.
Will the witnesses please rise and raise your right hands?
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you're about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
You may be seated.
Let the record show that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Without objection, your written statements will be made
part of the record.
Mr. Garza, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA GARZA, CORONAVIRUS SURVIVOR

Mr. Garza. Good morning to everybody. My name is Joshua
Garza. I'm 43 years old, residing in a suburb of Houston,
Texas.
Due to my initial hesitancy regarding the COVID vaccine, I
passed on a chance to obtain the vaccine in early January. Due
to underlying health issues that I was aware of and treating, I
was eligible for the early dose. As a result of not following
through with the vaccination, I ended up contracting the virus
in late January and endured a four-month stay in the hospital,
resulting in a double lung transplant to save my life.
When approached about the vaccine in early January, I felt
that I was adhering to all the protocols. I wore the mask when
out, made sure to be socially distanced, continued washing of
hands, et cetera. At the time, I strongly felt that I was doing
everything I needed to protect myself and my family. It's a
decision that I have to live with for the rest of my life.
On January 28, I started to feel ill with the usual
symptoms of the coronavirus. As my condition worsened, my wife
and I decided to get tested on January 30. Results were sent to
us the next day. My wife was negative, but I was given the
dreaded results of being tested positive.
My condition worsened in the following days to a point
where I no longer had enough strength to walk. My oxygen levels
started to drop as a result of the virus attacking my lungs. I
tried to walk to the front of the house and ended up falling
due to oxygen levels being so low. My wife called an ambulance
to take me to the hospital immediately. I was first admitted
into a hospital on February 2.
The first hospital I was at ran the usual tests, but my
condition continued to get worse. After receiving results from
the testing, doctors were able to determine that my lungs were
hit the hardest and deteriorating at a rapid rate.
After a two-week stay and countless tests, we received the
news we did not want to hear. The doctors had done everything
they could have done, and my condition was too far gone to fix.
This hospital had given up on me, and I was not ready to give
up.
I reached out to my family and explained the situation and
said my final goodbyes, as I did not know what was to come or
how long I had to live. The toughest call I had to make was to
my 12-year-old son and let him know the situation.
After the call, I decided that I was not ready to give up.
My wife and I decided, in order to continue fighting, I would
have to transfer to a different hospital. This was February 13.
On February 14, I was able to secure a bed at Houston
Methodist Hospital Medical Center. After being transferred to
the Methodist--after being transferred, the Methodist staff
started testing immediately. The doctors had the same
conclusion, that my lungs were being destroyed by the
coronavirus, but they had options for treatment not offered at
the previous hospital.
I was moved to the ICU floor and was placed on an ECMO
system to help my lungs function during this time. The ECMO
system prolonged my life enough to get evaluated for a lung
transplant. After evaluation, it was determined that I was a
candidate for transplant. I was on the ECMO system for almost
five weeks before being approved for the transplant list.
Once placed on the list, I waited three weeks in order to
find a match. Successful transplant surgery was done on April
13. After surgery, I had to start the rehab process within the
Methodist network and was released from the hospital on May 27.
Here is a photo of me on the ECMO system.
While in the hospital, I was faced with many uncertainties
that are not controllable due to the situation. You have time
in the hospital to reflect on life decisions and the outcome of
each. The amount of pain I endured during this ordeal is
something I never want to replicate. If I could change my
decision back in early January to go forward with the
vaccination, I would.
We live in a country where we're free to make your own
decisions. With respect to the coronavirus vaccine, I would ask
my fellow Americans who are on the fence to think of not only
yourself but also your family and community to avoid the pain
and suffering many families have gone through, as many have
lost loved ones due to COVID-19.
I have a second chance at life, and I intend to share my
story as much as I can to help someone save their life.
Thank you.
Mr. Foster. [Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Garza.
Dr. Benjamin, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF GEORGES BENJAMIN, M.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATION

Dr. Benjamin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. I want to thank you for the opportunity to
address you today.
You know, the SARS-COVID-2, the virus that causes COVID-19,
has infected over 33 million individuals and taken over 600,000
lives. I just remind us that it would've been much worse had we
not really implemented many of the important public health
measures--masking, handwashing, social distancing, closing
selected venues.
But the best tool we have in public health is vaccination.
It's good that we have a safe and effective vaccine, but, you
know, having a shot and getting those shots in the arms are
really two different things.
And we've done a lot of things to really get to this point.
You know, people have had--over 323 million doses have been
delivered. We've really made substantial progress as a Nation.
But it clearly isn't enough. As Chairman Clyburn pointed out,
it does save lives.
But I want to focus my remarks on just the fact that I
think we need a new strategy. And that is one that builds on
the successful national strategy that we've certainly had but
one that is grounded in communities. And I'm talking about one
that's using old-fashioned, grassroots, shoe-leather public
health.
And what often happens is that we get close to these
benchmarks that we've set for ourselves and then we get
complacent, and we don't finish the job. And we need to make
sure that, in this case, we finish the job. And we really need
to double-down particularly on the vulnerable populations--
communities of color, communities that, quite frankly, have not
taken the virus as seriously as others.
So, we're really recommending a four-step approach that has
been endorsed that we believe is community-driven. And this
framework has, really, four components.
The first one is using data to identify those communities
where there is a lower-than-expected level of vaccination.
Second, exploring which challenges those communities have
to coverage--meaning, where are people not confident enough to
get the vaccine and why? Because it's turned out that there are
lots of reasons, there's a whole spectrum of reasons why people
are not willing to get vaccinated, from simply haven't gotten
around to it, to not having all the questions that they need to
have answered answered and, therefore, they're not that
confident.
And then engaging local community-based stakeholders to
help design those solutions; and really monitoring what we do;
and then, in a cycling manner, doing these things all over
again until we get an adequate number of people vaccinated.
Over the last month, there has been a national effort to do
this kind of strategy, and I'm pleased to report that we're
beginning to see success in that strategy. But we need to
double--redouble those efforts if we're going to be successful.
I think we should anticipate that, over the next part of
this year, we're going to have intermittent outbreaks, and
we're probably going to have those outbreaks over the next
several years. The way to kind of conceive that is, it'll be
like these measles outbreaks that we have. We have a well-
vaccinated population for measles, but we have a population
where people are not adequately vaccinated, and people get
infected.
This is a very, very severe disease, and we need to take it
very seriously.
I also want to point out, because this disease is raging in
many parts of the world and we, quite frankly, have not done
enough as a planet to get that part of the world vaccinated, we
are going to have entry of new variants for some time to come.
I know people are very worried about the Delta variant, and
I am too, but just let me say, there is very likely to be a
variant that develops in any of our communities where we're
under vaccinated. And so, we need to be concerned about any of
these new variants that occur and watch them very, very
carefully. And I know the CDC has revved up its surveillance of
these, but we just can't let our guard down.
So, I thank you for this, and I look forward to the
opportunity to testify today, and I look forward to working
with Congress and the administration and, quite frankly, our
community in making sure we address this.
And let me just say one final thing to Mr. Garza.
Mr. Garza, I'm very glad, as a physician, that you're
better and want to thank you very much for your advocacy.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Dr. Benjamin.
Dr. Milkman, you're now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF KATY MILKMAN, PH.D., PROFESSOR OF OPERATIONS,
INFORMATION, AND DECISIONS AT THE WHARTON SCHOOL; PROFESSOR,
DIVISION OF HEALTH POLICY AT THE PERELMAN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE,
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

Ms. Milkman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and distinguished
members of the committee, for inviting me.
I'll focus my remarks today on how behavioral science
suggests we can encourage COVID vaccination by changing the
cost-benefit calculus.
First, we should be making vaccination radically convenient
to reduce its hidden costs. People are busy, forgetful, and
generally far more dissuaded by ``hassle'' factors than we
appreciate.
One recommendation is to prearrange vaccination
appointments for unvaccinated Americans. Research shows that
prescheduling people for flu shots, while making rescheduling
easy, leads to a 36-percent increase in vaccination over simply
telling people how to schedule an appointment.
If we can't give every unvaccinated American an appointment
to get a vaccine, we can still repeatedly remind them of how to
schedule one and convey that a vaccine has been reserved for
them, as opposed to just made available, which evidence
suggests will also help.
In two studies that included over 700,000 Americans and
tested dozens of different text-reminder messages encouraging
flu vaccination, my collaborators and I found that reminding
people a vaccine was reserved or waiting for them boosted
vaccine take-up in pharmacies and doctors' offices by 7 to 10
percent.
These types of reminders were proven to increase COVID
vaccinations too, and they likely work because having a
healthcare provider remind you to claim a vaccine that's set
aside for you communicates the vaccination's recommended,
suggests it will be easy, and because we strongly dislike
giving up things that have been allocated to us.
I also want to discuss financial rewards. For someone who
isn't rushing to get a vaccine, maybe because they're young and
don't fear infection or because they're concerned about the
indirect costs of vaccination, like lost income, incentives
increase the immediate benefits of getting inoculated. Thirty-
four percent of unvaccinated Americans surveyed this spring
reported they'd be more likely to get a vaccine if they were
paid $100 to do so.
A caveat, though, is that a recent study of unvaccinated
Medicaid patients found cash payments only actually compelled
more vaccination among people who already intended to get their
shot but just hadn't gotten around to it.
Another caveat to cash payments is that research suggests
paying people a small amount to get their vaccine could
unintentionally convey that there's a health risk associated
with vaccination, even though greater risks accrue to those who
decline a vaccine. If you have to pay me to do something, I may
incorrectly infer you're paying to offset a risk you're
imposing on me.
In one study, people said they'd be more likely to get
vaccinated if paid $100, but a payment of $20 would actually
reduce their interest in getting a vaccine, probably because of
the incorrect inferences low payments produce about risk.
Lottery payments for vaccination may help dodge this issue,
as we infer different motives for guaranteeing a reward versus
offering up a chance at a jackpot. Moreover, lottery incentives
are generally cost-effective, in part because we tend to
overestimate the chances of low-probability events. For
instance, we act as if a chance that's one in a million of an
event is more like one-in-a-10,000 chance. So, when we're
entered in a lottery, we overestimate our chances of winning.
And data from the benefits of Ohio's Vax-a-Million lottery
are very promising. The week after that lottery was announced,
Ohio's 16-and-up vaccination rate jumped 28 percent. And
estimates suggest that lottery caused an extra 50,000 to 80,000
Ohio residents to get vaccinated in just the two weeks post-
launch, implying a cost of about $85 per dose.
In Philadelphia, my collaborators and I recently designed a
vaccination sweepstakes that uses what's called a regret
lottery. We're drawing names from a Philadelphia residential
data base but requiring those we contact to prove they were
previously vaccinated to accept their winnings. Since all
residents are entered in the lottery, some unvaccinated
Philadelphians will be notified that they would've won a cash
prize if only they'd gotten their vaccine, which is the regret
component.
Past research shows that, because people imagine the regret
they'd feel if they got that call and couldn't cash in, regret
lotteries can be even more motivating than standard lotteries.
Our lottery's grand prize is also just $50,000, because we
doubt a million-dollar jackpot is necessary. And half of the
winners in each drawing will come from a preannounced ZIP Code
with a particularly low vaccination rate to target incentives
more efficiently.
It's too early to know the program's impact, but we hope it
could be a model for motivating local vaccination.
And, finally, I want to discuss non-monetary incentives.
One survey found that offering Americans the opportunity to
stop wearing masks after vaccination was highly motivating.
Giving only vaccinated Americans access to certain
opportunities will also matter. Over 500 U.S. colleges and
universities are requiring students to be vaccinated to return
in the fall, and many employers are setting similar mandates.
Mandates are understandably controversial, but a recent
review showed that workplace policies like vaccine mandates
increased flu vaccination coverage by an average of 25 percent,
whereas surveyed incentive programs only boosted vaccination
rates by 9 percent. This means encouraging mandates that allow
for medical and religious exemptions could increase vaccination
rates immensely.
I'll close now but note that I've only provided testimony
on evidence-based ways to change the costs and benefits
associated with vaccination. There are many other ways to
encourage vaccination and reduce health disparities, and I look
forward to perhaps discussing some later in this session.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Dr. Milkman.
Dr. Adams, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JEROME ADAMS, M.D., MPH, FORMER SURGEON GENERAL OF
THE UNITED STATES (2017 2021)

Dr. Adams. Well, thank you for the opportunity to testify
at this incredibly important and timely hearing.
The increasing spread of the Delta variant makes this
conversation all the more urgent, but the COVID-19 pandemic is
just the latest example of how our efforts to address overall
vaccine hesitancy must improve.
And I want to applaud your use of the phrase ``vaccine
hesitancy,'' because I never say ``anti-vax.'' There is a
small, albeit vocal, contingent who are what I call ``vaccine-
resistant,'' but most vaccine-hesitant people simply have
questions or barriers that, when addressed with compassion, can
be overcome. Or, as I often say, the more people know we care,
the more they care what we know.
Herd immunity is about having enough people with antibodies
by vaccination and/or prior infection to stop disease spread.
So, in other words, we could achieve sufficient protection to
contain COVID outbreaks with less than 70 to 80 percent of all
people in the U.S. vaccinated. That's good news, because we
also have to quite simply acknowledge we may never achieve 70-
percent nationwide vaccination rates.
What we need to focus on, in my opinion, is defining micro-
herds and striving to achieve overall containment through
vaccination within those smaller groups, because that's really
where outbreaks start. Your herd could be your church, your
workplace, your child's sports team, the neighbors you gather
with, and especially your family. The more these smaller herds
achieve 70-percent-plus vaccination rates within their groups,
the less likely the virus and variants will find quarter to
spread within the larger population.
And moving on to populations and interventions, the most
important lesson you should take from this hearing is that we
absolutely must change our strategy from broad mass-vaccination
campaigns to more focused education and engagement of smaller
groups and individuals.
We're well past the days of vaccine eagerness, where you
could simply set up at the local sports stadium or fairgrounds
and expect people to drive miles and wait for hours for a
vaccine.
My conversations with community nonprofit public health and
healthcare groups and organizations have revealed a number of
strategies to combat vaccine hesitancy, which I'd invite the
select committee to consider. They're grouped into three main
``mis''es that I think we need to focus on: misinformation,
mistrust, and a misperception that access is no longer an
issue.
I'd refer you to my written testimony for more details and
10 key recommendations I've gleaned from my engagement with
these groups, and which address these ``mis''es. But at a very
high level, they are:
One, make the conversation about more than just COVID.
Two, recognize and address continuing access issues as a
matter of health equity.
Three, we've got to get more shots in doctors' offices.
Four, encourage and fund efforts to better understand
hesitancy at the ground level and empower people with factual
information.
Five, work with states to award micro grants to community
groups who are doing the work on the ground.
Six, through the Department of Labor and Small Business
Administration, fund an effort to have businesses and employers
understand the benefits of encouraging and offering
vaccinations.
Seven, through the Department of Education, support school-
based vaccination clinics for COVID and all other vaccines
students have fallen behind on, because guess what: Our kids
are at as much and possibly more risk from other vaccine-
preventable diseases as they are from COVID right now.
Emphasize--No. 8--the non-health benefits of vaccination.
Focusing on the social positives of the vaccine to a
constituency that in many cases fears the social harms of COVID
more than the potential health harms is more likely to motivate
behavior change.
Nine, work with vaccine manufacturers and the FDA to gather
the data necessary to move toward full approval of vaccines. I
really, really hope the committee hears me when I'm saying
this. This is something that people on the ground level are
continually saying. It took five months to go from Phase III
trials to EUA. It's taken already longer than that to go from
EUA to full licensure of these vaccines, and the American
public wants to know why.
And, number 10, stop talking about vaccine hesitancy in
political terms, for goodness' sake, and find different and
credible spokespersons for different groups. I've never heard a
single person say, ``I'm not getting vaccinated because I'm a
Republican.'' I've heard plenty of people say, ``I won't get
vaccinated because I don't trust the government,'' ``I don't
trust the healthcare system.'' And when we focus on this
mistrust, versus focusing on political ideology, we win people
over.
In summary, vaccine hesitancy did not manifest itself out
of nowhere, especially in communities where trust of the
medical establishment is tenuous at best. Our country needs to
fundamentally change how it values and invests in caring,
quality, and expert public health services and communication.
Because vaccine hesitancy, quite frankly, isn't the root
problem. It's just the latest symptom, the latest example of
our collective failures to engage, educate, enable, and empower
all citizens to be their healthiest selves.
So, thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
look forward to taking your questions.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Dr. Adams.
Ms. Bush, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF SOPHIA BUSH, ACTRESS, ACTIVIST, ENTREPRENEUR

Ms. Bush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Scalise,
and honorable members of the committee, for the opportunity to
testify before you today.
My name is Sophia Bush, and I am a storyteller. As an
actress, an activist, an entrepreneur, and the host of the
``Work in Progress'' podcast, I have committed myself to
learning about people and communities so that I might highlight
the change-makers working to unite and propel us all toward a
better future.
In being afforded the opportunity to tell people's stories,
I have found both my personal purpose and the passion for what
lies ahead for us as a Nation. And I feel incredibly privileged
to have this opportunity to carry their voices into the chamber
with me today.
In early 2020, like so many of my fellow citizens, my
workplace shut down, and shortly thereafter I was locked down
at home.
I was terrified of COVID. As a child with severe asthma, I
suffered bouts of pneumonia that further weakened my
respiratory system, and, as an adult, what might present as a
seasonal cold for my coworkers has quickly turned into bouts of
bronchitis that have sent me to the hospital for emergency
breathing treatments.
Even with the unearned privilege of my less at-risk group,
one with better racial outcomes, and with my financial ability
to access quality healthcare, I wondered if I would be one of
the young Americans to suffer severe complications or carry a
deadly virus home to my family.
I was inspired by the urgency with which the global health
community mobilized to sequence the virus, develop a vaccine,
all thanks to decades of prior research on coronaviruses.
Researchers around the world collaborated like never before in
response to the greatest public health threat of our lifetime.
So, I jumped at my chance to get the vaccine the moment I
was able to, to protect myself and my parents, my coworkers'
and friends' families.
I jumped at the opportunity to take my best friend to get
her mRNA vaccine. She was five months pregnant at the time and
has a clotting disorder, and that made her cautious about
receiving a vaccine. But being acutely aware of what
contracting COVID could mean for her and her baby, she, too,
jumped at the chance to protect them both once experts
confirmed the vaccine's safety for pregnant women.
I drove us home with tears in my eyes that day. To be
honest, I also cried the day my parents received their second
mRNA vaccine, because, for me, vaccines represent love.
My grandfather was a United States Navy man--I have his
tags on the desk with me today--and he used to tell stories
about polio. My mother, too, remembers the relief when her
family stood in line for that vaccine.
Vaccines are acts of love made possible by innovation. And
I believe that, in innovation, we have historically seen the
best of America. That is where we are exceptional. From
skyscrapers to airplanes, eventually landing on the Moon, we
are innovators. And the COVID vaccine, in my opinion, is our
generation's shot at a Moon landing. This is a step for
humankind made possible by science.
Two of the largest groups of unvaccinated people exist in
communities you've mentioned: communities of color and rural
populations. There have been concerted disinformation and
misinformation campaigns to discourage communities, including
these, from vaccinating themselves against COVID-19.
We cannot allow people dubbed a threat to this Nation by
our own intelligence agencies, no matter if they are anonymous
internet marauders or members of our own governing body, to
peddle disinformation that keeps us from protecting ourselves
and others. Those are harmful stories.
And medicine is not partisan. Science is not partisan.
Public health must be supported to the best of our Nation's
ability, all of us, by nonpartisan political will.
It is on us to remind our loved ones that this pandemic is
not over. New variants, as you mentioned, including the more
transmissible Delta variant, are circulating at an alarming
rate.
And even before the proliferation of these variants,
experts were anticipating a fourth wave in areas with low
vaccination rates. We were warned just this week that we could
see dense outbreaks in rural areas because not enough of those
communities are vaccinated.
And on the subject of community inequity, as the chairman
mentioned, Black and Brown communities have suffered
unspeakable losses through this pandemic. And it should come as
no surprise to us that some people of color who felt abandoned
by our government in 2020 may have hesitated to believe that
the government would protect them now against COVID-19.
We must collectively come to terms with our historical--
with our history of medical trauma and the abuse on Black and
Brown Americans. And we must provide culturally competent,
evidence-based messaging that is community-specific if we want
to prevent more devastation this fall.
We need to spread the word about where people can find more
information about the vaccines. My dear friend and science
communication lead for the COVID Tracking Project, Jessica
Malaty Rivera, likes to say that science isn't finished until
it's been communicated with empathy. So, we must work to make
sure that our policies and the stories we tell about them, the
ways in which we communicate the science, are trustworthy,
transparent, and inclusive.
Public health must be our number-one priority, because, by
nature, public health requires us to work on behalf of the
public. Our doctors and researchers do, and each of us can do
the same by standing up for our communities and getting
vaccinated to stop the spread.
My fellow millennials watching and the innovative Gen-Z'ers
out there, we are looking to you. You can reclaim your academic
institutions and your precious milestones in person by getting
vaccinated to protect yourselves and your loved ones so that
you can write the stories of your futures. I genuinely believe
that, together, we can do this.
Thank you for your time.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Ms. Bush.
And thanks to all of our witnesses for your testimony.
Each member will now have five minutes for questions, and
so the chair will now recognize himself for five minutes.
And, first, I have to say, you know, as a scientist, I
often daydream that we can simply--when there's an issue that
has to be communicated to the public, you can just say, here
are the statistics, here are the numbers, here's the cost-
benefit analysis, and then every one of my constituents will
analyze that, apply the statistics to themselves, and say, OK,
decision's clear, when do I get vaccinated, for example.
But it's not like that. You know, this job is to get an
often-irrational primate to behave rationally. And so, very
often, you have to inject sort of an equal and opposite
irrationality into that primate with the sort of passion that
you described in your testimony. It's important. Or the--what
Dr. Adams mentioned about regret and even worrying about future
regret. And so, I think--and it all rings true to you as a
human being, even once you appreciate the statistics perfectly.
You know, I hosted a telephone townhall last week where we
had doctors, public health experts, and we took questions from
people about their concerns. And I understand--well, first off,
we have to start with the science, and we have to get the
science clear, that there is a definite net benefit. And we
have to be honest with the public that the risks are not zero,
but the benefits are so much more probable, that you must--you
must analyze that yourself, and you must really, I think, take
that rational approach to your life and your family's. But we
need more than that. You know, we need the sort of passion that
we saw in the testimoneys here.
You know, there--well, just in terms of the statistics, you
know, I think all of us struggle to find, what are the right
statistics to simply explain this to people? And the one that
I've found as effective as any is that, if you looked at the
180,000 Americans who lost their lives from COVID-19 in May
alone, less than 1 percent of those had been reported as being
fully vaccinated.
That means 99 percent of those who died in May had vaccines
available, by and large, and chose not to get vaccinated and
paid the ultimate price. Not to mention their families, not to
mention those who simply became sick and are going to, you
know, live with, potentially, a life of long COVID. That's
something that's hard to measure, hard to quantify, but it's
going to be real, the reality for probably millions and
millions of Americans.
So, it's time to get the shot here. You know, vaccines are
a public health issue, and, as everyone has mentioned, they are
not and should not be a partisan issue.
Just this morning, my colleague on this committee, Dr.
Miller-Meeks, and I published a joint op-ed in USA Today urging
all Americans to get vaccinated.
And, without objection, I'd like to ask unanimous consent
that that op-ed be entered in the official--yes, I presume
you're not going to be objecting to our op-ed?
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. No.
Mr. Foster. All right. Great. Yes, it's always nice to
stack the committee when there's an answer you want to get.
Mr. Foster. Now, Dr. Benjamin, in your written testimony,
you referenced a national poll that found that certain words
and approaches make people feel safer in getting the vaccine.
Could you say a little bit about that?
You know, one of the big irrationalities of human beings is
that, you know, labeling or a few words just twist our opinions
beyond all rationality. Can you say a little bit about the
words that work?
Dr. Benjamin. Yes. Thank you for that.
Yes, one of the challenges we have is that words matter.
And, you know, we try to make sure that you don't stigmatize
people, as the Surgeon General pointed out, that you--what I do
is, I ask people what their concerns are and then ask them to--
then I try to address those specific concerns. I try not to
make an assumption that I know what their concerns are.
And then using words that they're comfortable with. You
know, the fact that the vaccine was developed over many years
is important as part of that communication. Using words when
you talk about who described--who developed the vaccine. Make
sure that they understand it was people--scientists,
researchers, people in their community, so they don't think
these are some abstract people somewhere that went into a back
room and made this, you know, ``mad scientist'' type of image
of how the vaccine got developed, that it was very thoughtful
people.
Pointing out, for example, that there are--particularly for
the African-American community, very, very important--that
African Americans were part of both the development of the
vaccine--in fact, leaders in the development of the vaccine,
that African Americans were involved in the studies themselves
and, in fact, there was a Herculean effort, because we're not
really very good at getting diversity in these studies, but, in
this case, there was good diversity in these studies.
So, doing things like that to make sure that people
understand what actually happened. And so, it's not just the
message, but it's also the messengers----
Mr. Foster. Yes.
Dr. Benjamin [continuing]. which is very important.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
And I believe my time has expired, and I will now recognize
Representative Miller-Meeks for five minutes for her questions.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Representative
Foster.
First, I'd like to thank the chairman and the ranking
member for holding this important nonpartisan hearing today.
And I would like to thank our witnesses for their
testimony, even those that are virtually--or also those that
are virtually.
I have been to every county in my district, all 24 counties
in southeast Iowa, to administer the COVID-19 vaccines. I also
attended a function on getting young people to run for office
and administered vaccines there when a pharmacist brought the
vaccine.
I've also penned an op-ed on this topic with my colleague,
Representative Foster, as he indicated, which was published
today in USA Today on this exact topic. And I've done multiple
interviews and sent letters encouraging the American people to
get vaccinated.
I cannot emphasize how important I think it is to get
vaccinated so that we can all return to normal.
To date, three vaccines are approved under the Food and
Drug Administration Emergency Use Authorization process.
And, Dr. Adams, you mentioned something which is near and
dear to my heart and for which I and other members of the
Doctors Caucus--I'm an M.D. and a former state director of the
Iowa Department of Public Health--sent to the FDA talking about
this exact issue.
Can you explain how the Emergency Use Authorization is
different from the full biologics license application approval?
Dr. Adams. Well, thank you very much for that question.
And it is important for people to understand that, during
the EUA process, we are--or the FDA is evaluating to determine
whether or not the risk is less than the benefit of an
intervention. It hasn't gone through the full licensure
process. And so, it is a bar that is especially important in
the midst of a pandemic, because people are dying each and
every day from COVID-19, but it is certainly not full
licensure.
Now, that said, I want to hit a point that Representative
Scalise mentioned earlier. Three-hundred-plus-million people
vaccinated so far in this country--or doses delivered in this
country. This vaccine has, again, been administered to more
people and we have more safety data on it at this point than
we've had for any other vaccine in history--in history--at this
point of administering it to people.
So, I, as a doctor, feel it's safe. I got vaccinated. My
15-and 16-year-olds have been vaccinated. But, that said, I
continue to hear from the public that the lack of an update on
licensure is something that's hanging over their heads. And
that's why it's important that the committee address this.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So, you would agree with me and other
members of the Doctors Caucus when we have asked the FDA to
look at real-world evidence of the millions of vaccines
administered both in the United States and globally, that that
should be enough study data information to give full
authorization for these vaccines?
Dr. Adams. Well, absolutely. Dr. Fauci and I worked
closely, and Dr. Collins from the National Institutes of
Health, with these organizations throughout the process to get
to EUA, and we looked at data within the United States and
outside of the United States. And when you go beyond the United
States, you're well over 300 million doses that have been
administered. We have even more safety data.
I just personally, as a physician and as someone who was
inside this process, really, myself, don't understand why we
haven't had more of an update yet.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you for that. And, Dr. Adams, I
want to say also that I remember meeting you at an ASTO )
meeting here, and so it's a pleasure to see you again.
I'd also like to say that you mentioned herd immunity. And,
in April, in this committee, I asked Dr. Fauci and Dr. Walensky
both for herd immunity and the typical average of herd
immunity, which you have said is around 70 percent.
Granted, we don't know what it is for this virus. But I
think it's important--and I'm in an agricultural state. We know
what herd immunity is. And the goal is to get as many people
vaccinated as possible, and especially in the risk groups.
But you also mentioned about side effects. And there are so
many questions I would love to ask, but I'm going to direct
this next question to Ms. Bush.
And, Ms. Bush, your testimony was very compelling, because
you mentioned the anxiety that you had, given your health risk.
But we also know that, for children, there are tremendous
mental health effects associated with not being in a normal
school environment, coupled with stunted social and emotional
growth of children 12 and over, and it far outweighs the
potential effects of a vaccine.
So, what would you say to young people and to parents of
children between 12 and 18 as far as getting the vaccine?
Ms. Bush. Well, I think, again, you know, to the doctor's
points, this is about how we protect our communities. I might
have been less at risk than my parents, who are older and both
immunocompromised, but I still got vaccinated for them and,
admittedly, was terrified of this.
And I think the notion that households like some of our
friends, who have some children over 12 and some children under
12, could be better protected if kids 12 to 18 were vaccinated,
the likelihood that as we reach closer and closer to herd
immunity, we will have less incidents of infection is
incredibly important.
And it's our responsibility, in my opinion, to get
vaccinated for ourselves, our loved ones, and also for those
who can't, for immunocompromised people, immunocompromised
children. This is a community action that we can take.
And, hopefully, the sooner we reach that herd immunity, the
sooner we cross that threshold, all of these kids will be able
to get back to the in-person learning that they need for their
mental health and also for their cognitive development.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much.
And, Mr. Chair, I know that my time has expired, but I just
wanted to say that I thank the witnesses for talking about
ending the mask mandate. We asked about this in April, given
the data we had, and it should've been ended earlier so that
people could see there was another benefit to getting
vaccinated other than the lottery system, which I found
tremendously interesting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield my time.
Chairman Clyburn. [Presiding.] Thank you very, very much.
The chair has now returned via remotely. But thank all of
you for your questions.
I do have questions that I would like to raise. As I
mentioned earlier, I represent a largely rural district, and I
am deeply concerned about vaccination rates in our rural
communities. Although the CDC has warned that rural Americans
may be at higher risk of severe illness and death from the
coronavirus, rural communities are falling behind on
vaccinations, and we are seeing cases rise in rural communities
with large unvaccinated populations.
Over the next two weeks, I will be having five townhall
meetings. Three of them will be in rural communities. And we
will have the vaccine available at all of those meetings.
And I would just like to ask Mr. Garza: What would you have
me tell my constituents who may not be sure that they want to
get vaccinated?
Mr. Garza. Yes, sir. I think the most important thing to
explain is, the side that probably doesn't get shown very much
is the side of somebody who went through it, like myself.
You know, you're in the hospital. There are so many
uncertainties that you don't know about. And I think you have
to explain the--there are just so many--it's hard to explain,
being that I was there, and I experienced it, and a lot of
people haven't experienced it yet. Maybe these people haven't--
they don't know of people that have gone through it. Maybe they
don't know of somebody who lost a loved one. You know, I knew
of people who contracted the virus and, you know, they were
fine within a week or two, and they were back to normal. And I
felt like that was the norm.
I got hit very hard, so I went through the experience. You
know, you sit in a hospital, you see on a daily basis--you see
the people die on a daily basis. I think that needs to be, you
know, brought to light. I think it--you know, it's nothing we
really want to talk about, you know, all the time, but it's the
truth.
And there's ways to protect it, and that's by taking the
vaccination and going forward with it. And, you know, I would
say, just share the stories as much as you can, because it's
something that needs to be out there and for people to know
that there is a consequence to not getting the vaccination, and
it could happen to you and your family or your community. And
that's something that we don't want to do, we don't want to see
that happen, you know, but it's happening.
And I think people are on the fence either way, so I would
share the stories as much as you can and explain, you know, the
situation that--what could happen versus what they see.
Chairman Clyburn. Well, thank you for that.
And I want to say to our staffs and our technical people
here today that I would love very much to get your story. I was
not here for your testimony; I'm going to listen to it. And I'm
going to ask the staff to see whether or not we can make your
testimony and your case available to more people in rural
communities.
I can see us getting your story out to various community
groups, at least throughout my district, and rural churches so
that more people will know a little bit more about the dangers
of not adhering to the science when it comes to this
coronavirus.
So, I want to thank you so much for being here with us
today.
And, Dr. Benjamin, I want to thank you once again. You may
have said strategies before I came back. Is there anything you
would add to what Mr. Garza has said to us about getting the
word out to rural communities?
Dr. Benjamin. Yes, sir. I think that one of the things you
want to do is, particularly as you do in your townhalls, you
know, you want to prep the community. That means going, you
know--as you know, just like an election cycle, getting people
going out door-to-door, making sure people are well-educated
about the townhall, the opportunity to be vaccinated there, and
trying to get some of their questions answered, having not only
probably your health department there but also maybe some other
community messengers.
And you know the folks we're talking about. You know, I've
been to your events, as you know. We've known each other for a
long time. And the kind of community outreach workers that
you've had for some of the educational sessions that you've
done at the university that go door-to-door, bang on doors,
getting those folks out to talk to folks so that, when Mrs.
Jones comes in, you know, she knows the community messenger
that is trying to encourage her to get vaccinated so that it's
not someone that doesn't know her or him.
And so, I just think that we need to put our arms around
the community and just, as they say, show them the love when
they come into those events.
Making sure that they have adequate transportation,
providing rides to both your townhall and if the vaccination is
at a different site, getting their vaccination there and back.
Recognizing that, yes, people do sometimes not feel well
for either their first shot, quite often that second one, but
they'll be fine afterwards.
And making sure that they can get off work and working with
the local employers to give them time off. And, of course, I'm
an advocate for paid time off when they do that.
Chairman Clyburn. Well, thank you so much for your
testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Garza.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Waters, Chairlady Waters, for
five minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Chairman Clyburn.
And I'd like to thank our witnesses for being here today to
talk about a subject that's bothering so many of us. We are so
concerned about our communities and the hesitancy that is
displayed daily.
We know all the stories about why people are hesitant, why
they are suspicious. We know the distrust because of the way
we've been treated in the medical community with experiments
and et cetera. We know all of that.
And we are talking to people and warning them ad nauseam.
We're saying, you may die if you're infected and you have not
been vaccinated.
So, we've done all of that. So now I'm really looking at
incentives. I'm looking at what incentives work and how we can
involve maybe the private sector in supporting us with
incentives to get particularly young people out.
Now, either of you have any knowledge or experience that
you can share with us about whether or not incentives work and
whether or not it is ethical to do incentives?
First, Dr. Adams, what do you think?
Dr. Adams. Well, thank you so much. And, actually, I would
direct the question to Dr. Milkman, because she wrote the book
on this. She is the expert on this.
Ms. Waters. Oh, she did?
Dr. Adams. Yes, she did. And she is the expert on the panel
on incentives.
But what I would say to you very quickly is, you need to
have the right incentive for the right audience. And a blanket
incentive isn't going to work for every population, because
it's not going to address the concerns the particular
populations have. So African Americans may respond to different
incentives than Hispanics and Latinos, than rural communities.
But, again, I'll throw it to the expert who is here, Dr.
Milkman.
Ms. Milkman. Sure. No, the evidence that incentives work is
building. We have decades of evidence that they work for
changing health behaviors in other contexts. Of course, we only
have a little bit of evidence to date on how well they're
working for COVID-19 vaccinations.
But, as I mentioned earlier, the Ohio Vax-a-Million data is
already looking very promising. There was a 28-percent increase
in vaccinations in the week following the announcement of that,
and we believe that, in the two weeks following, there were an
extra 50,000 to 80,000 vaccinations given.
Now, you asked a question about particular communities and
do they work differently in different communities, and I wish
we knew more about that. One thing that we're pioneering in
Philadelphia, where I co-designed the Philadelphia Vax
sweepstakes, is a kind of lottery incentive that's actually
focused on communities where there are low vaccination rates.
So, we are running a citywide sweepstakes, but we are
giving half of the prizes in each round, in each drawing, to a
particular ZIP Code that's under vaccinated. And I think we
should be doing more to target those under vaccinated
communities.
A nice thing about lottery incentives is that they draw
tremendous media attention. We think that's part of why they're
so effective. People get very excited. There's vivid stories,
which is important. We just talked about the importance of
stories. You have vivid stories now of winners, happy stories
that people like to hear about.
And so, I strongly encourage more communities to think
about doing localized incentive programs.
Ms. Waters. Well, thank you. This----
Dr. Adams. And, ma'am, work sites. Incentives at work sites
are key, working with businesses. People spend more of their
waking hours at work than what they do at home.
Ms. Waters. Uh-huh.
Dr. Adams. And the people are going back to work.
Active is a company, an electronics manufacturer, that's
working with Texas on the border to vaccinate people on both
sides.
Again, it's important that--and I encourage the committee
and I put in my written testimony that you all should work with
businesses, the Department of Labor, and SBA to encourage and
empower work sites to offer incentives and onsite vaccinations.
Ms. Waters. Now, you may be the wrong experts to ask about
this, but, of course, I was at the BET Awards this past
weekend, and I was looking at Lil Baby and Rapsody and these
rappers and how thrilled young people were with them, the young
people that they have around the stages screaming.
What about that? Entertainment, athletes, rappers, do you
think they could be helpful, you know, in helping us to get
certain groups of people out?
What do you think, Dr. Benjamin?
Dr. Benjamin. Absolutely. The right messenger is very
important.
And I can tell you what we've learned, you know, from our
tobacco work, our anti-tobacco work, is that peer-to-peer
education is very important, so getting young people to talk to
other young people and getting them well-educated.
You know, just up the road here in Maryland, my colleagues
at the University of Maryland have barbers that are talking to
folks in the community. You know, lots of stuff gets talked
about in the barber shop while you're in that chair.
And we did it through a--you know, when I was here in D.C.
as a health officer, we used lay barbers and others to educate
the community about a range of health threats. And we believe
this would be effective.
A dean at the University of--in New Orleans at Tulane also
has a barber program, a community program. It turns out it
works.
Ms. Waters. Well, thank you so very much. Like I said, I
know we've all been preaching and talking, so we've got to be
creative. We've got to come up with some new ways by which to
do it.
Thank you very much for being here today. Thank you all.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much, Chairlady Waters.
The next--do we have anyone present on the Republican side
for the next question?
Ms. Velazquez, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing, important to the communities that I
represent, communities of color and underserved communities.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for being here.
So, recently, I introduced the Building COVID-19 Vaccine
Confidence Act of 2021, which directs the CDC to fund grants to
local health departments and nonprofit organizations to conduct
outreach to combat vaccine hesitancy, especially in communities
of color.
Dr. Benjamin, what are the top three recommendations to
create a successful, culturally competent, multichannel,
targeted vaccine campaign?
Dr. Benjamin. So, I think the first thing is to make sure
that you engage the community as part of your design. It is
important that we not go in and think that we know what the
community needs or what the community thinks. I think that's
the first thing.
Second, make sure that the--you know, that we make it
convenient for people to get their vaccine. And that's
extremely important. And that----
Ms. Velazquez. So that means opening up vaccine sites where
they are.
Dr. Benjamin. It means the sites where they are, it means
getting them rides, but also, again, asking them what they
need.
Ms. Velazquez. Sure.
Dr. Benjamin. When we were trying to do lots of education
around infant mortality, it turns out that pregnant women
wanted to--needed a place that was safe that they could simply
do their laundry. We would've never thought about that. But,
you know, just creating a welcoming environment for people to
do things that they want to do.
And I think the third thing, of course, is that, if you're
going to use incentives, that those incentives are focused.
Now, I would like to argue that the most important incentive is
that you don't get real sick and die. But people are not good
at thinking about risk, but they do respond to targeted
incentives that they find valuable.
Ms. Velazquez. Right.
Dr. Benjamin. And it doesn't have to be a lot of----
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
And, Dr. Benjamin, reports suggest that there may be a need
for a booster shot. A New York Times article from May raised
public skepticism over the COVID-19 vaccine's efficacy, and,
just a few days ago, The New York Times indicated the vaccine
could lead to years of protection.
So how do we educate the public on the facts and address
these concerns?
Dr. Benjamin. Yes. One of the challenges is that we're
doing science in real-time. In the old days, we would all go
into a back room, we'd spend several years exchanging
newspapers and articles, and debate amongst ourselves, and then
we'd come out and tell the public what we thought our consensus
was. That's now occurring in the public, and so the public is
hearing the scientific debate.
I think it's important that, as we communicate that stuff,
that we tell people that, first of all, we don't know if we
need boosters yet. We might. There may be certain populations
that need boosters and not others. It may be that if you got a
particular vaccine from a different platform, you know, mRNA
versus the adenovirus ones, et cetera, with different
efficacies. It may be that if we mix and match these vaccines
you get better coverage and maybe the booster may be different.
The answer is, we don't know. We need to tell the public we
don't know--tell them everything we know but tell them also
what we don't know. And then, as we know more, we should do
that.
By the way, I know that they're working on creating
boosters, but we're not there yet.
Let me say one final thing, is that, you know, the variants
are going to drive that booster discussion probably more than
anything else.
Ms. Velazquez. Right. Yes.
Dr. Benjamin. The story that we saw in the paper the other
day, I think they were talking about assuming that the strain
that we are protected from stays stagnant. If we get something
that is much more virulent and escapes the vaccine, then we
will clearly need a booster down the line.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
And, Dr. Milkman, a recent poll found that more than half
of unvaccinated Americans preferred to get a vaccine from the
doctor's office instead of a pharmacy or a vaccinationsite.
So, what can be done to reach vaccine-hesitant individuals
who may not have a local doctor, such as individuals
experiencing homelessness or undocumented individuals?
Ms. Milkman. Yes. That's a fantastic question. And I think
one of the things I'm most encouraged by is the fact that there
are opportunities to do, sort of, door-to-door--and that can
also be, you know, going to shelters and so on--outreach and
have physicians who are willing to travel and have those
conversations in that setting. Even if it's not your physician,
knowing that it is a doctor you're talking to and having that
conversation face-to-face can be very important.
And so, I think we need to be looking to tactics along
those lines, rather than expecting people to come into
pharmacies and request vaccines. The more we can go to the
community and bring the information and expertise to them, the
better.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much for yielding back.
Now, I am told that Mrs. Maloney is on her way. I don't
know if she's in the hearing room yet. Is she?
She is not.
I will ask the witnesses to bear with us as we observe a
five-minute recess. We will recess for five minutes to give
members time to get back from this vote.
[Recess.]
Chairman Clyburn. Let me thank the witnesses for their
indulgence.
And I understand that Mrs. Maloney has returned and let me
now recognize Chairlady Carolyn Maloney for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership.
I am very concerned about the lagging vaccinations and the
rates of the vaccinations in younger Americans. According to
the CDC, just half of Americans between the ages of 18 and 39
have received one or more doses of the vaccine, compared to
more than 85 percent of Americans age 65 and older.
Ms. Bush, I really admire that you have been so outspoken
on this issue. What message do you have for young Americans who
have yet to get vaccinated?
Ms. Bush. Thank you very much, Representative.
I think it's incredibly important for us to acknowledge the
facts and then also acknowledge how we feel about them.
We are seeing that overall COVID cases are dropping, but
only among the vaccinated. And the rates of infection,
hospitalization, and death among the unvaccinated remain
unchanged since January of this year. And we know that more and
more young people have contracted COVID, and we know that it is
not just adults. COVID-19 is among the top 10 pediatric killers
currently.
So, this does matter for all of us; this does matter for
young people. And I understand that there is an air of
invincibility at times, especially because in the initial
stages of the outbreak of the pandemic we thought that this was
something that mostly affected older Americans. That's simply
not true.
And especially for young people, who have so much of their
lives ahead of them, who have dreams that they're building on
and academic careers to pursue, so much of that is magic,
frankly, because it happens in person, because of who we meet,
who we fall in love with, where we wind up working, and I don't
want young people to lose those opportunities.
And Representative Waters asked how entertainers and
rappers and activists and athletes can play a part. What I
would encourage any young person watching to think about today
is how many of us you know through a screen or through a sport
who you've seen get vaccinated, and our bodies are literally
our jobs.
When I watched Megan Rapinoe and Sue Bird not only go get
vaccinated in Seattle but volunteer at a vaccine site, I knew
that that would be meaningful to young people, to see icons,
professional athletes, whose bodies are their business, whose
bodies have to run like gladiators, go out and get a vaccine to
protect themselves and also their families.
And so, my hope is that, if you're a little less interested
in politics than most of us in this room, that perhaps the
people who you look up to, the athletes and the entertainers,
et cetera, who you know don't really have anything to do
generally with what's happening in these rooms, believe in
medical science, believe in the innovation, understand that, as
we look at a global number of over--3 billion?--of over 3
billion vaccines that have been administered, we're doing
great.
This will save lives, and, in particular, it will allow
young people to get back to the futures that they're pursuing.
Dr. Adams. Congresswoman Maloney, if I may jump in really
quickly. This is Dr. Adams.
One of the points I made in my written testimony was that
the Department of Education should support school-based
vaccination clinics. And that will especially help with our
sports teams.
When you look at Jon Rahm--when you look at Chris Paul, who
missed an NBA playoff game; Jon Rahm, who lost millions of
dollars because he had to drop out of a golf tournament; when
you look at the NC State baseball team, there are numerous
examples of people whose lives were harmed by the social
consequences of not getting vaccinated as opposed to the health
consequences.
And young people, in many cases, aren't going to be scared
into getting the vaccine by the health harms, but we need to
help them understand how getting vaccinated will help them get
their lives back to normal. When they go back to school, some
of them in just a few weeks, they won't have to quarantine if
they're exposed to someone. They won't have to wear masks, in
most cases, if they've been vaccinated. It's important to show
the benefits that actually matter to that group of people.
Mrs. Maloney. Reclaiming my time, as I only have a very
limited amount of time, I wanted to ask a question about my
home state of New York.
In my home state of New York, we've offered 50 full-ride
scholarships to any New York state public college or university
to people under the age of 18 who get vaccinated. We also
offered lottery scratch-off tickets with a grand prize of $5
million to those 18 and older and free baseball tickets, among
other incentives.
Dr. Milkman, what strategies should we be using to increase
vaccination rates among younger Americans and anyone else?
Dr. Milkman?
Ms. Milkman. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
I think it's wonderful what New York is doing. I think,
actually, it's fantastic to see these kinds of incentives that,
in particular, appeal to young people.
I think, in addition to college scholarships, we could
think about, are there ways that we can particularly target
young people? And Congresswoman Waters earlier mentioned
celebrities. There are lots of things that we could offer in
lotteries besides just scholarships that might be even more
exciting to young Americans.
And I think there's an opportunity to try to get artists
engaged, you know, free concert tickets or an opportunity to
meet your favorite musician for lunch. Those are the kinds of
things that we could consider also putting on offer in
lotteries as prizes that might particularly appeal to young
people. And having the kinds of events that were mentioned in
Seattle, where sports icons come out and you could go meet them
and get your vaccine.
So, I think the more we can engage with artists and
entertainers and get them involved, the better we'll do.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you, Mrs. Maloney.
I don't know that Congressman Krishnamoorthi has returned.
I understand he may be on the way, but I don't want to hold our
witnesses any longer than we need to. So, if the ranking member
is not here for his closing statement, I'm going to proceed to
my closing statement. And I will interrupt myself if Mr.
Krishnamoorthi were to return.
So, before we close, I would like to enter into the record
21 letters the select subcommittee has received in recent days
from organizations representing healthcare providers and
advocates. I won't read off the names of all 21 organizations,
but each of these groups has written to emphasize the critical
importance of overcoming vaccine hesitancy so that we can
increase vaccinations across the country and contain this
deadly virus.
I'm going to ask unanimous consent that these letters be
entered into the official hearing record. And unless there are
objections, I'm going to order that they be in.
Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Clyburn. In closing, I want to thank Mr. Garza,
Dr. Benjamin, Dr. Milkman, Dr. Adams, and Ms. Bush for
testifying before the select subcommittee today. We appreciate
your personal stories, your expertise, and your leadership.
I would also like to thank the ranking member for his
participation in this effort.
We need to inform all Americans of the truth: Coronavirus
vaccines are safe and effective.
To overcome hesitancy around the country, we must meet the
skeptical where they are. We must enlist community
organizations and trusted community messengers to inform the
groups they represent.
We must also continue working to break down barriers in
vulnerable communities, including technology, transportation,
and language disparities, to reach those who want the vaccine
but are unable to get it.
We must also recognize that there are many unvaccinated
Americans on the fence, not opposed to getting vaccinated but
not eager enough to have done so already. We can learn from
those states who have come up with smart ways, such as
lotteries, free giveaways, sweepstakes, and other incentives,
to increase uptake among those who need extra encouragement.
The American public is still at risk. The more that the
coronavirus continues to circulate, both in the United States
and globally, the greater the risk that deadlier, more
contagious, and vaccine-resistant variants could emerge. To
lower this risk and to end the pandemic once and for all, it is
crucial to get as many people vaccinated as quickly as
possible.
We need to continue developing and implementing innovative
solutions to encourage everyone to receive their vaccinations.
I look forward to working with all of you on this panel, with
my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, and with the Biden
administration to do so.
But before I close this hearing, I wish to recognize
Representative Krishnamoorthi for five minutes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Chair Clyburn. Can you hear
me?
Chairman Clyburn. Yes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I wanted to just ask the panel a couple
questions. And I'm sorry I'm running back and forth with votes
and press conferences and so forth.
But the question is this, which is: Can any of the
panelists speak to--and I apologize if you covered this before,
but can any of the panelists speak to what has been effective
in encouraging people who are hesitant about taking the vaccine
to do so now?
And the more specific that you can be in terms of any
examples of what has worked, I would be most grateful.
Ms. Milkman. I'd be happy to take this one for a moment and
then turn it over to others.
Some of the key things that we've seen that do work are
lotteries. Lotteries are working. There was a 28-percent
increase in vaccination among those 16 and up in Ohio after the
announcement of the Ohio Vax-a-Million and an estimated 50,000
to 80,000 additional doses delivered in the two weeks after
that lottery was announced.
We know that people also respond to large incentives,
payments on an order of magnitude of $100, though there is some
risk that small incentives can actually backfire by signaling,
``We have to pay you; it must be risky to take this vaccine,''
which is inaccurate, but an inference people make. So large
incentives work.
And people are also very motivated by reductions in
restrictions, like not having to wear masks anymore. That means
a lot to a lot of people.
Another thing that works very well are mandates, even
though they're unpopular for good reason. However, we know that
when there is a mandate it's highly effective. And 500 colleges
and universities are mandating that people be vaccinated when
they come back to campus in the fall. That's going to make a
huge difference. And larger numbers would help, especially
given that we know there are low vaccination rates among the
young. And so that's another strategy we could think about
encouraging.
And employers can also impose mandates. And I think we
should be looking at whether or not there are ways to encourage
more employers to do that, given the huge impact it has and the
externalities of vaccination on your community.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Are there any particular messages,
especially with young people, that seem to work better than
others in getting them to get vaccinated, obviously aside from
saying that you have to do it, from a mandatory vaccination
standpoint?
Ms. Milkman. It's important to hear from people who they
trust and who they respect and admire. There was a discussion
about, you know, musicians, athletes, the kinds of people we
look up to. Young people respond more to that than to hearing
from a politician.
Everyone responds well to hearing from a trusted medical
source. So, if young people have a doctor, they're used to
having conversations with, having those in-depth conversations
can be really powerful, as well as just seeing role models.
But social norms spread, meaning I see my friends doing
something and that makes me much more attracted to doing it.
So, the more we can also convey to young people how many other
young people are making the choice to get vaccinated, make that
really visible on social media, that's going to help as well,
because it will propel more and more. There's a snowball effect
when we see someone else who looks like us doing the thing that
we are contemplating doing.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Would something as simple as having
people who have been vaccinated get online and basically share
that they were vaccinated, would that make a difference?
Ms. Milkman. It should. We know that it makes a difference
in other contexts. When young people see on Facebook a number
of their friends have voted, for instance, it increases their
likelihood of voting. And the closer the social connection, the
bigger the impact.
So, the more visible we can make it when young people vote
and the more, we can ask them to tell their friends,
communicate to their friends, send a message to their friends,
the better.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And has there been something that has
not been done in that vein that should be done? I would imagine
that there's a lot of social media campaigns that involve what
I just referred to, but perhaps I'm wrong about that. But can
you think of other things that need to be done on social media
that haven't been done that would be effective?
Ms. Milkman. Well, one thing that I advocate for--and this
applies to all populations, but young people in particular--is,
I've been advocating for radical convenience, so whatever we
can do to make it feel like the lightest possible lift to get
this vaccine. Like, you wake up, you roll out of bed, and,
boom, it's done.
So, college campuses bringing it to your dorm room, right?
Your friend shows up and escorts you to the vaccine center, and
you already have an appointment, everything's set up for you. I
think that would help a lot with this population, and I don't
think we've done enough of that.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much for your questions.
And thanks, once again, to the panelists who are here
today.
Without objection, all members will have five legislative
days within which to submit additional written questions for
the witnesses to the chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses for their response.
Chairman Clyburn. This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:35 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
