- A HEARING WITH TRUMP WHITE HOUSE CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE COORDINATOR DR. DEBORAH BIRX

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A HEARING WITH TRUMP WHITE HOUSE

CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE COORDINATOR

DR. DEBORAH BIRX

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS CRISIS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 23, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-89

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-928 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Vacancy
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Jennifer Gaspar, SSCC Staff Director
Beth Mueller, Chief Counsel
Yusra Abdelmeguid, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Crisis

James E. Clyburn, South Carolina, Chairman
Maxine Waters, California            Steve Scalise, Louisiana, Ranking
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York             Minority Member
Nydia M. Velazquez, New York         Jim Jordan, Ohio
Bill Foster, Illinois                Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Nicole Malliotakis, New York
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 23, 2022....................................     1

Witness

Deborah L. Birx, M.D., Former White House Coronavirus Response
Coordinator (Mar. 2020 - Jan. 2021)
Oral Statement...................................................     5

Written opening statements and the written statement of the
witness are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* August 11 email Dr. Birx sent to CDC, Director of the FDA
Commissioner, and Dr. Fauci; submitted by Rep. Maloney.

* Staff report, ``The Atlas Dogma: The Trump Administration's
Embrace of a Dangerous and Discredited Herd Immunity Via Mass
Infection Strategy,'' June 2022; submitted by Rep. Raskin.

* Questions for the Record: to Dr. Birx; submitted by Rep.
Maloney.

* Questions for the Record: to Dr. Birx; submitted by Rep.
Waters.

Documents entered into the record for this hearing are available
at: docs.house.gov.

A HEARING WITH TRUMP WHITE HOUSE

CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE COORDINATOR

DR. DEBORAH BIRX

----------

Thursday, June 23, 2022

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis
Washington, D.C.

The select subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09
a.m., in room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building and via Zoom;
the Hon. James Clyburn [Chairman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Clyburn, Maloney, Foster, Raskin,
Krishnamoorthi, Scalise, Jordan, Malliotakis, and Miller-Meeks.
Chairman Clyburn. Good morning. The committee will come to
order. Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time. I now recognize myself for
an opening statement.
As President Biden declared earlier this year in his State
of the Union address, the coronavirus, and I quote, ``need no
longer control our lives,'' end of quote. We have been able to
move beyond the crisis phase of the pandemic in large part
because of the powerful protection from severe illness and
death provided by coronavirus vaccines, which now are
authorized for all Americans over six months old. I applaud the
scientists who developed these lifesaving vaccines, and I
applaud the Biden-Harris Administration for distributing them
throughout the country effectively, efficiently, and equitably.
I urge all Americans who are not currently up to date on their
coronavirus vaccinations to get vaccinated and boosted in
accordance with the current recommendations.
Even as we move beyond the coronavirus crisis, scientists
tell us that there will eventually be another pandemic caused
by another new pathogen. That is why we must learn from our
experiences with this coronavirus crisis so that we can save as
many lives as possible the next time we are confronted with
such a deadly public health threat.
That is the objective of the select subcommittee as we
continue to investigate our Nation's response to the
coronavirus pandemic, with a particular focus on the period
when the American people were most vulnerable to severe
illnesses and deaths.
Our investigations have found that the Trump administration
engaged in a rampant campaign of political interference in the
pandemic response: minimizing, undermining, and eventually even
suppressing the work of scientists and public health experts in
a misguided and dangerous attempt to advance the President's
political goals.
Our witness here today, Dr. Deborah Birx, has firsthand
knowledge of the failures of the previous Administration's
pandemic response from her tenure as coordinator of the White
House Coronavirus Task Force. This is her first time testifying
at any congressional hearing about her experience in that role.
Based on what she observed, Dr. Birx has estimated that
more than 130,000 lives could have been saved if the Trump
administration had implemented optimal mitigation measures in
2020 and early 2021.
The Trump administration's failures began early in the
crisis and persisted for the remainder of their term in office.
The Administration failed to take basic steps to acquire
critical supplies, develop tests, and prepare for the growing
threat in the early months of 2020, leaving our country
woefully underprepared.
The President failed to share accurate medical information
with the American people, instead spreading dangerous
misinformation as we will now see on video.
[Video plays.]
Chairman Clyburn. Consistent with these dangerously
inaccurate statements, President Trump and his advisers
sidelined public health experts and sound science in favor of
discredited strategies that they believed served his political
goals. As detailed in a report released by the select
subcommittee earlier this week, senior Trump administration
officials embraced a dangerous herd immunity via mass infection
strategy that Dr. Birx has described, as I quote, ``a true
threat to a comprehensive and critical response to this
pandemic,'' end of quote.
President Trump ignored warnings from top scientists
throughout 2020, including from Dr. Birx when she anticipated
that the Nation would be entering, and another quote, ``most
concerning'' phase of the pandemic in late 2020. Instead of
taking lifesaving action to mitigate surging cases, President
Trump prioritized his re-election campaign and the Big Lie,
leading to the deadliest period of the pandemic to date.
President Trump's contempt for science and his persistent
attacks on public health experts have had a lasting harmful
impact on our country, undermining many Americans' trust in
public health officials and institutions, and contributing to
the continued politicization of public health. This damage has
resulted in far too many coronavirus deaths, including deaths
that could have been prevented through vaccinations. Many
preventable deaths have been disproportionately concentrated
among those who trusted the former President.
We cannot bring those Americans back, nor the more than
130,000 who Dr. Birx estimates lost their lives before vaccines
as a result of the previous Administration's failures. But we
must learn all we can about these failures so that we can
properly prepare for future threats. Dr. Birx, we look forward
to hearing from you today in furtherance of this critical work.
I now recognize the Ranking Member Scalise for his opening
statement.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
welcome Dr. Birx, and I appreciate you being here. I would also
like to thank you for your four decades of service to our
country, including 29 years in the United States Army.
Like Groundhog Day, my Democratic colleagues will use
today's hearing to continue their political vendetta against
the former Trump administration while continuing to mask the
many failures that have occurred with respect to COVID-19 under
the Biden administration.
It is our job to perform congressional oversight over the
Administration. That is why Republicans on this subcommittee
have focused on serious issues like the CDC's school reopening
guidance and the emails that prove the Biden administration
colluded with union bosses to keep millions of American
children locked out of their classrooms. We now know that the
social isolation and school closures caused by the COVID
lockdowns resulted in serious mental health issues and dramatic
learning loss for millions of American kids.
The last time I tried to talk about this incredibly
important issue, Mr. Chairman, you had urged me not to look
backward, stating, quote, ``I would hope we won't spend all our
time today talking about yesterday. I am concerned about
tomorrow and the day after.'' He went on to say, ``All of us
can spend the rest of our lives talking about what happened
before COVID-19 or we can spend a little time trying to figure
out how best to move forward from whatever mistakes may have
been made, whoever may have made them, or we can spend all of
our time assigning blame.''
Yet here we are today, having yet another hearing with the
witness to discuss things that happened more than two years
ago, while working for the former President. No hearings with
Biden's first COVID-19 response coordinator and Dr. Birx's
immediate successor, Jeff Zeints. No hearings with President
Biden's current coordinator, Dr. Ashish Jha. And, of course, no
hearings in more than year with President Biden's chief medical
advisor, Dr. Fauci. In fact, now marks 434 days since Dr. Fauci
has testified before any House committee, any House committee.
Why are they hiding Dr. Fauci, and why has it been 434 days
since Dr. Fauci has testified before a committee?
We have asked for him. In fact, one of the last hearings,
we asked him to be our witness on the Republican side, and he
told us he would like to have come and be a witness but that
the Chairman and the Biden administration would not extend him
that invitation. So, we will continue to ask, Mr. Chairman,
that you extend Dr. Fauci that invitation, and we would ask the
Biden administration to allow him to come testify, not to keep
him hidden for over a year now from any House committee.
Of course, I welcome Dr. Birx's testimony today, but I
would be remiss if I did not point out the irony of those past
statements, talking about the past. It is noteworthy that this
subcommittee would focus on the events of years ago while
denying our ability to address the failures of the Biden
administration that are still going on to this day. More
Americans died from COVID during President Biden's first year
in office than President Trump's, even though multiple vaccines
were available when President Biden came into office. And we
are currently dealing with the serious impact COVID lockdown
policies have had on millions of our young children. I am
worried the effects will last for years to come on those kids,
jeopardizing their future ability to achieve their dreams.
We need a proper investigation into the origins of COVID.
Obviously, Mr. Chairman, you are well aware we have been asking
for a hearing on the origins of COVID for well over a year now,
and we will continue to. And it begs the question, why the
select subcommittee refuses to hold a hearing on the origins
when the World Health Organization and now a growing list of
leading experts in the scientific community all deem this
worthy of investigation.
Dr. Jeffrey Sachs of Columbia University, who himself
thinks that this virus came from a lab, said, quote, ``a
blunder of biotech, not a natural spillover.'' And now it is
being reported that Dr. Tedros--yes, the head of the World
Health Organization--is quietly confiding to officials that he
believes this pandemic originated in a lab in China. I wonder
if Dr. Sachs and Dr. Tedros, to use the Chairman's own words,
are, quote, ``using the issue of the origin of the virus to
shift accountability from President Trump to Dr. Anthony
Fauci,'' as we were accused of doing when we started asking for
hearing into the origins of COVID. Well, now you see these
leading health experts also questioning whether COVID started
in the Wuhan lab. We should have that hearing.
More than 1 million Americans have died from COVID. We
should understand how this virus started, not only because we
owe it to those that have died but also to protect against
future pandemics. China was doing risky research in a lab that
likely caused this pandemic. Did China lie to the world about
the virus and how it spread? These are questions we should
absolutely know the answer to.
To that end, I know Dr. Birx has told us before that the
origins of the virus are detectable if China would be willing
to share the earliest sequences of the virus. And Dr. Birx has
previously testified or said in earlier statements from
scientists, scientific publications, and the media that
downplaying the lab leak were premature and not based on data.
I am glad we will get the opportunity to hear what she has to
say about China's involvement and how the U.S. and the rest of
the world were misled by China and the World Health
Organization back in those early days.
I also look forward to hearing Dr. Birx's suggestions for
reforming the CDC. Over the course of the pandemic, Americans
have lost trust in what once was a premier public health
organization. Their failures must be confronted in order for
that trust to be restored.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I am happy to yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much, Mr. Scalise.
Dr. Birx, welcome to the select subcommittee. Thank you for
taking the time to testify. Please rise and raise your right
hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you, God?
[Witness is sworn.]
Chairman Clyburn. You may be seated. Let the record show
that the witness answered in the affirmative. Without
objection, your written statement will be made part of the
record.
Dr. Birx, you are recognized for five minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. DEBORAH BIRX, FORMER TRUMP WHITE HOUSE
CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE COORDINATOR

Dr. Birx. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member
Scalise. I really appreciate the time of the committee and your
brilliant staff, who have been working on this issue for more
than two years. It is important that we look at both what works
and what did not work and address those issues in real-time to
save American lives.
If I could have the first slide. Thank you very much.
What we are still missing in the COVID response, and that
is lessons learned from battling pandemics around the globe.
What I learned as a military doctor and a public servant in
working on pandemics around the globe that is an American
response really required bipartisan support. PEPFAR had
bipartisan support across Presidents and across these
committees, ensuring funding over the years, and that is how
you have an impact. You have an impact when our two sides of
the aisle work together effectively to make a change.
I also learned that plans are great, but they must adapt
and continually change based on the data. Tools are great, but
they are only great if we use them effectively. So, as we
continue to develop new tools, we constantly need to be setting
clear goals and utilizing data in real-time to ensure that we
are achieving those goals across all of America, both urban and
rural areas.
Data in real-time allows us to see who we are reaching and
who we are not reaching. Implementation science is core to
program improvement. Behavioral science research is core to
understanding the structural barriers, whether it is vaccine
hesitancy or whether it is hesitancy to attest and to treat
strategy. Listening, planning and funding of peer community
outreach organizations and community leadership is critical.
The next slide shows the progress that we made by using
data in real-time against the HIV pandemic. We increased our
data utilization beginning in 2014, and in the countries with
the highest incidence and prevalence of HIV, both Eswatini and
Lesotho effectively had more than a 50 percent and a 46 percent
decline in new infections when you use data and work with
communities in real--time.
Next slide.
So, we have to move from hope and sometimes magical
thinking to the reality that we have the tools today, between
our antivirals, our monoclonal antibodies, and our vaccines, to
save lives. But first, we have to ensure that all Americans can
survive. As shown in this graphic, those over 70 remain
persistently the highest group of hospitalizations, at the
highest rate, despite being the highest vaccinated and boosted
component of the United States.
Next slide.
Simple conclusions do not address the complex issues that
we are facing in America today, and I am going to go quickly
through these slides to prove that in rural America. Rural
America is older, poorer, has higher comorbidities, less access
to primary care, less access to subspecialty care, less access
to high-technology care, and a higher death rate from all
causes of mortality dating back decades.
Next slide, please.
This slide shows that urban areas are enriched for young
people who have much less significant complications from COVID,
and the rural areas are enriched for older Americans.
Next slide.
The level of childhood poverty is marked across rural areas
of nine states and up through Appalachia as well as our tribal
nations.
Next slide.
Levels of obesity are concentrated along our Appalachian,
our Southern states, and up into our tribal nations.
Next slide.
This shows accessibility to trauma, whether it is Level 1
or Level 2 trauma. Now that is just a surrogate for the
sophistication of hospitalization and access to subspecialty
care. In Mississippi, there is one Level 1 trauma. In the New
York City area, there are 22. If you look at the map, the light
blue areas illustrate that there is no access to either Level 1
or Level 2 trauma by helicopter or by ambulance within that
golden hour of 60 minutes.
Next slide.
This slide shows, in the orange and the darker orange
categories, compared to the blue, the all-cause, age-adjusted
fatalities in the United States. I used 2014 to show that
people in rural counties have been dying at a higher rate in
the United States for more than a decade. This is an emergency
that has been pointed out by this current issue of coronavirus.
And finally, with the last slide, hospitalization rates,
and deaths continue in a very high level, both through 2020 and
2021. In fact, the summer surge of 2021 was about 40 percent
more deadly than the summer surge of 2020.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Clyburn. Well, thank you very much, Dr. Birx.
Each member will now have five minutes for questions, and
the chair now recognizes himself for five minutes.
Dr. Birx, you were interviewed by the select subcommittee
last October about your role in the Trump administration's
pandemic response. During that interview, you were asked
whether President Trump had done--and here is the quote--
``everything he could to try to mitigate the spread of the
virus and save lives during the pandemic.'' You responded,
``No.''
What should President Trump have done differently?
Dr. Birx. Thank you, Chairman Clyburn. So, when you do not
have tools, when you do not have vaccines, you do not have
antivirals, you do not have knowledge of effective treatment,
the most important thing you have in a pandemic early on is
communication, and clear and concise and repetitive
communication about the seriousness of this virus.
I think, from the very beginning, putting this and
utilizing a syndromic flu approach, and creating the sense
among the American people that this would act and basically
have the fatalities equivalent to flu, created a sense among
the American people that this was not going to be a serious
pandemic, and that continued communication of underplaying the
seriousness of this pandemic, that we could already see
evidence of high fatality rates, from China into Asia and then
early into Europe, that that concise, consistent communication
about the seriousness of the pandemic resulted in inaction
early on, I think across our agencies, but also created a false
sense of security in America where we used words, and it was
not just the President. Many of our leaders were using words
like ``we can contain'' and you cannot contain a virus that
cannot be seen, and it was not being seen because we were not
testing.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much. You also told us
that the consequences of President Trump's failure in that
regard were devastating, and you estimated that 130,000 lives
were lost unnecessarily. Am I correct about that?
Dr. Birx. Yes, Mr. Chairman, and as I write in my witness
statement, we continue to lose American lives at a rate that I
find completely unacceptable. I think we still are not
effectively communicating the effects of this, both antivirals
of vaccines. We are not effectively working within rural
communities to improve their health care and improve their
access and decrease their structural barriers. Many of our
rural physicians, when you say to people, ``Go talk to your
primary doctor,'' and they do not have one, and they have been
receiving care from emergency rooms 150 miles away, that is not
a program. That is not a program that is reaching every
American.
And so, yes, I was concerned and did everything I could to
combat the issues in 2020, but I remain concerned today, and
that is why I appreciate the committee continuing to be
concerned about our coronavirus response.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much for that. You know,
one of the things that I have been advocating for, for years,
ever since I have been here--well, before I got here--community
health centers, and trying to place one within commuting
distance of everybody in this country in rural America, as you
indicated in your statement. People have been dying and getting
sick without treatment for decades, and it seems that every
time we fashion a response, we talk as if people are living
right down the street from a drugstore or around the corner
from a doctor, and we do not seem to take into account the full
composition of this great country of ours.
And I thank you so much because we just finished
celebrating a new national holiday that came about because of
the failure to communicate. Because of the failure to
communicate, thousands of enslaved folks remained in slavery
for 2 1/2 years because nobody communicated with them. I think
that communication is, in fact, the key in so many things, and
thank you so much for your ability and willingness to
communicate.
I yield the ranking member for questions.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Birx, when were
you the Coronavirus Response Coordinator?
Dr. Birx. I came on board on March 2 and left, I think, on
the 18th or 19th of January, 2021.
Mr. Scalise. Yes, so March 2020 to January 2021. Gotcha. We
have had these conservations with some other witnesses,
including Dr. Fauci over a year ago when he had come before,
about herd immunity. I know Mr. Jordan has asked him, you know,
what herd immunity is. He would not even define herd immunity.
Was there ever an attempt to look at a herd immunity strategy
when you were the coordinator?
Dr. Birx. Certainly, there were individuals who discussed
the fact that infections should be allowed to run through the
population in those who are not vulnerable while protecting the
vulnerable. But as many other Americans, I live in a
multigenerational household, and so of the 35 million Americans
that we just discussed, over 70, that are vulnerable still to
severe disease, even some of which have been vaccinated and
boosted, that when you have community spread you cannot protect
those 35 million Americans who live in multigenerational
households. Only 1.5 million Americans live in long-term care
facilities. And so whatever strategy we have has to speak to
all of Americans.
Mr. Scalise. Yes, and we have even had hearings early off
on the nursing home scandal, where you saw some Governors
follow proper scientific guidance to protect seniors in nursing
homes, and then you saw others, starting with Governor Cuomo at
the time in New York, and unfortunately, other Governors
followed, where they said you have to leave the hospital and go
back to the nursing home, and actually banned them from
testing. Did you see that, and were you concerned about that
when it was happening? Because we saw thousands of people die
from that failed strategy.
Dr. Birx. You know, as I was assembling the data, and I
think--and hopefully in the written testimony, it is clear--
what made American vulnerable was the lack of data streams on
just common diseases. We were not testing for flu. So, as the
U.S. Congress has supported me to bring advanced medical care
and diagnostic capacity to the far reaches at the end of the
road in Sub-Saharan Africa, I returned to a country that had
less access than what I created in Sub-Saharan Africa, less
access to routine medical care, less access to testing.
Mr. Scalise. And obviously, we worked to ramp up testing.
When President Biden took office, would you say there was a
robust testing plan and apparatus in place to hand over to
President Biden?
Dr. Birx. I think there were two components of that. We
were up to about 1.3 million PCR tests a day.
Mr. Scalise. And growing, right?
Dr. Birx. And growing. We had put aside half a billion
dollars, nearly, to increase 20 Federal surge sites, and left
that for the incoming Administration to execute those sites.
Mr. Scalise. And let me ask you. Were in the Administration
when there were reports that President Biden was presented with
a more robust testing plan and turned it down over a year ago?
We have never had a hearing on that. We have tried to. But were
you working with the Administration when that plan was
presented that was turned down by President Biden?
Dr. Birx. No. I knew, unfortunately, that my 40-year
government career would come to a terminal event if I went into
the Trump White House. And let me make it clear----
Mr. Scalise. No. I'm talking about the Biden White House.
Dr. Birx. Yes. So, I was gone by the time President Biden
came to office.
Mr. Scalise. All right. Well, let me ask you this because
you said in your comments earlier, your submitted testimony,
quote, ``We learned from Governors in Arizona, Texas, New
Mexico, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida about
data-driven mitigation to decrease community spread while
opening retail and outdoor dining.'' We have seen many people,
from President Biden on down to some of my Democratic
colleagues here in Congress, criticize some of those very
Governors on the strategies they took early off that turned out
to be very effective. Do you think that was a healthy thing to
do, to be criticizing Governors who were using that data to
protect the vulnerable citizens while allowing kids to be back
in school, for example, and other people to be able to go on
with their lives without all of the devastating consequences we
saw from shutdowns?
Dr. Birx. I think we were very fortunate to be able to work
with a group of scientists at CHOP, in Philadelphia, David
Rubin and his team, who modeled for me, what mitigations could
be taken while maintaining as much of society open as possible.
Mr. Scalise. And I know I am running out of time. Do you
think it is healthy when the Biden administration is
criticizing some of those Governors that you yourself said did
things well, before they actually----
Dr. Birx. The Governors proactively looked at the models
and agreed to institute them. We were able to get data that
showed the impact of that model in decreasing--in real life, in
population-level health--in decreasing new inflections.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Ms.
Maloney for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Dr. Birx, earlier this week, the Select
Committee released a report on how the Trump White House
embraced a dangerous and discredited herd immunity via mass
infection strategy, pushed by Dr. Scott Atlas, President
Trump's special advisor on the pandemic. We recently obtained--
actually, just yesterday--additional documents that shed
further light on how Dr. Atlas', I would call radical views,
enabled President Trump to prioritize his political prospects,
his own election, over America's health.
Mr. Chairman, I ask for unanimous consent to place in the
record this August 11 email Dr. Birx sent to the CDC, Director
of the FDA Commissioner, and Dr. Fauci.
Chairman Clyburn. Without objection.
Mrs. Maloney. And it is up on various places for people to
see.
So, Dr. Birx, in this email, you wrote that there was a,
quote, ``dangerous meeting in the Oval Office,'' end quote,
yesterday. Briefly, what was the meeting you were referring to,
and why did you find it so, quote, ``dangerous''?
Dr. Birx. So, my access to the President was quite limited
after mid-April, I would say, and so I was called to a meeting
that was going to be on vaccine and vaccine development. Dr.
Atlas was there. I was there. We were in the middle of a summer
surge. I was very concerned about what was happening. Of
course, I was out in the field and collecting data, both in
real-time but also on the ground. And I went to this meeting,
and essentially Dr. Atlas put forward--I used that opportunity
to inform the President about the depth and breadth of the
viral spread across the South, the rising hospitalizations, and
what would follow would be rising deaths, and what could be
done, and what I was encouraging the Southern Governors to do
and what they were doing.
And Dr. Atlas took that opportunity to make the point that
it did not matter what you did, each of these surges would be
identical. It did not matter if you tested. In fact, testing
young people, and asking them to isolate while they were
infectious, was an infringement of their rights and was
equivalent to a lockdown.
So, these kinds of thoughts, particularly in any infectious
disease, are dangerous. We never encouraged individuals who are
infected with a contagious virus, no matter how that virus is
spread, to go out and spread that virus to others. That is a
basic principle of public health.
And so, I used that opportunity to do my best to push back
on his views. Obviously, he became very agitated. But I wanted
to make sure that----
Mrs. Maloney. Reclaiming my time because I want to put on
record what you actually wrote. And you wrote that Dr. Atlas
displayed, quote, ``a very different take on the epidemic,''
end quote, your words, and then you listed seven of his core
beliefs. For instance, you wrote that Dr. Atlas felt, quote,
``No matter what we do, the outcome will be the same. In other
words, in most places, the virus has already run its course.
There is enough herd immunity to protect the rest of the
population,'' end quote.
In other words, Dr. Atlas was suggesting that the Nation
should stop taking any steps to mitigate the spread of the
virus and let it run rampant throughout our communities. And
you also wrote that Dr. Atlas believed that, quote, ``case
identification is bad for the President's re-election,'' in a
health conversation, putting re-election over solid health.
Dr. Birx, was it your impression that decisions related to
identifying coronavirus cases in the U.S. and otherwise testing
were being made around political considerations?
Dr. Birx. I was never privy to those kinds of political
conversations because, obviously, I was not----
Mrs. Maloney. Well, you just quoted that case
identification is bad for the President's re-election. That is
an election statement.
Dr. Birx. Exactly, and that is what I wanted the other
physicians to know what was being said, because I knew that was
going to make more work for us in working with Governors and
mayors and communities to ensure that we could keep people as
safe as possible.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, did you agree with Dr. Atlas' diagnosis
that you should stop testing because an election is coming?
Dr. Birx. Of course not.
Mrs. Maloney. And, in fact, you sent the email to Dr.
Fauci, Dr. Redfield, and Dr. Hahn, you wrote, quote, ``The
conclusion was Dr. Atlas is brilliant, and the President will
be following his guidance now,'' end quote.
So Dr. Birx, what impact did Dr. Atlas' dangerous views
have on President Trump's pandemic response? My time is up.
Chairman Clyburn. You will have a second round, so you may
hold onto that question.
Mrs. Maloney. OK.
Chairman Clyburn. The chair now recognizes Mr. Jordan for
five minutes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Birx, why should Americans believe anything the
government says about COVID? I mean, last summer, President
Biden said this. Quote, ``You are not going to get COVID if you
have these vaccinations. If you are vaccinated, you are not
going to be hospitalized. You are not going to be in the ICU.''
Dr. Birx, can vaccinated people get COVID?
Dr. Birx. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. Have vaccinated people been hospitalized with
COVID?
Dr. Birx. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. And according to your testimony, it was not
just President Biden who said things that were not accurate and
were not true. In your testimony that you provided the
committee, you said, ``Beginning in 2021,''--so beginning in
the Biden administration, again, these are your words--
``agencies provided muddled and contradicting information, or
partial information, that implied we knew something we didn't,
which they later had to correct, which accelerated the loss of
respect and trust in the Federal Government.''
I will come back to my original question. Why should we
believe anything the government tells us about COVID?
Dr. Birx. Well, to be honest, that is why I wrote the book,
and that is why I believe that this is a moment in time where
we can increase accountability and transparency and provide
that data and information in real-time to the American people,
so they are empowered with the knowledge that they need to
protect themselves and their families.
We knew, early on, in January 2021, in late December 2020,
that reinfection was occurring after natural infection. Once
you see that--and I want to make it clear to you all and to
anyone that is listening--this is not measles, mumps, and
rubella. Those vaccines produce long-term immunity and can
create herd immunity.
Mr. Jordan. I just want to interrupt for a second, Dr.
Birx. You said something important. You said in early 2021,
January 2021, you knew that people who had been vaccinated
could be reinfected.
Dr. Birx. I knew that people who were naturally infected
were getting reinfected, and that was quite evident from South
Africa, and I have included it in my slides. But I think the
reason I knew that is South Africa did a remarkably good job in
measuring baseline antibody with their first surge. So, they
knew 50, 60, 70 percent of some of their population had been
infected.
Mr. Jordan. Well, here is what I am concerned with.
Dr. Birx. And then were reinfected.
Mr. Jordan. Here is what I am concerned with. Let me ask
the question this way. When the government told us, told the
American people, that people who had been vaccinated could not
get it, were they guessing or were they lying?
Dr. Birx. I don't know. All I know is there was evidence
from the global pandemic that natural reinfection was
occurring, and since the vaccine was based on natural immunity,
you cannot make the conclusion that the vaccine will do better
than natural infection, although it can often do slightly
better.
Mr. Jordan. I mean, you are an expert. You were on the task
force. You were part of this effort when you were in the
previous Administration. And you are saying in this
Administration that you cannot rule out the fact that our
government was lying to us when they told us the vaccinated
could not get the virus.
Dr. Birx. I do not know about their discussions that they
had in the task force, so I cannot tell you that. I can tell
you, as a family member who had individuals that were
susceptible, of course, we got everybody vaccinated. But we
still used layered protection during surges because I knew
potentially the vaccine immunity would wane like natural
immunity waned. There was evidence that every four months,
reinfection was occurring in South Africa.
Mr. Jordan. Wow. When the government told us that the
vaccinated could not transmit it, was that a lie or was that a
guess, or is it the same answer?
Dr. Birx. I think it was hope that the vaccine would work
in that way, and that is why I think scientists and public
health leaders always have to be at the table, being very clear
about what we know and what we do not know.
Mr. Jordan. But this is important for the country to know.
So, when I asked the question, when the government told us that
the vaccinated could not get it, and I asked you if it was a
guess or a lie, you said you do not know. You said you think it
was hope. So, what we do know is it was not the truth. So, they
were either guessing, lying, or hoping and communicating that
information to the citizens of this country.
Dr. Birx. I think they were hoping, but you should know, in
those original Phase III trials that were done in this country,
that we only measured for symptomatic disease. So, we were not
proactively testing everybody in those trials to see if they
got infected with mild or asymptomatic disease. And so, people
had to present within the clinical trial.
Mr. Jordan. I am just----
Dr. Birx. So, we never had the data that it was going to
protect against asymptomatic infection.
Mr. Jordan. I am just struck with the irony. We have got
government agencies guessing, hoping, or lying with the
information they are presenting to the American people, and
this is the same Administration that wants to set up the
Disinformation Governance Board and wants to talk about
misinformation. They are the biggest purveyors of
misinformation, false information, hopeful information, but not
accurate and true information, which is, again, the frustration
I think so many of the folks that I get the privilege of
representing have shared with me.
When the government downplayed natural immunity, was that a
guess or a lie?
Dr. Birx. We are only beginning to--OK, these are
complicated answers, so I am going to try to be very brief.
Once you are infected, you are putting immune pressure on that
virus. We know viruses always mutate, and they mutate to escape
something, like immune pressure, virologic pressure, and that
is why you always have to be looking for evidence of
reinfection so you can understand what epitopes on the virus
are under extensive immune pressure so that you can map that
and design next-generation vaccines and next-generation
therapeutics. You would like to find epitopes that are
constant, that the virus cannot mutate from, or it loses its
ability to actually infect and replicate.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Dr. Birx. Mr. Chairman, I just think
this is amazing that our government, guessing, hoping, or
lying, one of those. But what we do know is they were not
telling us the truth, were not telling the American people the
truth, and it started right with the President of the United
States, just 11 months ago, when he told us something that was
absolutely false.
With that, I will yield back and look forward to a second
round.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you for yielding back. That is
amazing that the President of the United States just started
lying 11 months ago.
With that, the chair yields five minutes to Mr. Foster.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Dr. Birx,
for our service and your talent trying to talk sense to
politicians who think that they know the answer when the truth
is complicated. You know, trying to explain immune escape to
someone who comes into the discussion imagining that they
understand it and, in fact, they are just looking for a viral
soundbite must be frustrating, and thank you for putting up
with that.
You know, as fellow scientists, I know we are both very
data-oriented, and we rely on accurate and complete data to
make informed decisions on our work. So, as a scientist myself,
I really appreciate how important it was to have at least one
person in the room with a scientific approach, particularly in
the early days of the pandemic.
You recently wrote that when you joined the White House in
March 2020, the country was, quote, ``dangerous behind the 8-
ball when it came to data collection.'' You recounted that data
collection issues impeded the task force's ability to, quote,
``understand the scope, scale, and spread of COVID-19 in or
near real-time'' and that the United States had only, quote,
``a static, partial, 30,000-foot awareness of the virus.''
So, in what ways were the efforts to collect and analyze
data from the emerging coronavirus threat dangerously behind?
Dr. Birx. A whole series of reasons. One the belief that
you could track viral infections diseases, particularly
respiratory disease, by following syndromes. That was our
pandemic preparedness. We believed that we could track viruses
through the eyes of people who were infected that had symptoms.
That is always dangerous because we have always known there are
asymptomatic viruses and asymptomatic spread, and not everybody
has magically the same symptoms.
And so when you base your entire surveillance on syndromic,
which we had, through your work and your funding, changed Sub-
Saharan Africa, which did the same thing for fever in the
2000's, but because of your investment, we were diagnosing, no
matter where you lived, HIV, TB, and malaria. If we had been
diagnosing RSV, flu, and parainfluenza, we would have had the
lab capacity at every single clinic and every single hospital,
no matter if they were community hospitals or large throughput
hospitals, we would have been able to diagnose flu, and we
would have seen that there was a circulating virus that did not
match and any of those laboratory diagnoses, and we would have
seen it coming.
Because the CDC believed that they could track syndromes,
that is why they made tests only for the public health
laboratories because we only test about 0.001 percent of the
flu cases to just confirm the strain and its relationship to
the vaccine. And that is done in public health laboratories.
And so, I think from the very beginning, CDC believed this
could be tracked through symptoms only and did not prepare for
an asymptomatic community spread or develop the data and the
infrastructure to track that.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. You know, I am struck that, let's
see, I guess in the United States, we are sequencing only 0.36
percent of the confirmed coronavirus cases, and Denmark was
sequencing more than half of them. And so I am just really
distressed at how far behind our country has been in just the
collection and genomic sequencing alone, and I hope that is on
everyone's list of lessons learned.
Are those likely to be general-purpose capabilities that
will be useful if the next pandemic is a bacteria or a fungus,
and so on? Are there really universal things, or are we going
to need subspecialized ones for every potential pandemic?
Dr. Birx. No, and this really gets to the work of the
committee. So tomorrow, if CMS required that, and community-
acquired infectious diseases were definitively diagnosed, we
would know precisely who was infected where, with what, and we
could combat it with advanced tools. We would have better
antivirals. We would have much better local sequencing. All of
these things cascade when you require.
It would be like me in Africa, saying to a patient, ``I
think you have HIV,'' and treating them for HIV, which we have
done for flu for the last four decades. That is unacceptable in
the 21st century. We need to make sure that it is unacceptable,
and we need to move funding from investments that we are making
into these investments that are absolutely required.
Sequencing is critical, and it allows you to see
transmission trends, and that is why I can tell you today, and
that is why I went out with the warning for the Southern
states, B-4 and B-5 was evident in South Africa. Multiple times
now, we have seen that strain move from South Africa, where
they are doing sequencing, to Europe, where they are doing
sequencing, and arriving in the United States. It is
predictable. It is understood. And we are not utilizing that
information to act in real-time to combat hospitalizations and
death through testing, proactive testing of people over 70, and
providing, proactively, Paxlovid.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Dr.
Miller-Meeks for five minutes.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. First, I would like to thank you, Dr.
Birx, for your service and for coming before the committee to
testify today. Like you, as a physician, as a former director
of the State Department of Public Health, I am very concerned
about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the lockdown, and
school closures that have had on adults and children, but like
other members here I am also concerned about the loss of trust
in our institutions that are so valuable.
And I think that instead of having a committee hearing that
is geared to trying to lay blame at the feet of one
Administration, we have ongoing mistakes in response to COVID-
19, and all of those have to be examined, given my time in the
military, having an after-action report so that we know what we
did well, what we did not do well, how we could have better-
geared testing so that we learn from this because there will be
another pandemic, and we do not know if it will be 15 years
between COVID-19 and H1N1 or if it will be more rapid than
that, and if it will be overseas or if will come here to our
shores.
Early in the pandemic, there was a lot of focus on limiting
people's interaction with others, which was appropriate.
However, by the summer of 2020, I would argue that the risks of
keeping schools closed and how to reopen them as safely as
possible was, in fact, known, and in Europe and the
Scandinavian countries, this was already being done. However,
many Democrat-led states, and blue states, kept their schools
closed, and the Biden administration listened to the American
Federation of Teachers, causing, to me, irreparable harm to our
students' mental, physical, and emotional health. And we have
seen this in reports, in suicides as young as nine years of
age.
In fact, in February 2021, the New York Times found that 86
percent of pediatric disease experts recommended in-person
schooling, regardless of vaccination status, and in our State
of Iowa, we opened schools to in-person learning in August
2020, without significant repercussions of spread.
Can you speak to the unintended consequences, mental health
consequences, of lockdowns and school closures, especially in
our younger students?
Dr. Birx. Let me make two comments quickly. We knew, in
July 2020, the already impact of just having the schools closed
March, April, May when the head of SAMHSA came to the task
force and presented the data about a rapid increase in suicidal
ideation. I sent that to the CDC after she told me that the CDC
was not utilizing that guidance and would not include it into
the school guidance. So, I wrote to Dr. Redfield and said, ``I
really think your team should look at this and at least include
it in the introduction so that school boards and family members
can make informed decisions about the whole child.''
Second, we had universities--and I just want to thank
presidents of universities who planned through the summer and
used that time to create an effective plan to reopen. They
understood that they were institutions of higher education,
that their students could learn how to protect one another. And
those universities that opened, that trusted their students,
that worked on a comprehensive plan, opened successfully, and
all of them stayed open successfully except for the North
Carolina system.
They did that through active testing and making
interventions and tools available. But most critically--and I
think you do this in your opening--they made the knowledge
available to students in real-time about what was happening on
their college campus so they could change their behaviors as
necessary. And that is still not being done today at a local
level to really make sure that every American knows what is
happening in their community and how to mitigate against the
virus.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Correct, and I would say more
information is always better rather than trying to censor
information that we do not particularly like. And as a
physician, I was very forthright in my concern that there would
be unintended excess deaths from our lockdowns and our,
closures and missing routine screens.
Dr. Birx, how much money does the U.S. donate to the WHO
annually?
Dr. Birx. Oh, I do not know. There are the direct
assessments, and then there is the additional funding that we
provide through a whole series of agencies.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. It is $500 million. And when did you
first suspect human-to-human transmission of COVID-19?
Dr. Birx. In January, when I saw the social reports coming
out of China.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. And when did WHO confirm human-to-human
transmission?
Dr. Birx. Not until the middle to late January.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So, they wasted some time. Did they
parrot the Chinese propaganda, continuing that there was no
human-to-human transmission?
Dr. Birx. You know, what was unfortunate to me is we all
experienced the SARS outbreak, and there was a level of
transparency and integration of WHO personnel into China. And
so we have to investigate why that did not work.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. So, would you say that the WHO got this
wrong?
Dr. Birx. I think very early on, when people should have
been preparing, and certainly I was preparing Africa for a very
significant pandemic----
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Did you advise President Trump to
withdraw from the WHO?
Dr. Birx. No.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Mr.
Raskin for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this
important hearing. Dr. Birx, it is a pleasure to see you. I
want to thank you first for your service in the White House,
operating in the face of a lot of propaganda and a lot of
obfuscation from people who wanted to tell the public
essentially don't trust the scientists, don't trust the
government, just trust Donald Trump and whatever comes out of
his mouth.
The subcommittee has obtained an August 21, 2020, email
that you sent to senior doctors on the White House Coronavirus
Task Force, about Dr. Scott Atlas, who was a Fox news
commentator with no background in the field of infectious
disease, who was hired somewhat covertly as President Trump's
pandemic advisor, in July 2020. In this email, excerpted here,
you wrote to Dr. Fauci, the CDC director, and the FDA
commissioner to warn of the, quote, ``dangers of Dr. Atlas'
views on the pandemic.'' You said, quote, ``I don't see the
President so I don't have a counterbalance opportunity to this
Atlas dogma.''
What was the ``Atlas dogma'' you were referring to, and why
did you think it was so dangerous for America?
Dr. Birx. Remember, at that time we did not have a vaccine.
We were still ramping testing. So, at that time we did not
really have tools to save American lives except for redeliver
and some breakthroughs in proning. And so Dr. Atlas' view was
anybody who was not going to have severe disease should be
allowed to become infected.
I do believe that he thought that there was long-term
protection from reinfection, but we did not know that. And it
was a team. It was not just Dr. Atlas. There was a team of
physicians and PhDs who strongly believed that the virus was
innocent to the majority of the American people, and somehow
you could magically separate the 50 or 60 million vulnerable
Americans from that infection at a high level.
Mr. Raskin. Which you have emphasized is really impossible.
This is the way we live and----
Dr. Birx. I believe it is impossible, without mitigation.
Mr. Raskin. Yes.
Dr. Birx. You could mitigate and it is possible, yes.
Mr. Raskin. And that is following public health advice and
strategies and so on. And the idea that the only vulnerable
people are the ones living in nursing homes is ridiculous, is
it not?
Dr. Birx. Correct.
Mr. Raskin. I mean, how many people live in those homes,
like 2 million?
Dr. Birx. 1.5 million.
Mr. Raskin. So, the idea that those are the only vulnerable
people in the country is just absurd.
So, you led the Federal coronavirus response throughout
your time in the White House. You saw the effects of the
policies and strategies that Dr. Atlas aggressively promoted,
even during the surge in late 2020, when death counts were
reaching record highs, hospitals were full and overflowing, and
vaccines were not yet widely available.
Do you have any doubt that Dr. Atlas' tenure in the White
House undermined America's coronavirus response and jeopardized
public health?
Dr. Birx. Absolutely. It did two things. One, it created
the sense that if Debbie, Bob, Tony, and Steve are saying this,
and Scott Atlas and these PhDs are saying that, then no one is
right and no one really knows. So, it created a sense that
anything could be right and nothing was absolutely right.
And I think, at that time, we had enough data, and we were
working with Governors, and what it did is it just maybe shift
my strategy from this was going to be--not that I gave up on
pushing back on Scott Atlas, and you can see I did
continuously, but I went directly to the Governors and the IGA
staff, Intergovernmental Affairs. And the communications team
allowed me to directly communicate to local media and to get
out and meet with Governors and mayors and counterbalance this
approach.
Mr. Raskin. Would you agree with me, Doctor, that a
critical ingredient to a successful public health strategy is
social cohesion? And if that is the case, did the bringing of
Dr. Atlas to the White House undermine and work to destroy the
social cohesion that is necessary for a successful public
health strategy?
Dr. Birx. Well, it certainly destroyed any cohesion in the
response in the White House itself, and I think that then
became the ability to unravel the response, state by state. I
think we did as good a job as possible at preventing that at
the state level. I could not with Florida because he got there
before I knew he was going.
Mr. Raskin. Yes, but if cohesion was destroyed in the White
House, could there be any cohesion in the country?
Dr. Birx. It makes it much more difficult. But I want to be
clear. Governors did an extraordinary job. Both Republican
Governors and Democratic Governors I worked with were focused
on the health and welfare of their constituencies.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you for your service and testimony. I
yield back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
The chair now concludes the first round with the recognition of
Mr. Krishnamoorthi for five minutes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Hello. Thank you so much, Chair
Clyburn, and thank you to Dr. Birx.
On April 23, 2020, during a briefing, then-President Trump
said, ``I see that disinfectant knocks out the virus in a
minute, one minute, and is there a way we can do something like
that by injection inside, or almost a cleaning?'' Do you
remember that moment when he said that, Dr. Birx?
Dr. Birx. Vividly.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And I think to people--I am sorry, the
ABC, you said, regarding President Trump's statements about
injecting disinfectant, you said, quote, ``I just wanted it to
be the Twilight Zone and all go away. I mean, I just--I could
just see everything unraveling in that moment.''
What do you mean by that?
Dr. Birx. We had, I thought, developed pretty strong
consensus throughout the White House that resulted in use of
data and science to drive our response, resulting in the 15
days to slow the spread, the 30 days to slow the spread, and
the carefully selected reopening criteria. And I could see in
that moment--and again, he was speaking to the DHS scientist,
and just to make clear how far this went off the rails, we had
DHS scientists study disinfectant versus sunlight, so that
children could get out to playgrounds. That was the sole reason
that study was done because most playgrounds were closed across
the country. I wanted them open so children could be outside. I
thought that was critically important. We knew that every
parent knew what Lysol and Clorox was, and so we thought if we
compared sunlight and its ability to inactivate the virus, a
disinfectant, mayors and parents would be confident about their
children going out.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me jump in for a second because
actually, in that same press conference on April 23, he said,
``So, supposing we hit the body with a tremendous, whether it's
ultraviolet or just a very powerful light.'' I think you said,
``That hasn't been checked because of the testing,'' referring
to Dr. Bryant at DHS. And then I said, meaning Trump,
``Supposing you brought the light inside the body, which you
can do either through the skin or some other way,'' and I think
you said you were going to test that too.
Dr. Birx, what other similar, crazy suggestions did
President Trump make in private with regard to treating COVID?
Dr. Birx. I just want to be clear because I am not sure it
was crystal clear in that dialog. The dialog that you are
presenting is the dialog that was occurring between President
Trump and the DHS scientist.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Correct.
Dr. Birx. That dialog went on for quite some time. The
scientist was encouraging him and saying, ``We have not looked
at that. We will look at that,'' and then finally he turned to
me and I said, ``Not a treatment.''
I think this illustrates clearly that people were
communicating with the President dangerous ideas, whether it
was hydroxychloroquine, whether it was hydroxychloroquine
combined with azithromycin, which we know has an impact on the
heart. These were coming into the White House on a daily basis
from different individuals, and I was not there for the
majority of those times.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me reclaim my time, Dr. Birx. I
appreciate that, but let me just ask you this. Did anyone
besides you question these particular treatments within
internal discussions?
Dr. Birx. Well, I was not present when that Oval Office
meeting occurred between Dr. Bryant and the President prior to
that press conference. There were no physicians in that room at
the time, and I do not know who was. I know that the physicians
on the task force continuously pushed back on misinformation
about treatments, in the task force.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand. You estimated that more
than 130,000 American lives could have been saved after the
first wave of the pandemic if President Trump had implemented
proven mitigation measures. Is that not right?
Dr. Birx. Through that first year of the pandemic, correct.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And Dr. Birx, is it accurate to say
that President Trump's approach, his poor approach, is
responsible for the deaths of over 100,000 Americans?
Dr. Birx. I want to make it clear that I think our starting
strategy should always be no American dies from COVID and no
American has severe hospitalizations from COVID. And when you
start with that zero, as we did with HIV, zero new infections,
zero deaths, you drive programming to uncover structural
barriers, and you make the changes that are needed on the
ground to implement tools effectively.
I think that we were not doing that effectively in that
first year, mostly related to communication, and I fear today
that we are still not effectively using our tools across all of
America, particularly in rural America.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much. That concludes our
first round of questions, and to begin the second round the
chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
Dr. Birx, I want to begin by asking a question. When we
saw, in the clips up there, President Trump saying that the
virus would just go away, was that a hope or a lie?
Dr. Birx. I don't know. I can't speak to what he was
thinking. I think a lot of these statements that are made
concerning the virus often reflect people's hopeful thinking.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much. I would like to ask
you about the statement that you made to our staff. During your
interview with the select subcommittee staff you said that
during the fall of 2020, the Trump White House officials spent
time campaigning instead of at the White House and that this
focus--and I am quoting you here--``took people's time away
from, and distracted them away from the pandemic,'' end of
quote.
What did you observe to lead you to that conclusion?
Dr. Birx. We had assembled the data and analyses that I
believed, and I believe to this day, really pointed out where a
virus was and where it was not, and where we need to apply our
mitigation efforts. Normally I could find people to have those
discussions about what was not going optimally, either in the
task force meetings or in direct communications in the
hallways. It was very difficult, throughout the summer and the
fall of 2020, to find those individuals. That is not to say
that I stopped for one minute interacting with Governors and
mayors and being on the road, but it is another reason why I
went on the road, to ensure the messages were getting out
despite the fact that the White House was distracted about its
re-election.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you. I think we have all been
noticing, with the current hearings taking place through the
January 6th Committee, that even after the election White House
officials were engaged in the President's efforts to overturn
the will of the voters.
Dr. Birx, you recently wrote, and I am quoting here,
``Aggrieved over the election results, some in the West Wing
appeared willing to engage in a dereliction of duty.'' What did
you mean by that?
Dr. Birx. So I optimistically, throughout September and
October, had created a fall strategy for full implementation.
Of course, I wanted to start it earlier, but I believed, and I
was given reason to believe that after the election that
strategy would be utilized to combat the surge that I knew was
coming to the United States throughout that fall and winter of
2020, into 2021.
That strategy was never fully executed in all of its robust
and comprehensive approach because the teams were never brought
back together, or that strategy, what I thought was endorsed by
the West Wing, was never executed. I believe it is because they
were distracted by the post-election issues.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very much.
The chair will recognize Mr. Jordan for five minutes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Doctor, should the
United States be in the World Health Organization?
Dr. Birx. The United States should both be part of the
World Health Organization but working with all the member
states to create the necessary reforms that are required.
Mr. Jordan. Did you support leaving the World Health
Organization during the Trump administration?
Dr. Birx. No.
Mr. Jordan. OK. I'm looking at Dr. Giroir's transcript from
his deposition. He said, ``I can tell you from the task force,
it surprised me, but Dr. Birx was one of the leading advocates
for pulling out of the WHO.'' So, was he stating something that
was not true there?
Dr. Birx. There was a difference between withholding
funding versus pulling out of the WHO.
Mr. Jordan. Oh, well, let's ask it that way. Should we be
giving them, like what, $500 million a year, I think is what we
do? Should we be giving them American tax dollars to this
organization that lied to us?
Dr. Birx. I was supportive of withholding funding based on
the development of the appropriate reform and to figure out
precisely what happened during January. Because a week at the
beginning of----
Mr. Jordan. Well, we are back in it. Have they done the
reforms that you were supportive of having them do before we
gave them the American people's hard-earned tax money?
Dr. Birx. I was supportive of reform.
Mr. Jordan. So, you are comfortable now with the Biden
decision to get back into the World Health Organization and pay
the money, or not?
Dr. Birx. I am no longer in government.
Mr. Jordan. No, I am just asking.
Dr. Birx. I believe that we should have a clear
accountability and milestone associated with the funding that
we give to the WHO out of our assessment.
Mr. Jordan. And I am asking you if that the case now.
Dr. Birx. I believe that we should do our assessment. It is
the dollars above and beyond the assessment, which I think is
about 80 percent of the dollars, that we should hold directly
to required performance.
Mr. Jordan. OK. We will take that. I disagree with 80
percent of the money that is going there from the United
States.
How about gain-of-function research? Should that be
allowed?
Dr. Birx. I don't know all the details of gain-of-function
research. I think the decision has been made, with certain
countries we do not do gain-of-function research.
Mr. Jordan. So, definitely limit it with certain countries.
Should the American tax dollars be used to fund gain-of-
function research?
Dr. Birx. Well that is a very big blanket statement, and it
is difficult. I mean, there are----
Mr. Jordan. Well, there has been legislation introduced in
the U.S. Congress to say that it should not happen. Some people
even--we have got some doctors who are members of the U.S.
Congress who are saying that we should not fund it at all. It
is just way too darn dangerous. And particularly in light of we
have seen with this pandemic over the last two years I tend to
share those views. I am just asking, do you think we should not
have American tax dollars funding gain-of-function research.
Dr. Birx. The trouble is there are Class 4 agents that we
work with that are very deadly, that we have worked for years
to try to improve countermeasures. That is not solely done
within the United States, and obviously that would be part of
gain-of-function because you are making changes to the virus to
work on countermeasures to control those viruses.
And so I would hate for our ability to utilize the great
minds of science in allied countries.
Mr. Jordan. How about the more basic question. Should we be
sending American tax dollars to labs in China to do any kind of
research?
Dr. Birx. There are critical investigations that we have
supported in partnership with China, from HIV, and to really
work on controlling the pandemic in Asia through our work with
epidemiologists, and CDC in China.
Mr. Jordan. So you support----
Dr. Birx. I think it was----
Mr. Jordan [continuing]. Sending American tax money to
China to do essentially gain-of-function research or other
research.
Dr. Birx. Not gain-of-function research.
Mr. Jordan. Not gain-of-function research. So, we should
definitely not do that. That is one place you will draw the
line.
Dr. Birx. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. No tax dollars going to China to do gain-of-
function research.
Dr. Birx. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. But I think that is what happened in this
situation. I think that is what happened at this lab in Wuhan.
It was actually gain-of-function research. I believe it came
from the lab. The idea that it was, you know, a bat to a
pangolin to a hippopotamus, to people, whatever they say, I
just do not buy that. But, I mean, who knows.
The last thing I would say is this. In your testimony, you
said, being critical of the Biden administration, you said,
``They shouldn't base decisions about pandemic response on
polling.'' I mean, one of the things we hear from the other
side is, ``Oh, the Republicans are interested in the
politics.'' Well, actually, it is just the opposite. Typical
thing--Democrats always accuse us of what they are doing. They
are basing it on polling, that people who trust the science are
the ones who trust the science. Joe Biden is the one who said
if you have these vaccinations, you are not going to get COVID.
That is just a flat-out lie. And according to your testimony,
the government already knew that was not the case, but he made
the statement anyway.
So, we support the science, not the polling, not the lies,
not trust the government, as the Democrats always want to do.
We actually want to trust the science and the facts and the
data versus trusting the government.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I am over time. Thank you. I yield
back.
Dr. Birx. Mr. Chairman, just to clarify, what I said was we
did not know at that time whether the vaccines would provide
that protection or not.
Mr. Jordan. Well, actually, I think what you said is I
asked you the question when the government told us that the
vaccinated could not get the virus, I asked you if that was a
guess or a lie, and you said, ``I don't know.'' That is what
you told us.
Dr. Birx. I don't know.
Mr. Jordan. And then Joe Biden told us last summer--he said
that at the start of calendar year 2021, and this is July 2021,
so seven months later, where the President of the United States
says, ``If you have the vaccinations, you are not going to get
COVID.'' Totally false statement. That is what you said the
first round of your testimony.
Dr. Birx. Just to be very clear, there is a period of time
that we believe, after immunization and after boosting, that
people do have protection from infection. That does want,
though, and wanes rapidly.
Mr. Jordan. Have people who got the vaccine gotten COVID,
Dr. Birx?
Dr. Birx. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. Yes.
Chairman Clyburn. I think all of us remember that debate
very well, and I think we all were following the scientists
when they continued their research and came to the conclusion
that we could.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Raskin for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you. The January 6
Committee has determined that Donald Trump has knowingly,
deliberately lied--it is obvious from all of the evidence--
about who won the Presidential election. So, that just seems
irrefutable to me. He continues to lie about who won the
Presidential election. So, Mr. Jordan's line of questioning
makes me wonder when he was out talking fake medical cures,
like hydroxychloroquine or injecting yourself with bleach, were
these knowing lies, or was this expression of a hope?
Dr. Birx. I don't know. My only speculation is that there
were people, including physicians, telling the President that
these items would work outside the White House.
Mr. Raskin. Physicians outside of the White House. People
would write to him or call him up. What about when he would
say, ``It is going to disappear,'' by Easter, or it is going to
disappear. Was that based on any advice you were giving him or
any of the scientists within the White House or the CDC?
Dr. Birx. No. Even with that first surge, that estimate of
100,000 to 240,000 Americans lost, that was only that first
surge. We had not even modeled out what was going to happen in
the summer or the fall.
Mr. Raskin. So, do you have any idea where that came from,
the idea that it was just going to disappear on its own?
Dr. Birx. No. I think there were individuals communicating
with the White House. I think Dr. Atlas was one of them who
believed that if you infected enough people that you would have
herd immunity. There was no evidence--in fact, there was
evidence to the contrary--that there was potential----
Mr. Raskin. I got you. So, you basically had the equivalent
of ``team normal'' on the election, on the inside, like you,
and then people from the outside who were feeding him lies and
superstition, and that is what he wanted to go with. He wanted
to run with that.
Look, you did warn, on November 1, 2020, that we are
entering the most deadly phase of this pandemic. You were
extremely concerned at that point. You called for much more
aggressive action by the Administration. But you just testified
a moment ago that the President failed to act on it because
they were interested in the politics of trying to, well, win
the election first, but then overthrow, subvert the election,
describe themselves as the winners.
One of the things that has come out in the January 6
hearings is the idea that Trump knew that he would get more
voters showing up on Election Day because he was telling them
not to use mail-in balloting, his supporters. He was telling
them to go and vote. And he knew that he would lose very badly
in the mail-in balloting.
Do you think that there is any connection between these two
things, that he wanted to listen to the people who were telling
him, like Dr. Atlas, just to let COVID-19 run wild because that
would then increase the number of votes and presumably his
margin on Election Day, because as they thought, the Democrats
were not willing to go and vote in person because they were
afraid of COVID and they would use mail-in balloting?
Dr. Birx. I was not part of any of those discussions. I
have no idea. I know, within the task force itself, that was
never discussed.
Mr. Raskin. Well, why do you think they did not follow your
advice, as the lead COVID-19 advisor, to take much more
aggressive action to avoid the most deadly phase of the
pandemic yet, and they acted as if you had never even written
that.
Dr. Birx. I think that they believed the counterfactual
points that were never supported by data, from Dr. Atlas and
his team.
Mr. Raskin. Is this the period when you think we lost so
many people--I think you have estimated more than 130,000
people--or is that cumulative of the irresponsibility of the
entire response?
Dr. Birx. That is cumulative for those 11 months. Well,
actually 12. Well, from January 2020 through January 2021.
Mr. Raskin. Well, we have lost more than 1 million
Americans, and had the scientific advice been heeded by the
Administration how many people might we have saved?
Dr. Birx. Well, that is where the 130,000 comes from. But I
want to make it clear to this committee that we have lost
175,000 Americans since January 2021.
Mr. Raskin. Yes.
Dr. Birx. We have to----
Mr. Raskin. And that is just what you were warning about.
That is what you were warning about in the memo, right? You
were saying it is coming, we need to act now.
Dr. Birx. Yes. But we are still losing Americans today at,
I find, a very unacceptable rate, when we have the tools to
prevent it.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you so much for your service, and I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Foster for five minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Since the beginning of
the pandemic I have pushed for greater flexibility and speed in
the way that we research and authorize treatments, as free as
possible from political interference and based on a thorough,
rational, yet as prompt as possible analysis of the risks and
benefits.
Dr. Birx, you wrote in your written statement that
emergency use authorizations helped streamline the regular
process for evaluating potential coronavirus treatments, and
unfortunately we also saw that President Trump and members of
his Administration abused this process by pressuring FDA
scientists to authorize EUAs for things that were unproven and
turned out to be ineffective.
What are the tools that you would like to see to rapidly
knock down claims of treatments that turn out to be
ineffective, at the same time maximizing the speed at which we
identify ones that are truly effective, both for in-hospital
and on an outpatient basis?
Dr. Birx. What was frustrating to me is we learned how to
deal with this with HIV. And what the NIH did is they moved
research money into the community. Because when you do
community-centered trials with new agents, and you create that
community advisory board, you bring everyone in the community
up to that shared knowledge. And they also can bring products
forward that they think are warranted to be tested. And so
there is a dialog, a partnership, between the scientists and
the communities.
I think right now, in the next budget, what would be very
appropriate is we have 20 percent of Americans living in rural
areas. We are failing in rural areas, and I think we all can
admit that. We are failing for general population-based
diseases but also specifically COVID. We should move 20 percent
of the research dollars to research in our rural areas, to
really create that partnership between communities and
physicians, and actually retain physicians and nurse
practitioners in our rural areas, because they will be able to
do groundbreaking and critical research that will save their
communities.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. I remember sort of halfway through
the whole sequence there was a very interesting set of clinical
trials that caught my attention, one out of St. Louis
University, that were outpatient trials, very simple ones,
where you tested positive, you went back home to isolate,
someone knocked on your door and deposited a bag of treatments
or placebos. You took them, you called in on your cellphone
every day for a couple of weeks. Very simple things that could
easily be implemented in rural areas.
And so it seems like having that capability in place at the
start of this would have been tremendous.
Dr. Birx. And there is still the opportunity to do that. We
can change things overnight with investment of resources and
human capacity, and you change everything. If you are worried
about misinformation in the rural areas you combat that by
working on the ground with communities and community groups.
You want to combat vaccine hesitancy? We should have been doing
that under flu. Instead we just measured it every year. We just
said, you know, Black and brown people in rural areas and white
people in rural areas do not get vaccinated at the same rate,
and we treated it like it was a gas price. You know, it meant
nothing.
It meant everything, and that kind of behavioral science
and partnership between the Federal Government, the local
government, science, and communities is a game-changer. We have
proved that with HIV. We know that as a roadmap that is
effective. The community groups that advocate for HIV and work
among and with communities are enormously successful.
Mr. Foster. You mentioned in your written testimony the
need for next-generation COVID vaccines with enhanced
protection, and you mentioned specifically the need for
intranasal vaccines with durable IgA mucosal immunity. And it
is my impression, in just trying and failing to convince people
to get vaccinated, that there is a big difference between
asking someone to get injected and having something spritzed up
their nose. And did we make a mistake in not putting more
effort into oral vaccines and intranasal vaccines early,
because we did not anticipate the vaccine hesitancy problem?
Dr. Birx. Just like testing. We should have anticipated the
vaccine hesitancy problem because we had clear data going back
30 years that adult vaccine hesitancy existed, and it was
evidence-based in flu. We did have an intranasal flu vaccine
and it was not really studied in behavioral science and
implementation science to show that it was more acceptable.
And so there are simple things that we can do today that do
not cost a lot of money, but engage communities in a real way,
where you develop trust.
Mr. Foster. Thank you again for your service, and I yield
back.
Chairman Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
The chair recognizes Ms. Maloney for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Birx, I asked you earlier about an email you sent in
August 2020. You were describing an Oval Office meeting with
President Trump and Dr. Atlas. You said in that email that Dr.
Atlas told the President, quote, ``No matter what we do, the
outcome will be the same,'' end quote. You also wrote that Dr.
Atlas advised President Trump, quote, ``Testing is very
overrated,'' end quote, and that, quote, ``case identification
is bad for the President's re-election,'' end quote. And you
said that the conclusion of the meeting was, quote, ``Dr. Atlas
is brilliant and the President will be following his guidance
now.''
After that meeting in the fall and winter of 2020, America
experienced some of the deadliest months of the pandemic. We
lost the most lives during that period. Dr. Birx, do you
believe that Dr. Atlas' recommendations, including his focus on
the upcoming election, had an impact on President Trump's
pandemic response?
Dr. Birx. Absolutely, and I believe that went on for months
prior to that meeting.
Mrs. Maloney. How so? How did it have the impact?
Dr. Birx. Because starting in April and May, I felt like
there were parallel streams of data coming into the White House
and parallel analyses that I was not privy to. They would show
up in statements. It was subtle at the beginning, but it was
very clear when the President did the Axios interview that he
was holding up graphs that I had never seen or created. And so
they had to come from someone. Someone had to request them, or
someone was generating them.
And I think it gets back to Mr. Raskin's point that it is
great to have a debate, and it is good to have a scientific
debate, but you have to agree on the data being the data, and
you have to fundamentally move from that place. It is why we
wrote the Governors Reports. We wrote the Governors Reports so
that the Governors and the White House could be exactly in the
same place in interpreting what was happening, county by
county.
And when you no longer agree on what is actually happening
in the country, and what needs to be done, and there is not
consensus on that, then you lose the ability to execute in the
maximum efficient and effective way.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, do you think if the President had
followed your recommendations and your data instead of two sets
of data and responding in a different way to Dr. Atlas'
recommendations, do you think it would have saved lives?
Dr. Birx. Absolutely. And I look forward to all those
emails and reports. I wrote an analysis of the epidemic daily
for over 320 days. It clearly shows that the task force and
everyone in the West Wing was clearly aware of what the
pandemic was doing and the predictions on what would happen,
and the solutions to combat this. Because I had something,
fortunately, that many of the others on the task force did not
have, is I was grounded in working at the community level, to
really understand that it is great to talk from a microphone in
Washington or Atlanta, but you have to see the reality on the
ground so that you can really support the reality on the ground
and enforce the ability to really implement those changes that
would support people thriving and surviving COVID-19.
And I know a lot of people focus on the million dead, and I
will just say this very quickly. Hospitalizations in people
over 70 is not benign. It is not benign. So, let's not just
say--I mean, hundreds of thousands and millions of people above
that million who died have significant what we call morbidities
from being hospitalized. So, this is not a benign illness, and
hospitalizations in someone who is older is not a benign moment
in time. We will still see rising, in other, cardiovascular and
other infectious diseases, in those individuals who have those
prolonged hospitalizations. And I know everybody focuses on the
deaths, but I want to make it clear many more Americans have
suffered really significantly from being hospitalized, and
another whole group still has long COVID.
And so, you know, this is not trivial. This virus is not
trivial and should not just be immediately discarded as we are
doing fine. We are not doing fine yet.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, my time is almost up, but Trump himself
indicated at the time that he wanted less testing. True?
Dr. Birx. Correct.
Mrs. Maloney. And you, at the same time, thought we needed
more testing.
Dr. Birx. Correct.
Mrs. Maloney. And you believe more testing would have saved
lives.
Dr. Birx. Correct.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired. Thank you. Thank you for
your service.
Chairman Clyburn. Thank you very, very much.
I think that we have exhausted our second round.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Clyburn. Yes, and I yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to introduce this excellent staff report called ``The
Atlas Dogma: The Trump Administration's Embrace of a Dangerous
and Discredited Herd Immunity Via Mass Infection Strategy,''
June 2022.
Chairman Clyburn. Without objection.
Chairman Clyburn. As a student of history, I often quote
George Santayana's admonition that those who cannot remember
history are condemned to repeat it. But in order to remember
the past we must first learn what happened. And I want to thank
you, Dr. Birx, for appearing before us today to help us learn
the history of the Trump administration's failed response to
the coronavirus pandemic, so that, hopefully we can avoid any
repetition.
We have learned, and will remember, how the Trump
administration's failures resulted in many thousands of
preventable American deaths. We have learned, and will
remember, how politics was prioritized over science. We have
learned, and hopefully remember, how damaging it is when people
in positions of authority undermine public trust in those like
Dr. Birx, with lifesaving medical expertise.
We cannot change the terrible history of the coronavirus
pandemic but we can remember it so that no future
administration is condemned to repeat the Trump
administration's failed response and its deadly consequences.
With that, and without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witness to the chair, which will be forwarded
to the witness for her response.
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:43 a.m., the select subcommittee was
adjourned.]
