- CYBERSECURITY FOR THE NEW FRONTIER: REFORMING THE FEDERAL INFORMATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT ACT

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY FOR THE NEW FRONTIER:
REFORMING THE FEDERAL INFORMATION
SECURITY MANAGEMENT ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 11, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-59

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-680 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Vacancy
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Emily Burns, Team Lead
Elisa LaNier, Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on January 11, 2022.................................     1

Witnesses

Ms. Jennifer R. Franks, Director of Information Technology and
Cybersecurity, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     8
Mr. Grant Schneider, Senior Director of Cybersecurity Services,
Venable Federal Chief Information Security Officer, Office of
Management and Budget (2018-2020). Senior Director for
Cybersecurity Policy, National Security Council (2017-2020)
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Mr. Ross Nodurft, Executive Director, Alliance for Digital
Innovation Chief, Office of Management and Budget Cybersecurity
Team (2015-2018)
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Ms. Renee Wynn, Chief Executive Officer, RP Wynn Consulting LLC,
Chief Information Officer, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (2015-2020)
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Mr. Gordon Bitko, Senior Vice President of Policy, Public Sector,
Information Technology Industry Council Chief Information
Officer, Federal Bureau of Investigation (2016-2019)
Oral Statement...............................................    15

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

The documents listed below are available at: docs.house.gov.

* Scorecard; submitted by Chairwoman Maloney.

* Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep. Brown.

CYBERSECURITY FOR THE NEW FRONTIER:
REFORMING THE FEDERAL INFORMATION
SECURITY MANAGEMENT ACT

----------

Tuesday, January 11, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and on Zoom; Hon.
Carolyn B. Maloney [chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Lynch, Cooper,
Connolly, Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Mfume, Tlaib, Porter, Brown,
Davis, Wasserman Schultz, Welch, Speier, Kelly, DeSaulnier,
Comer, Foxx, Hice, Grothman, Cloud, Gibbs, Sessions, Keller,
Mace, Franklin, LaTurner, Fallon, and Donalds.
Chairwoman Maloney. I want to start this hearing with an
announcement we just received.
CISA, the FBI, and the National Security Agency are, as we
speak, releasing a new joint cybersecurity advisory on
mitigating Russian state-sponsored cyber threats to U.S.
critical infrastructure. It provides information on 17
vulnerabilities to help organizations reduce the risks
presented by the Russian state-sponsored cyber actors.
I applaud this action and convene today's hearing to
discuss how to reduce these kinds of state-sponsored
cybersecurity risks for the Federal Government, which is so
important to our national security.
[Gavel sounds.]
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today, we are discussing the urgent need to improve the
Federal Government's defenses against cyber attacks. Over the
past year, we have seen devastating cyber attacks against
Federal agencies, state and local governments, and businesses.
These attacks have caused real-world damage like stolen
intellectual property, hundreds of millions of dollars paid in
ransoms, and even shutdowns of critical infrastructure like oil
pipelines.
Many of these attacks were carried out by America's
geopolitical adversaries. Last January, a group of Chinese
hackers unleashed a massive cyber attack that ripped through
computer networks around the globe through Microsoft, a
software. The attack spread to as many as 60,000 U.S.
organizations, including businesses, hospitals, schools, and
city governments, and posed a grave risk to Federal agencies.
According to FBI Director Christopher Wray, economic
espionage from China is ``the greatest long-term threat to our
Nation's information and intellectual property and to our
economic vitality.'' Director Wray has explained that this
information theft amounts to ``one of the largest transfers of
wealth in human history.''
Federal agencies are also still reeling from the SolarWinds
breach in which Russian actors infiltrated and roamed the
networks of at least 9 agencies and 100 private companies for
months. And today, we are dealing with the fallout from the
Log4j software vulnerability, which the Director of CISA, Jen
Easterly, described as the most serious vulnerability she has
seen in her decades-long career.
The mounting attacks by China, Russia, and other bad actors
are constantly changing. They are as dynamic as they are
diabolical. Today, we will be discussing how the Federal
Government can protect itself against these threats.
The Federal Information Security Management Act, commonly
known as FISMA, establishes a cybersecurity framework for the
Federal Government. It is the best defense our Federal
information networks and supply chains have against cyber
attacks, but the reality is that it is simply not enough to
protect us in its current form.
Threats have transformed dramatically since FISMA was last
updated in 2014 and in ways that were unimaginable when the law
was first written 20 years ago. Now it is no longer enough to
guard our networks at their perimeters, as was the focus in the
past. Today, we must also guard within the perimeter,
continuously monitoring for the smallest trace of abnormal
activity that might signal an intruder.
Modernization cannot wait because our adversaries certainly
won't, and we are already woefully behind. Congress must reform
FISMA and create a cutting-edge, whole of government approach
to meet the challenge of the constantly evolving cyber
frontier. That is why today Ranking Member Comer and I are
releasing a discussion draft to modernize FISMA called the
Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2022.
The bill would improve the cybersecurity of Federal
networks through a risk-based approach that uses the most
advanced tools, techniques, and best practices. It would also
clarify and streamline the responsibilities of Federal entities
so that they could respond quickly and decisively to breaches
and major cyber incidents.
By modernizing the law and focusing it on the most
important security outcomes, we can ensure that Federal
agencies are better equipped to combat the evolving threats
they face. Our bill contains key similarities to the companion
legislation in the Senate, which was introduced by our
counterparts, Chairman Gary Peters and Ranking Member Rob
Portman. I applaud their bipartisan leadership on this critical
issue.
Our committee has a strong bipartisan track record of
shining the light on the country's cybersecurity challenges and
fighting to improve Federal information technologies. Last year
alone, we held hearings on ransomware attacks, the SolarWinds
breach, and the hundreds of open recommendations by the
Government Accountability Office to improve cybersecurity in
the Federal Government. Our committee was also instrumental in
creating the role of the National Cyber Director, who serves as
the President's top adviser on cybersecurity and has a crucial
role to play in the FISMA framework.
I also want to recognize our Government Operations
Subcommittee chairman, Mr. Connolly, for his crucial work to
improve Federal IT, including through his seven years of
biannual FITARA hearings. In addition, he has led the charge on
H.R. 21, the FedRAMP Authorization Act, which will enhance
security and modernize cloud computing Government wide. That
bill passed the House on suspension last year, and Chairman
Connolly has my full support in encouraging the Senate to pass
it so it can reach the President's desk as soon as possible.
I want to extent my thanks to the witnesses for being here
today and to Ranking Member Comer for his partnership and
diligence in working on the discussion draft we are releasing
today. We are committed to perfecting the bill together, and I
am confident that today's hearing will help our bipartisan,
bicameral coalition get this priority across the finish line
this year.
I now recognize Mr. Connolly for an opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. Madam Chair, were you recognizing me or the
ranking member?
Chairwoman Maloney. You, first.
Mr. Connolly. Ah, OK. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman,
and thank you for elevating this issue to the full committee
level. It is that important. And frankly, as we learned during
the pandemic, information technology platforms undergird
everything we do, and they have to help the Government deliver
services, be efficient, effective, but also be cybersecure.
Over the past several years, we have witnessed the
consequences of vulnerable cybersecurity infrastructure across
the Federal Government. Poor cyber hygiene leaves sensitive IT
systems and data susceptible to cyber attacks by criminals,
prompting significant disruption and high cost. This hearing
will examine the urgent need to reform FISMA and evolve the
Federal Government's approach to cybersecurity.
Seven years ago, the Office of Personnel Management
suffered a massive data breach that completely disrupted the
operations of OPM and affected more than 20 million Americans,
including contractors, family members, others who had undergone
background checks for Federal employment, as well as Members of
Congress. Since then, cyber incidents have continued to grow in
frequency and sophistication. Fiscal year 2020 alone, Federal
agencies reported more than 30,000 cybersecurity incidents.
The SolarWinds, as you mentioned, Madam Chairwoman, and the
Microsoft Exchange hacks demonstrated the unique patience,
sophistication, and aggressiveness of our adversaries. More
recently, on December 9, a vulnerability was discovered in
freely available and widely used open-source software provided
by the Apache Foundation called Log4j, which has been used to
build a vast array of Web services for over a decade.
Ensuring the cybersecurity of our Nation is critical,
protecting taxpayer data and dollars. In its 2021 High Risk
List, the GAO says that the Federal agencies and other entities
need to take urgent action to implement a comprehensive
cybersecurity strategy, perform effective oversight, secure
Federal systems, and protect critical infrastructure, privacy,
and sensitive data.
The foundation of the Federal Government's cybersecurity
posture relies on modernized, nimble technology systems that
bake in security from the outset. A fundamental component of
this security is FISMA, which was first signed into law, as you
indicated, Madam Chairwoman, back in December 2002 and was last
updated in 2014. The law requires each Federal civilian agency
to establish an agency-wide program to ensure the security of
the agency's information systems.
Despite FISMA's positive contributions to improving Federal
cybersecurity, Government officials have cited FISMA
requirements as sometimes onerous and overly focused on
compliance rather than on mitigating potential cyber threats.
Further, when FISMA first passed, many of today's key cyber
stakeholders had not yet been established, like the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and the
National Cyber Director. We must take more proactive cyber
measures that ensure the Government runs on modern, well-
designed IT.
For example, I have long advocated for the codification of
FedRAMP, the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program,
which you very generously mentioned and very much we welcome
your support in our endeavor to get that into law. For the past
five years, we have worked to improve and make permanent the
FedRAMP program.
And by the way, it has passed the House four different
times, four different times in two Congresses. It has never
passed the Senate. And it has finally come out of the Senate
committee, but we believe, frankly, that the House has clear
providence, and we want to make sure it gets passed.
The future of Government IT is paramount to effectively
serving the public. That future should involve an agile Federal
work force that can respond quickly, relying on technology and
supply chains to deliver results.
I was thrilled to see that President Biden made Federal
cybersecurity a priority early in his administration. His
executive order on improving the Nation's cybersecurity ensures
agencies are adapting and adopting best practices of secure
cloud services, zero trust architecture, and multifactor
authentication and encryption.
But today's hearing reminds us more must be done, and
Congress has a critical role in ensuring that laws evolve to
accommodate and anticipate new realities. I look forward to
working with you and the ranking member on the draft
legislation, Madam Chairwoman, and I thank you for your
leadership in holding today's very critical hearing.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. I thank you for your statement, and I
now recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr. Comer, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, for holding this
hearing to examine a central law governing Federal
cybersecurity, the Federal Information Security Modernization
Act.
Prior Congresses have not encountered the same array or
frequency of cybersecurity threats that we face today. Last
year's breach against SolarWinds exposed weaknesses throughout
multiple Federal agencies and throughout the private sector.
Just last month, we learned of a new vulnerability infecting an
Internet tool called Log4j. Some estimate that this is used in
nearly a third of all websites, impacting Government agencies
and businesses large and small.
These incidents highlight why FISMA, a law which assigns
cybersecurity roles and responsibilities for the protection of
Federal information systems, is a critical component in our
cyber defense arsenal. Public and private sector entities
continue to play whack-a-mole while hackers take advantage of
every possible weakness in information systems. A modern uptake
to FISMA will ensure Federal agencies, in coordination with the
private sector and Government contractors, can better protect,
disrupt, and deter damaging digital intrusions.
The Federal Government maintains extensive public records,
which contain sensitive information on all Americans and the
private sector businesses and institutions that drive our
economy and civil society. Congress and the executive branch
must be smart and diligent stewards of this sensitive and
valuable information.
In examining FISMA, we need to clearly understand the full
scope and evolving nature of cybersecurity challenges our
Government faces before enacting systematic changes. Recently,
the Senate and the administration addressed FISMA reform
through legislation and executive guidance. These are important
steps, ones that the chairwoman and I hope to buildupon to
ensure reforms not unnecessarily impose restrictive burdens,
duplication, or complications.
FISMA reform must provide agencies with the authority to
effectively address threats with speed and precision while also
freeing time to continuously monitor new and emerging threats
as they arise. To get this right, we must understand a core
principle of cybersecurity--that it is impossible to have a
completely secure system.
As technology continuously evolves, our systems and
networks will become more interconnected, allowing bad actors
to continue to discover or engineer new methods of attack. Any
reform must enable Federal agencies to respond to an incident
in real time to mitigate damage, fix the problem, and
effectively share critical information about the attack so it
does not happen again.
Burdensome red tape requirements for coordination and
outdated compliance checklists cannot remain significant
hurdles when responding to major cyber incidents. Nor should
Congress be subjected to delayed and disjointed agency
briefings following major incidents.
That said, we also recognize the cyber expertise and
knowledge housed within the executive branch, along with
Government contractors performing valuable cybersecurity
services. We have listened to these experts. We have accounted
for their advice and guidance in drafting House companion
legislation. We greatly appreciate OMB's technical assistance
and have honored an overarching request to avoid imposition of
overly burdensome bureaucratic reporting and compliance
controls, which hamper agencies from addressing daily
cybersecurity challenges.
I also want to thank the chairwoman and her staff for
working diligently to incorporate this feedback. I encourage
our members to support a streamlined legislative product the
chairwoman and I are crafting, which adheres to a risk-based
cybersecurity model. We are confident our approach gives more
flexibility to our Federal agencies and private sector partners
to address a quickly evolving threat landscape.
We are also focused on offering statutory authority
enabling agencies to take proactive steps to harden our
Nation's cyber defenses. I am confident that cybersecurity
modernization is largely achievable through carefully balanced
FISMA reform.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, each of whom
have a unique perspective in working in the cyber arena.
Together, I hope our collective efforts in reform will place
the Federal Government on a solid security footing for years to
come, improve coordination, and present a united front in
deterring and defeating cybersecurity threats.
Now I would like to yield to the distinguished ranking
member Mr. Hice, who is no doubt an expert in this area.
Mr. Hice. I thank the ranking member. Appreciate that very
much.
And if I could, just as a point of personal privilege, just
give a great shout-out and congratulations to the Georgia
Bulldogs for a great win last night. It is my honor to
represent Athens and the University of Georgia, and we are
thrilled with the win that they brought home last night.
But with that, listen, I appreciate a hearing to examine
the potential updates to FISMA. The Federal cybersecurity
issue, of course, is an extremely important issue, but I must
admit that I am confused, and I am sure some of my other
colleagues also share in some of my confusion, as to
specifically why the majority has failed to invite the
administration witnesses to testify concerning their experience
operating on the cyber front lines.
No doubt we have an esteemed group of witnesses who are
with us here today, and they have a lot of Federal years of
experience. But nonetheless, the agency operators currently
battling threats from our adversaries are inexplicably absent,
and I am sure it is because, quite frankly, they were not even
invited to be a part of today's hearing. But if Congress is to
examine the modern cyber threat environment fruitfully, we must
hear from the very administration officials who understand why
we are falling short in cybersecurity preparedness.
It is no secret that our Federal cyber apparatus is a
massive bureaucracy, and it has grown exponentially since the
last revamp of FISMA in 2014. And yet it is no question, a
reality--and a legitimate question to ask does anyone--does
anyone believe that our Nation's cybersecurity has improved at
the same pace as the bureaucracy? The answer, of course, is no.
Our adversaries, particularly China and Russia, continue to
exploit our weaknesses, weaknesses that are born from
bureaucratic layers, from misaligned roles and
responsibilities, and the failure to exhibit strength. When our
Government fails to address cybersecurity weaknesses, what is
at stake? What is at risk? Literally reams of sensitive
information that the administrative state has amassed on
American citizens.
Malicious actors and America's enemies know our cyber gaps,
and they target them. They do so accordingly. Just this past
year, they targeted infrastructure like meat production, our
oil pipelines, and ubiquitous software supply chains. And the
list goes on and on and on. We are vulnerable.
Cyber attacks are no longer merely a product of war games.
They are genuine threats to our American livelihoods. They are
a threat to our daily digital interactions and the numerous
Government and private sector services.
The Government Operations Subcommittee, understanding this
threat, we have worked hard to improve the adoption of modern
secure technology in Federal agencies through initiatives like
FedRAMP and IT Modernization Centers of Excellence. And I
believe our efforts to adopt modern cloud technology solutions
will similarly help deliver efficient, effective, and secure
Government services.
My hope, my hope sincerely is that FISMA reform will spur
further migration to the cloud, to transition spoken of
optimistically in the aftermath of SolarWinds for improving the
Federal Government's cybersecurity posture. I am hopeful that
eventually we will actually have discussions with
administrative witnesses that will allow us the opportunity to
explore ways to further the Government's effective utilization
of its IT assets by moving away from legacy insecure
technologies, consolidating and optimizing the use of existing
data centers, improving agency inventories of their IT systems,
and focused defense of critical data assets are always that
FISMA reform in our upcoming hearing regarding FITARA can
contribute to better Federal cybersecurity.
And I hope we will go down these paths with genuineness in
the days, weeks, and months to come. And with that, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back, and I thank
him very much for his comments and particularly the ranking
member and his staff for working in such a positive way to
confront what is a national security threat to our country.
Earlier, we had several months back in October a hearing
with the Government cybersecurity experts. We had the Director
of Cybersecurity, newly appointed, a representative from CISA,
the FBI. We also consulted with representatives of the Biden
administration and the Government, Government professionals on
the drafting of this bill. They were deeply involved in all of
it. We can have another hearing on it.
This hearing focuses on the private sector, which is an
important part of our country. We need to hear what their
challenges are and what they are doing. We have already heard
from Government. We can have them in and hear again, or we can
have just a panel and a committee discussion.
But we have already consulted them, and they were consulted
deeply and effectively and many times. We were partners in
drafting this legislation along with the Senators that were
involved.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness today is Ms. Jennifer Franks, who is the
Director of Information Technology and Cybersecurity at the
Government Accountability Office.
Then we will hear from Mr. Grant Schneider, who is a Senior
Director of Cybersecurity Services at Venable. He previously
served as the Federal Chief Information Security Officer at OMB
and as the Senior Director for Cybersecurity Policy at the
National Security Council.
Next, we will hear from Mr. Ross Nodurft, who is the
executive director of the Alliance for Digital Innovation.
Next, we will hear from Ms. Renee Wynn, who is the CEO of
RP Wynn Consulting. Previously, she served as the Chief
Information Officer at NASA, which always is a target of cyber
theft.
Finally, we will hear from Mr. Gordon Bitko, who is a
Senior Vice President of Policy at the Information Technology
Industry Council and was previously the Chief Information
Officer at the FBI.
The witnesses will be unmuted so we can swear them in.
Please raise your right hands.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony that you are
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
[Response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you. Without objection, your written statements will
be part of the record.
With that, Ms. Franks, you are now recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER R. FRANKS, DIRECTOR OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CYBERSECURITY, U.S.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Franks. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting GAO to
contribute to this important discussion about FISMA reform.
As you know, IT systems supporting Federal agencies are
inherently at risk. The protection of these systems is vital to
public confidence, safety, and national security. Without
proper safeguards, computer systems are increasingly vulnerable
to attack. As such, GAO has designated cybersecurity as a
governmentwide high-risk area for the last 25 years.
As the cyber threat landscape has significantly evolved, it
is important for Federal agencies to ensure that their
information security programs under FISMA can mitigate the risk
and impact of threats to their data, systems, and networks.
Today, I will focus on the key preliminary results from our
ongoing reviews of agencies' FISMA implementation.
Our ongoing review highlights the reported effectiveness of
Federal agencies' implementation of cybersecurity policies and
practices and the extent to which relevant officials at Federal
agencies consider FISMA to be effective at improving the
security of agency information systems. Our preliminary results
indicate varied levels of effectiveness of Federal agencies'
implementation of FISMA requirements.
For example, IGs identified uneven implementation of
cybersecurity policies and practices across the Federal
Government. For Fiscal Year 2020, IGs concluded that only 7 of
the 23 civilian CFO agencies had effective agency-wide
information security programs.
Specifically, most agencies continued to struggle in the
security core functions to identify, protect, detect, and
recover. On a positive note, more agencies were, indeed,
meeting the cybersecurity goal of taking appropriate actions
needed to respond to a cybersecurity incident.
In responding to our questionnaire and interviews regarding
the effectiveness and usefulness of FISMA, cybersecurity
officials at the 24 CFO agencies highlighted the benefits of
FISMA, identified impediments to implementing FISMA
requirements, and made suggestions to improve FISMA and the
annual reporting process.
Regarding the benefits of how FISMA helped improve their
agencies' security posture, agency officials identify
standardized security program requirements, justifiable
cybersecurity requests to management, establish agency metrics
to track performance of the security program, and establish
responsibilities and authorities related to the cybersecurity
program, among others.
In terms of the impediments, agency officials identified a
number of barriers to their agencies' implementation of FISMA.
The most cited were a lack of resources, that annual reviews
focused more on compliance with the law than on the
effectiveness of cybersecurity programs, and that there was
insufficient time to implement new requirements and/or
remediate findings identified in the annual FISMA reviews
before the next review season begins.
With respect to the suggestions, most agencies did not
identify legislative changes to FISMA nor the need for
additional authorities. Specifically, seven agencies made
suggestions on reducing the frequency of the FISMA IG reviews.
Other suggestions were related to the consistency of IG
evaluations, IG reviews focusing more on risk as opposed to
compliance, and the advancing of data automation.
In summary, the risks to IT systems supporting the Federal
Government are increasing, and the tactics and techniques of
cyber criminals are constantly evolving around the globe.
Further, high-profile events, such as the SolarWinds and
Microsoft Exchange Server incidents, demonstrate the need for
further attention and improvements to agency cybersecurity
capabilities. This means that Federal agencies need to continue
to build stronger cybersecurity programs through more effective
FISMA implementation, which could better protect against
increasing cyber threats.
This concludes my remarks, and I look forward to answering
any questions you may have.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. Schneider, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF GRANT SCHNEIDER, SENIOR DIRECTOR OF CYBERSECURITY
SERVICES, VENABLE, FORMER FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY
OFFICER, OFFICE OF
MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

Mr. Schneider. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, members of the
committee and your staff, thank you for the privilege to appear
before you today.
I've spent my entire 30-year career focused on our Nation's
security. This includes over 20 years at the Defense
Intelligence Agency, seven of which as the Chief Information
Officer. I then spent six years within the Executive Office of
the President, involved with all aspects of Federal and
critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
As mentioned, I served as a Senior Director for
Cybersecurity Policy on the National Security Council staff and
most recently as the Federal Chief Information Security Officer
working with agencies to secure Federal systems.
For the past 16 months, I have been a Senior Director for
Cybersecurity Services at the law firm Venable, where I help
our clients, both large and small from across all sectors,
enhance their cybersecurity programs through the development
and implementation of risk management strategies, as well as
assisting with the preparation, response, and recovery from
various cybersecurity incidents, including ransomware attacks.
I want to thank the committee for taking up the very
important issues related to the security of our Nation's
Federal information and information systems. Over the years,
FISMA legislation has focused agencies' attention on
cybersecurity and made them more secure. However, FISMA must
evolve, just as the threats and the nature of our information
technology environments continue to evolve.
The threat surface for Federal agencies and private sector
organizations increases as organizations interconnect systems
and move more sensitive information and transactions online.
This started well before the global pandemic and has only
accelerated over the past two years. To be clear, these digital
enhancements increase productivity, increase convenience, and
increase access to services.
At the same time, malicious cyber actors have increased
their capabilities and demonstrated a willingness to exploit
any system to achieve their objectives, whether they be
monetary gain, espionage, or some form of activism. Most
recently, public and private sector organizations have been
responding to the exploitation of the Log4j vulnerability. Over
the past year, organizations have responded to the attack on
SolarWinds, the Microsoft Exchange Server incident, and
countless ransomware attacks, including the one involving the
Colonial Pipeline. These are but a few of the many incidents
highlighting the importance of cybersecurity for both public
and private institutions.
FISMA is focused on directing Federal agencies to develop
and implement risk management programs to secure Federal
information and information systems. As you consider updates to
this keystone piece of legislation, I encourage you to address
five key areas.
First, clarify Federal cybersecurity roles and
responsibilities. Since the last update to FISMA, Congress has
established the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, as well as the National Cyber Director. These are
important additions to the Federal cybersecurity ecosystem.
However, they also require clarification of the roles and
responsibilities with respect to Federal cybersecurity. I
recommend Congress clarify the roles and responsibilities at a
high level and then direct the President to clarify them in
more detail.
Second, codify the role of the Federal Chief Information
Security Officer as a Presidentially appointed position within
the Office of Management and Budget with appropriate budget and
oversight authorities, including approval of CISA's budget and
approval of agency cybersecurity budgets.
Third, as part of risk management programs, require
agencies to have greater situational awareness of their
technology environments. This includes inventories of hardware
and software, supply chain assessments of those inventories,
understanding the actions being performed within their
environment, and fully inspecting network sessions to identify
and mitigate techniques used to compromise systems.
Four, hold OMB accountable to maintaining the definition of
a major incident to ensure that the right level of information
is being reported to Congress.
And five, require greater alignment of core cybersecurity
requirements based on the National Institute of Standards and
Technology guidance for both national security systems and non-
national security systems.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you
today, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you very much.
Ms. Wynn, you are now recognized for your testimony.
Oh, no, no. It should be Mr. Nodurft. You are now
recognized for your testimony. Mr. Nodurft?

STATEMENT OF ROSS NODURFT, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
ALLIANCE FOR DIGITAL INNOVATION, FORMER CHIEF,
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET CYBERSECURITY TEAM

Mr. Nodurft. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member
Comer, and members of the committee, for holding this hearing
on FISMA reform.
My name is Ross Nodurft. I'm the executive director of the
Alliance for Digital Innovation. It's a coalition of innovative
commercial companies whose mission it is to bring IT
modernization and emerging technologies to Government.
ADI engages with policymakers and thought leaders to break
down bureaucratic, institutional, and cultural barriers to
change and to enable Government access to secure, modern
technology that can empower a truly digital Government.
ADI focuses on four key areas in our advocacy efforts. One,
accelerating technology modernization in Government. Two,
enabling acquisition policies that facilitate greater use of
innovative technologies. Three, promoting cybersecurity
initiatives to better protect the public and private sectors.
And four, improving the Federal Government's technology work
force. Each of these areas must work closely with each other to
allow for Government mission owners to partner with industry to
build a modern digital Government.
My experience prior to taking on the role of executive
director at ADI includes both operational and strategic roles
in the Government and the private sector focused on
cybersecurity. More specifically to today's discussion, I led
the Office of Management and Budget's cybersecurity team,
reporting to the Federal CISO and CIO. During my time, my team
was responsible for drafting the annual FISMA report to
Congress, developing and reporting the FISMA metrics, writing
and implementing Government-wide cybersecurity policies,
aggregating and producing the annual cybersecurity budget, and
managing the team that conducted oversight of the Federal
civilian agencies' cybersecurity programs.
Since leaving Government, I've worked closely with many
companies to build, expand, and institutionalize their own
cybersecurity programs and to develop an approach to
cybersecurity risk management that effectively uses resources
to buy down and manage enterprise risk. Since joining ADI, I've
worked closely with some of the leading technology
cybersecurity professional services providers to the public
sector.
The technologies and services delivered by ADI member
companies underpin the Federal Government's modernization
efforts and provide the backbone for many agencies' zero trust
architectures and cybersecurity plans. Given the roles that
many of our member companies play in the Federal cybersecurity
and technology ecosystem, ADI appreciates the committee's focus
on this important topic.
With the spate of cybersecurity incidents and
vulnerabilities over the last several years, the need for
continued oversight and support from Congress is necessary to
combat the constantly evolving threats facing the Federal
departments and agencies. The proposed FISMA legislation that
was recently approved in the committee in the Senate contains
several important changes but could be more comprehensive in
its handling of cybersecurity as a holistic public sector
priority.
As Congress considers an update to FISMA, ADI encourages
this committee and others in the House and Senate to also look
to update other key laws dealing with Government information
technology policy acquisition and governance. Updating the E-
Government Act, the Clinger-Cohen Act, the Federal Information
Technology Acquisition Reform Act--which you guys have a
hearing on coming up--and aligning proposed legislation such as
the House-passed FedRAMP Authorization Act would enable
agencies, as well as the oversight entities and program offices
that govern Federal IT policy, to modernize and secure their
environments more quickly.
On the topic of FISMA reform, ADI believes there are
several important areas that warrant attention from the members
of this committee. These include the need to update and align
cybersecurity roles and responsibilities so changes to FISMA
should reflect the new roles and authorities of the National
Cyber Director, as well as the responsibilities of the Federal
CISO at OMB and the Director of the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency.
Another area that warrants the committee's attention is the
need to address incident response, breach notification, and
vulnerability management. Given the proliferation of incidents,
breaches, and vulnerabilities, updated FISMA legislation should
codify practices and policies that keep Congress informed in a
way that will allow for effective oversight while giving the
departments and agencies the flexibility and time to respond
and report these incidents, breaches, and vulnerabilities
without disrupting or impacting those responses.
Another area is to reinforce Government shift to commercial
technologies through use of automation and focus on meaningful
reciprocity. As the Government's information technology
ecosystem shifts to more modern cloud-based solutions, agencies
should embrace technologies and services that enable security
in these zero trust environments and leverage best-in-class
industry partners to assist with the buildout of those
environments.
This bill should make it easier for agencies to issue
authorizations to operate through strategies that include use
of automation and offer reciprocity across agencies and across
compliance regimes.
Effectively budget--another area to look at is to
effectively budget for cybersecurity and invest in risk
management. Securing large enterprises, especially those that
have legacy technology and modernization backlogs, can be
expensive. Congress must encourage agencies to budget for
technology and services that can effectively buy down the risks
to their environments. As agencies continue to modernize their
systems, agencies should pivot their cybersecurity spend to
move toward tools and services that enable zero trust
environments.
And finally, a final area that warrants the committee's
attention, to modernize and standardize cybersecurity
performance metrics and measurements. As agencies modernize
technology and move toward cloud-based environments, take steps
to enhance security, and migrate to zero trust architectures,
oversight offices must also modernize the measurements used to
track agency progress and measure security. Successful
cybersecurity must be defined through outcomes, and those
outcome-driven, risk-based metrics must be consistent across
all the oversight entities.
Thank you again to the committee for this opportunity to
discuss the important topic, and I look forward to your
questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much.
Ms. Wynn, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RENEE WYNN, CONSULTANT, FORMER CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Wynn. Good morning, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member
Comer, and distinguished members of the committee.
I am honored to testify today on the importance of
cybersecurity and examine the transformation of the cyber
threat landscape since the Federal Information Security
Management Act, FISMA, was created. Now is the ideal time to
update this law to meet the evolving cyber threats.
My recommendations are based upon 30 years of Federal
service, 10 of which were spent as a Deputy Chief Information
Officer or the Chief Information Officer at two Federal
agencies--the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, and the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA.
The implementation of information security laws of
yesterday and today are dependent upon Government employees and
contractors. Their leadership to address cybersecurity risks
should be lauded, and they are the reason the Federal
Government has made so much progress. I am proud of the
progress achieved by the teams I led at both the EPA and NASA.
The original FISMA of 2002 set the Federal Government on
the path to strengthen its approach to information security, a
bold and necessary move. The act recognized the importance of
information security to our economic and national security
interests and the importance of protecting individuals' data.
In 2014, Congress updated FISMA through the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act to address the rapidly
evolving information security threat landscape. Continuing to
upgrade information security laws, regulations, and policies
for the Federal Government is a must if we are to maintain our
economic position in the world and national security.
As the refresh just contemplated, I urge you to continue a
risk-based approach that emphasizes all types of technology--
information technology, or IT; operational technology, or OT;
and the fastest-growing segment, Internet of Things, IoT. All
of these elements of technology are used by the Federal
Government to improve mission effectiveness, efficiencies, and
the customer experience.
There are several FISMA areas ripe for refresh. Some areas
for your consideration, cyber aspects of supply chain risk
management, the interconnectivity of Government operations, and
the IoT.
The Federal Government must assess the potential risks
posed through IT and OT and IoT supply chain prior to
purchasing and deploying on Federal networks. There are well-
resourced nation state cyber threat actors that intentionally
target all tiers of the technology supply chain by embedding
malicious functionality.
The Federal Government relies upon networks and devices
that are interconnected between departments and agencies. There
are only a few service centers for processing Federal payments.
Thus, every department and agency are connected. These points
of connection, if not properly upgraded, managed, and
monitored, create greater cyber risk, including the easy
transmission of malicious code. Also, the data while in transit
are at risk of compromise if poor cybersecurity practices are
employed.
Technological advances have provided opportunities for
Government operations to be more effective and efficient. These
advances increase complexity and risk, including cybersecurity
risk. For example, the growth of telehealth and the Internet of
Things medical devices such as heart and glucose monitors. This
growth, especially during the pandemic, has allowed medical
services to be delivered during a trying time, but they add
risk.
The next iteration of FISMA must mandate Federal Government
buy, use, and manage secure IoT. The adoption of technology has
provided and will continue to provide opportunities to better
serve the public. This adds cyber risk. Congress must continue
to ensure that our Nation's laws keep pace with these advances.
Finally, and in addition to legislative changes, Congress
must continue to hold the heads of departments and agencies
accountable for addressing cybersecurity risks. This is about
ensuring a culture attentive to cybersecurity risks. Please
consider asking cybersecurity questions during all budget
authorization and program hearings.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
committee today and testify on the changing cyber threat
landscape and modernizing FISMA to meet this challenge. I stand
ready to answer your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. Bitko, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF GORDON BITKO, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF POLICY,
PUBLIC SECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
INDUSTRY COUNCIL (ITI), FORMER CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

Mr. Bitko. Thank you, and good morning, Chairwoman Maloney,
Ranking Member Comer, and distinguished members of the
committee. Thank you for holding this hearing today.
A recently released Harris and MITRE survey showed that
more than 75 percent of U.S. residents are concerned about
cyber attacks. Given the effect on Government operations of
incidents like Log4j and SolarWinds, they have good reason to
be concerned, and it's critical that we discuss here what can
be done.
I'm currently the Senior Vice President for Public Sector
Policy at ITI, the Information Technology Industry Council.
Previously, I was the FBI's Chief Information Officer, and I
have more than 25 years of experience with technology and
policy issues across the public and private sectors.
At ITI, I work on behalf of 80 of the world's leading IT
and cybersecurity companies. We believe that in an increasingly
digital world, it's never been more important for Government to
work with industry to promote effective, reliable, and secure
Government services.
2021 began with the Federal Government responding to the
SolarWinds cyber attack, a very sophisticated nation state
supply chain exploitation that's one of the most widespread and
damaging cyber intrusions ever. Only a year later, 2022 is
beginning with the Federal Government responding to yet another
cyber incident, a widespread vulnerability in Log4j, a very
commonly used piece of open-source software. Log4j is so widely
used that this vulnerability is one of the most significant
cyber threats of at least the past decade.
In both cases, Government operations suffered serious
adverse impact. Systems and capabilities had to go offline to
limit the risk. Extensive manual work, including searching deep
into logs and source code, was needed to find evidence of
intrusions, and IT specialists had to test fixes to deploy them
safely while minimizing impact on all the other interconnected
systems.
There's a huge opportunity cost to doing such recovery work
instead of planned activities such as system upgrades, which
had to be delayed or even deferred.
Those major events bookended countless other major cyber
attacks on critical industries, service providers, the defense
industrial base, governments around the world, and other
victims. Some widely reported, but others not. They show the
need for new cyber policies that place continuous risk
management at the forefront of the enormous demand for digital
services and data.
Today, many Federal agencies struggle with cybersecurity
stemming from three FISMA issues that prevent effective risk
management decisionmaking. First, the law is overly focused on
process and compliance rather than on outcomes. FISMA requires
careful implementation of processes like inventories of
systems, the use of approved security measures, and annual
cybersecurity program reports. But it doesn't look at the real-
time effectiveness of those processes, and therefore, it
doesn't promote real risk management.
Second, FISMA creates duplication of effort across
agencies. Today, each agency is individually obliged to develop
its own information security programs with little incentive for
leveraging shared services, sharing information, or accepting
security assessments or best practices from other agencies.
This can lead to considerable redundancies as agency security
officials are frequently unable or simply unwilling to use the
good work already done elsewhere in the Government.
And third, a comprehensive lack--a lack of comprehensive
real-time information. Too much cybersecurity information
collection comes from manual processes, annual updates, and
according to agency-unique definitions. As a result, it's
nearly impossible to obtain a clear, timely view of the state
of information security across the whole of the Federal
enterprise.
FISMA modernization must enable and promote continuous
assessment of cyber risk. Better risk management, along with
improved collaboration and communication, will enable Federal
network defenders to have a more comprehensive view of all
Federal IT infrastructure while allowing for increased
efficiency and better outcomes.
In my full written testimony, I offer six recommendations
as necessary steps to improve FISMA, reduce compliance burdens,
and better protect our Federal networks and systems. Two key
elements are the shift to managing risk based on measuring and
evaluating security outcomes and breaking down across
governmental barriers through increased sharing of security
information and increased reciprocity across Government.
These recommendations and others are discussed in detail in
my written testimony. While no recommendations can offer
complete, ironclad protection against every newly discovered
vulnerability or zero-day, an improved FISMA that includes
these measures will help ensure Government is well prepared to
prevent attacks and quickly respond even in the worst cases.
These improvements will help ensure agencies have a
thorough understanding of the risks and invest resources
appropriately, will increase confidence in the effectiveness of
cyber defenses and response preparations, and ensure that
Federal organizations coordinate and contribute to the whole of
government cybersecurity. As well, these principles help to
guarantee that CISA and OMB have the visibility they need
without manual data calls. They help codify consistent
cybersecurity strategy that enables the Government to deliver
services more securely to its constituents while raising
preparedness and the ability to respond to global threats.
Thank you again for inviting me. I look forward to your
questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. I now recognize myself for five minutes
for questions.
The SolarWinds and Microsoft Exchange Server attacks show
just how vulnerable the Federal Government is to sophisticated
attacks from nation states such as Russia and China.
Unfortunately, OMB and DHS did not have the full picture when
assessing these attacks. They had to issue multiple calls for
data from agencies, and some of the information they collected
was incomplete.
Mr. Schneider, how did these weaknesses in data collection
impact the Federal Government's response to the SolarWinds
attack?
Mr. Schneider. Chairwoman, thank you for the question.
I think, and from my perspective--and I wasn't in the
Government at the time when the Government was responding to
those. But I think in general, the lack of having and agencies
having accurate situational awareness of their environments
slows down any response activity. And so when OMB and CISA need
to issue a data call and agencies need to go hunt for and
search for the information just to understand where their
vulnerabilities may lie and where their potential exposure is
to a particular incident, such as SolarWinds or the Exchange
Server incident, they're already behind the eight ball.
And so, it just slows down any activity that they have to
actually be able to respond and recover appropriately to such
an incident.
Chairwoman Maloney. And Mr. Schneider, what are the biggest
problems with the current version of FISMA that was exposed by
the SolarWinds attack?
Mr. Schneider. So, I think, and Gordon mentioned, the
overly focus on compliance and on process. And I think a lot of
compliance activities are necessary, but not sufficient for
cybersecurity. They can be helpful. However, I really do think
and agree with Gordon that if we have a FISMA, as we look at
updates, that is more focused on agencies' risk management
programs and their ability to, you know, protect wherever
possible. But I think more and more we have to be in a position
of presuming that a compromise either exists or is going to
happen, be able to quickly detect those compromises and
incidents, and be able to respond and recover to them, you
know, swiftly and adequately is going to be an approach that
will be more successful for Federal security.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, one of the weaknesses to me was
the fact that once they got in, they could roam through nine
different agencies. Seems to me we would want to ward off
certain agencies from allowing them to roam and went massively
through the private sector.
Is there any way we could sort of block off or protect that
information? You don't have to answer now. Maybe we can talk
about it later. But that seemed to me outrageous that they
could gain so much information from one breach. They were able
to get throughout America in so many areas gathering
information.
Mr. Schneider. Yes, and----
Chairwoman Maloney. The discussion--yes. Yes, Mr. Grant--
Mr. Schneider?
Mr. Schneider. I mean, quickly, there are techniques to
kind of minimize lateral movement once someone gets in while
you're trying to deal with it. And we can certainly work with
your staff on some ideas around those.
Chairwoman Maloney. I would like to hear them.
The discussion draft that Ranking Member Comer and I
released today would enhance information sharing on cyber
attacks. This bill would also promote another important tool
called endpoint detection and response. This tool uses data
from every endpoint in an organization's network to
automatically detect and block threats.
Mr. Nodurft, is it possible that endpoint threat detection
would have made a difference if it had been adequately in place
during the SolarWinds attack, and how would it protect against
future attacks?
Mr. Nodurft. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question.
So, absolutely, endpoint detection and response
capabilities can identify supply chain attacks and certain
other attacks depending on the configuration setting if--EDR
works if you have an understanding of the endpoints, and have
it deployed across your environment in a way that allows you to
track ongoing behavior.
I think the EDR deployed across the Government, to your
question, would have been helpful against SolarWinds attack,
and it's very important. That said, it has to be part of a
larger solution set that fits into the broader zero trust
architecture, which your bill also does. And I think it's
important not to lose sight of that.
EDR is one aspect. We also need strong identity solutions.
We need best in breed networking solutions. We need to have
encryption across all of our networks.
That, combined with EDR, would be--would create a robust
environment that really could help prevent future attacks that
are similar to or even threats that we can't even--we don't
even know about right now.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
China has been trying to steal American intellectual
property and trade secrets and health secrets for many years to
support its own economy.
Ms. Wynn, as you know, NASA has been a repeated target of
Chinese cyber criminals and other nation state actors desperate
for American intellectual property. How have these attacks
evolved in recent years, and what updates to FISMA would be
most important to address these kinds of attacks?
Ms. Wynn. Thank you for the question.
Yes, NASA, like other scientific agencies, certainly see
its fair share of attacks. There are several things within
FISMA that will help, but to be brief, I want to emphasize the
identity management piece. When you collaborate across the
globe with your allies, it creates a very challenging and
complex cybersecurity threat landscape. So, we do have to take
hold and get to a better method for identification, matching
who somebody is physically with who they are logically.
And then I want to emphasize the remarks regarding zero
trust networks. If the networks that are used across the U.S.
Government really say that I should never be let in until there
is an appropriate handshake, that better protects us as
individuals, as well as protecting the mission and the
intellectual property created across the U.S. Government on a
daily basis, and you have considered this.
And my final add to this one, to stay brief, is supply
chain risk. Certain companies are targeted for insertion of
malware, and the U.S. Government uses these companies on a
regular basis. Taking a hard look at what we use in the United
States Federal Government and making sure it's appropriate to
use prior to deployment are ways that should help strengthen
the network security as well as the identity necessary for us
to do work with those that we want to collaborate with. And
FISMA proposes many changes that help advance this area--these
areas.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. I have many more questions,
but my time has expired.
Attacks like SolarWinds underscore how quickly cyber
threats evolve. Our bill, our bipartisan bill, the FISMA Act of
2022, will help the Federal Government stay ahead of the curve.
I look forward to working with the ranking member to move this
legislation forward.
I now yield to the gentleman from Georgia. Mr. Hice, you
are now recognized for five minutes. Mr. Hice?
Mr. Hice. Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
And I want to thank all our witnesses for being here and
for the testimony that each of you have provided.
Ms. Franks, I would like to begin with you. Next week, we
will be having a hearing dealing with the latest installment of
the FITARA scorecard, and I guess I just would like to hear
from you, in your opinion, does the cyber--the current cyber
assessments that are required by FITARA, does that give
Congress an adequate and accurate view of agencies'
cybersecurity posture and security?
Ms. Franks. So, unfortunately, the short answer is no.
There are some significant gaps in the scorecard metrics that
would make it a little bit challenging for those sensitive
cybersecurity details to be shared.
Presently, the scorecards' data is all available publicly
and is accessible by anyone that needs to kind of pull and
review that context of data. But a lot of the work we do at GAO
and even the other agencies with their IGs are investigating
specific security controls that provide those necessary
cybersecurity protections for those various unique
environments. And oftentimes, even for our own reports, we have
to go through sensitivity reviews, given the context of what
we've seen and what we've done.
So, if going toward a scorecard where you're identifying
some of the needed cybersecurity controls, some kind of
bringing some light to them, it's going to have to be an effort
where the committee works with the executive committee's
leadership to look at what types of information would be best
suited for a publicly available report. And absolutely, GAO can
assist in that effort as well.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much for that answer.
Mr. Nodurft, let me swing over to you. Do you believe, as
we are talking about FISMA legislation, are there parts of this
or similar legislation that you believe should sunset in order
to prevent current reforms from becoming outdated or even
counterproductive as the threat landscape changes, as we all
know, with technology?
Mr. Nodurft. Absolutely, Congressman. Thank you for the
question.
Look, FISMA went for 12 years without a legislative update,
followed by another seven years without a legislative update,
eight--will be eight. So, I think that the frequency in
changing of technology and the frequency in changing of tactics
and threats that attack that technology is moving at a
blistering pace. So, I think we need to take a very hard look
at the legislation in its entirety on a more regular basis.
So, I think that sunsetting the legislation is
extraordinarily important. I think that there are certain
provisions that probably could stand longer than some other
periods. But I do think that it is important for Congress to
really take a hard look at how we're approaching security
holistically over this piece of legislation and, like I
mentioned in my testimony, several others to include FITARA,
which you guys are going to cover, earlier on a more frequent
basis and really consider how these pieces of legislation that
were built around legacy technology, that were insular, that
were at different departments and agencies, that were built on
mainframes and closets, how this has evolved to--to--and look
at the laws that are governing these new systems, these cloud-
based environments and figure out how the laws interact with
each other.
So, yes, I think some of these provisions could sunset, and
I think that this is an opportunity for you guys to really
consider how to drive good, secure policy for the next five
years.
Mr. Hice. Well said. And I agree with you.
Let me ask you just one more question, and I will yield
back. In your experience, are there any Government procurement
or contracting rules that potentially could hinder the
strengthening of our cybersecurity that needs to be addressed
in the FISMA legislation?
Mr. Nodurft. So, yes, I appreciate that question as well.
I think that there are--I think when you look at
procurement policy, it's not so much the procurement
legislation as it is the compliance that underpins the
procurement. And you know, Gordon covered it earlier. I think
we'll hear about it some more. But I really think it's
imperative that we take a hard look at what the compliance is
for the security parameters that we've defined.
So, we've set the standards. We've said you--agencies, you
need to--you need to make sure that your vendors that you bring
in are maintaining the standards. But what we see sometimes,
and whether it's because the work force is stretched too thin
or people don't understand the systems, there is an
overemphasis on compliance as opposed to doing the hard work to
say, OK, here is my risk. Here is the security that meets my
risk, and therefore, I can bring in more technology faster.
So----
Mr. Hice. Well, you--just for example, you mentioned a
moment ago the cloud. All right? So, here we go. We have a
broad, wide Federal adoption of a more secure and modern cloud
protection. But it is so--it is so broad. Does that type of
requirement in procurement or contracting, does that hurt us? I
mean, what needs to be done to help in that area?
Mr. Nodurft. Well, honestly, I think the bill that you guys
have passed recently, the FedRAMP, to modernize the way that
the FedRAMP process is working really pushed that forward and
can do yeoman's work into bringing the compliance process
forward that will allow more innovative technologies to enter
the marketplace.
That said, what we need to do is we need to really elevate
the compliance policy that we're getting behind and drive
reciprocity across the other compliance regimes that we have.
We've got some different compliance regimes over at DOD. We've
got different compliance regimes for on-prem and hybrid
systems.
The companies that are trying to bring their technology to
bear want to be able to come in, prove that they're doing what
they need to do to be secure, and then be able to leverage that
one set of proof across all these agencies and across all these
compliance regimes. So, I think the start with FedRAMP is great
and looking forward to working with you more on that.
Mr. Hice. Very good. I yield back, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentlelady from the
District of Columbia, Ms. Norton, is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, for this
important hearing, and I thank all the witnesses.
I was here when the 2015 data breach occurred. Twenty-one--
the personally identifiable information of 21 million people
was breached. As a result, I have repeatedly introduced
legislation that will require OPM to make permanent free
identity protection coverage that Congress required OPM to
provide for only--excuse me, for only 10 years.
Mr. Schneider, I believe you were involved in OPM's
response to the 2015 breach. How long after the breach was
discovered were congressional leaders notified?
Mr. Schneider. Ma'am, thank you for the question.
I was. I went over to OPM shortly after the breach was, I
guess, notified to the White House. I was working at the Office
of Management and Budget at the time. As I tell people, I went
to OPM for three days and got to leave nine months later.
I don't have a specific answer. I don't recall the answer
because I wasn't there on the timeline between when it was
identified and when--when the notification took place.
Ms. Norton. So, you don't have any idea how long--how long
individuals, it took to notify individuals as well?
Mr. Schneider. So, the individual notifications, there were
broad notifications put out publicly that of the fact once--you
know, after Congress was notified, the White House was
notified, and Congress was notified, there were broad
notifications put out in the media of the incident.
The individual notification, the letter that probably many
of the people here received from OPM that was many months
later, after extensive forensics work and research into
identifying who was impacted.
Ms. Norton. Yes, that is the point I am trying--that is
really the point I am trying to make.
Mr. Schneider. Yep.
Ms. Norton. Public notification is an important component
of the response to any Government data breach. That was why I
asked that question.
Now, Mr. Schneider, the chairwoman, Chairwoman Maloney, the
legislation she and the ranking member have introduced would
clarify requirements for notification of both the public and
appropriate Government entities. So, how would the requirement
in the chairwoman's draft bill improve public trust--that is my
interest, public trust--that they will be notified in a timely
manner in the event of another data breach?
Mr. Schneider. Yes. And my recollection from looking
through the House discussion draft last night is that I think
the congressional notifications would have to take place within
72 hours of when an agency had determined a major incident. So,
I think, you know, that's a much accelerated--currently, the
FISMA 2014 legislation is seven days. So, that accelerates that
significantly.
It also puts in, and I believe it was a 45-day timeline, to
begin the individual notifications in the event that an agency
had determined that, you know, notifications of breach is
necessary to individuals. And so, I think from a public
confidence standpoint, certainly as a citizen being on the
receiving end of that, that is a much more aggressive timeline,
and I think that will increase public confidence in, you know,
the notification.
Obviously, your confidence is low any time you learn that
your data has been breached. But understanding how that's being
handled and how it's being dealt with can help to, you know,
re-establish some of the credibility with the public during
those times.
Ms. Norton. Well, several months went by before cyber
attacks were able--went by before they were detected, the cyber
attacks were detected, presumably increasing the amount of data
they were able to access.
Ms. Wynn, how would you characterize the ability of agency
Chief Information Officers to perform ongoing monitoring of
cyber threats today?
Ms. Wynn. In my assessment and experience, those agencies
that either embrace continuing diagnostic and mitigation
programs or had already deployed tools on their network to
answer two important and basic questions regarding network
management. Who is on your network, and what is on your
network? And when the Chief Information Officers, in
partnership with the heads of agencies and the Chief
Information Security Officers, took very seriously the
responsibility of monitoring, you see the ability to respond
decrease, which is the right thing that you want to do.
When you don't monitor your systems or have poor monitoring
systems or don't look at the data on a regular basis by using
artificial intelligence, robotics, and other tools available to
you, then you increase the likelihood of significant damage,
and it--because it takes you so much longer to respond, and
therefore, you can't inform those that have been impacted by
that breach.
Ms. Norton. Ms. Franks, because GAO is auditing FISMA
implementation of Government by interviewing cyber experts
across the agencies, my question to you is what has the
feedback from agencies been regarding the guidance pursuant to
FISMA about continuous monitoring and how best to access the
security of their systems? Ms. Franks?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentlewoman may respond, but her time has expired.
Thank you.
Ms. Franks. I can certainly respond. For GAO, the ongoing
review, we didn't get into the details of the CDM process with
FISMA implementation. But the new legislation that's being
proposed does cover increased data automation, and as Ms. Wynn
just discussed, increased data automation comes from CDM
implementation.
There are certainly other tools and technologies out there,
as well as the guidance from the binding operational
directives, as well as OMB, who have already kind of
distributed the guidance to the Federal agencies as to what
they should be doing and how they should be acquiring those
tools and then identifying what's needed specifically for their
various unique environments.
We did do a CDM tailored review. That report came out
August 2020. And in that review, we did a case study of three
agencies, and all of the agencies had acquired the necessary
tools for continuous monitoring services in their environment.
Where they lacked was in the implementation.
And this FISMA reform effort will cover all of those lack
of compliance, lack of assessment that were needed to be
complete to make that CDM process whole.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Ms. Franks. You're welcome.
Chairwoman Maloney. All right. The gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. And thank you for having this
hearing.
I got a couple of questions for Mr. Nodurft. OK, the first
one. What do you think the current status of the Federal
Government's software supply chain--how does the current status
of the Federal Government's software supply chain place
agencies at risk?
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
I think that we have it's across Federal departments and
agencies as well as most IT ecosystems, we are at the stages
where we don't have a robust software development lifecycle
process fully implemented across Federal departments and
agencies. And I think that as NIST is developing those
requirements, we--we--the Government needs to do a better job
of recognizing where and how they need to implement those
software development lifecycle processes and to govern their
supply chain risks more broadly.
Mr. Grothman. If you wanted to grade us between an A to an
F, how you would grade us right now?
Mr. Nodurft. I think it depends on the agency, Congressman,
to be perfectly honest with you. I think some agencies that I
have interacted with are doing a very, very good job of it, and
some agencies right now are at their infancy stage.
Mr. Grothman. OK. To what do you attribute the difference?
Mr. Nodurft. It's resourcing is one. I think maturity in
thinking, frankly. I think what you tend to find or what I've
tended to find in my previous role is that some of the agencies
whose missions are core and foundational around security tend
to have a more forward-leaning security mindset, whereas others
who are less focused on that tend to not.
Now that's not a conclusive statement. There may be some
agencies that have moved forward, but I would say that in
general, it's--some of it's core to certain agencies' DNA, and
then other ones that have more resources tend to do a better
job.
Mr. Grothman. OK. How have agencies successfully
implemented FISMA lines of authority in responding to
cybersecurity threats?
Mr. Nodurft. I'm sorry, Congressman. I couldn't catch that.
Could you say that one more time?
Mr. Grothman. How, in your opinion, have agencies
successfully implemented FISMA lines of authority in responding
to cybersecurity threats?
Mr. Nodurft. I think--so agencies have--I would say over
the past 5 to 7 years, we have seen agencies move their FISMA
slowly away from some of the compliance-based efforts and
started to invest in more risk-based approaches to security. I
would say that a lot of that has to do with investments in
cloud technology and investments in some of the zero trust
technologies that have really helped drive some of the
modernization efforts that help them comply with the FISMA
risk-based outcomes that they're looking for.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I will give you one more question. I
think that is going to be all we have time for.
Some companies offer services that provide a unified view
of an organization's devices and digital infrastructure and,
thus, a clearer picture of potential areas of risk and
vulnerabilities. Why is it that there remains broad ignorance
on the full scope of vulnerabilities posed by disparate systems
and hardware used within many organizations when widely adopted
private sector management tools are available to offer such
insight?
Mr. Nodurft. Yes, and Congressman, I think that's a great
question, and I think your point is well taken. We are--the
Government right now is at a turning point, and it needs to
shift the way that it invests and partners with the private
sector to leverage some of the technologies that are out there
to enable broader access.
I think the work that the committee is doing on the bill
today is going to really push the ball forward and enable
agencies to focus on some of the technologies like what we
covered with EDR and like some of these zero trust technologies
that are going to enable access.
What I would--what I would double down on here is that we
have an--or the committee has an opportunity to open the
aperture for how we do compliance, security compliance, and
make sure that we are removing as many barriers as possible so
that these innovative technology companies can come in and
provide their services across agencies and across compliance
regimes. ``Check once, do many'' type approach.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, is now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Lynch?
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I thank
the ranking member.
Before we go into zero trust principles and architecture, I
do have a question about where we are with the Log4j software
vulnerability. We have a great group of witnesses. Can anybody
tell me where we are in terms of patching that vulnerability?
I understand that that code is ubiquitous. It is very, very
widespread. Do we have a sense on where we are in patching that
vulnerability, both Government side and also private sector?
Anybody?
[No response.]
Mr. Lynch. Yes, OK. That is what I was worried about. I do
realize that is no easy task. So, it would be helpful, Madam
Chair, if we could get somebody to give us a read on that.
Let us talk about zero trust architecture and the
principles that are contained in the ranking member and the
chair's draft legislation. Now zero trust principles require
that users be continually validated so that we don't have to
run the risk that a bad actor is actively engaged in one of
our--one of our programs.
But I know that several of you, several of our witnesses
have expressed a little bit of concern about whether or not our
Federal employees and the users of zero trust technology and
architecture could adopt that quickly. I think, Ms. Franks, you
might have said it is going to take--it is going to take a
change in lifestyle and patterns of behavior in order to adopt
that. Could you elaborate on that? Are we going to have
problems in moving to that type of architecture?
Ms. Franks. Yes, absolutely. I do believe I have said that
several times in recent settings.
So, the fundamental problem across Federal agencies, and I
have been with GAO since 2006, and I've audited several
agencies at this point--Government-wide reviews, agency-
specific reviews--and the fundamental problem across the
agencies is identifying what's in your inventory of systems.
So, with zero trust architecture, knowing what you have before
you can even protect it is key. That's going to be your No. 1.
And with agencies unable to really give us a firm
attestation as to the inventory of their major information
systems and then the data that resides on those systems, we're
going to have difficulty preventing those that may need access
or may not need access to those systems and services. How will
we protect? How will we be assured that the adequate
protections are in place to prevent certain situations from
happening?
So, with the zero-trust making us not--not permit anyone
and making everyone be reauthenticated into the services
continually through the day is going to be helpful for
agencies, but what's not going to be helpful is if the agencies
can't really just get that fundamental handle on their
networks.
And you asked a question about Log4j, and I know what GAO
has been doing because I do have that sit at the table for our
agency. But agency wide--I mean, Federal Government wide, I
cannot say that they have the necessary procedures in place to
quickly contain that vulnerability and then perform the
necessary eradication procedures.
Mr. Lynch. OK, thank you.
Mr. Nodurft, Mr. Schneider, or Mr. Bitko, any thoughts on
the adoption and implementation of zero trust architecture and
principles across Government?
Mr. Bitko. Sure, Representative Lynch, I'll jump in with an
answer on that.
I think the challenge is what Ms. Franks was starting to
hint at. Agencies don't have a comprehensive understanding of
their data assets, and at the core, for zero trust to be
effective, it's about what that data is, what that information
is, and who should have access to it. Today, that's a very
challenging thing for most agencies because of the dispersed
nature, the federated nature of their infrastructure, the fact
that the data can be dynamic, the people can be dynamic because
they change roles over time.
So, when you put all that together, zero trust is
absolutely the right thing to be doing, but at the same time,
having the visibility to do it effectively is really, really
difficult. That's one of the reasons why we've talked a lot
about focusing on risk and understanding where the highest
risks are and start there.
You cannot possibly boil the ocean of all of your data and
zero trust at one time. You have to pick what are the most
critical assets, what are the things that are the crown jewels
of the agency, so to speak, that if they are compromised, the
cost to the agency is unacceptable.
Start with them and manage them and manage those data and
the rules around them first, and then expand outwards. There's
got to be an understanding that that's going to take a long
time. There's so much legacy technology. There is so much in
the federated landscape that it's not going to happen
overnight.
And I think, sir, by the way, that that's the same answer
to your Log4j question. People will know up front at the high
level where does Log4j exist. But when you have this dispersed
federated enterprise, and Log4j might not be the product that
you're using yourself. It might be buried three or four or five
layers down in a product that was provided and acquired years
ago. And that's hard to have visibility into, and agencies are
struggling with that.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, and I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. And I thank you for your questioning,
and we will have a briefing on the challenges of Log4j, as you
requested.
Thank you.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Gibbs, is now recognized for
five minutes. Mr. Gibbs?
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Madam Chair.
To the panel, back in FISMA 2014, the main emphasis, my
understanding and my memory, was to build more collaboration
and coordination with the public program and the private sector
and especially through the Infrastructure Security Division. I
was wondering if anybody on the panel can maybe give me an
update how successful since 2014 building more coordination and
collaboration with the private sector entities, or has it been
a real challenge? What is the status?
Ms. Franks. Well, I can go first. I do cover the COVID-19
portfolio for the Government Accountability Office, and in
that, there was a report issued November 2020 and a subsequent
full report on HHS's cybersecurity roles and responsibilities
issued June of last year. And in both of those reports, we
highlight the coordination and collaboration that the
Department was performing across its public health sector as
well as all of their component agencies.
Given the uptick of cyber-related vulnerabilities that were
impacting the healthcare organizations due to the coronavirus
pandemic, they had to lean on the coordination and
collaboration, starting at the CIOs and then to the CISOs. They
definitely leveraged all of the communication that we had--that
was supplemented by CISA and the FBI and the like.
But they communicated with the states and local departments
as much as they needed to, to make sure that all entities that
were impacted on the Federal level that could perhaps be
impacted on those state and local levels, as well as some of
those private industries--you know, there is patient research
institutions and pharmacies and the like. So, they were always
collaborating and still to this day doing so.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Just to kind of followup, maybe Ms. Wynn or
somebody else might want to jump in, when we are looking at
certain sectors like banking, utilities, transportation, and
defense, has that status with the private sector improved, or
is there challenges there? Is there challenges because they are
afraid of liability issues, or you know, can you expound on
that? Maybe Ms. Wynn might be a good one on that?
Ms. Wynn. Yes. Thank you for that.
I think it is domain-specific in terms of whether you
experience some challenges in that and where the trust lies
between the private sector and the public sector in terms of
collaboration. We're seeing certainly in the space domain,
where I last served, is they definitely collaborate across
international space agencies and with some of the main
contractors that focus on space and specifically in low-Earth
orbit. But there's always more that can be done in this area
because the threats change, the entry points change and that.
And so, a concerted effort to collaborate across critical
infrastructure or the whatever domain that you have to work in
is absolutely critical in order to secure for national security
purposes.
Mr. Gibbs. Do you think we can do this on a voluntary
approach or legislation that mandates more collaboration with
the private sector?
Ms. Wynn. I would say I would suggest a framework from a
legislative perspective, and then--that would be at the high
level. And then how some of that effort is done and where the
recommendations flow, I think I would leave it up to the teams
that are established in order to put the information in the
right hands. But the framework and requiring collaboration is
definitely a piece to the cybersecurity mindset.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, thank you.
Mr. Bitko, why is it we are seeing so many vulnerabilities
in widely used software produced and developed by large private
sector companies?
Mr. Bitko. Congressman, thank you for the question.
I think that the answer is software technology is just
incredibly complex. And the adversaries who are out there are
really sophisticated, and so they are going to find weaknesses
when they exist. It highlights the importance of us
collaborating together, and I'm going to tie this back to your
last question.
I think that there is a lot of room still to increase trust
between Government and industry to ensure that that information
is flowing in a timely manner. Today, a lot of the time--and
it's understandable--there are investigative or intelligence
priorities which limit the ability of information to be shared
back, but that sometimes is what reduces the trust that we have
on the industry side now because what we get back from the
Government is sometimes a day late and a dollar short.
And so, it's important to share that information, to have
vulnerability discussions, to have that all going in a regular
and continuous and ongoing basis. And we've improved. The JCDC
with CISA, for example, is a good step forward, but there's
still more work to be done there.
Mr. Gibbs. It sounds like build trust to make sure that the
private sector can trust the Federal Government. Maybe we need
some sentences in there that gives us some protections to try
and do the good things.
You know, obviously, if there are bad actors, we have to go
after them. But to try and do the right thing if it doesn't go
quite right, you know, maybe it has to add some protections.
Would you agree?
Mr. Bitko. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
you may answer--OK, it is over? All right.
Let us now go to Mr. Cooper. Mr. Cooper, you are now
recognized. Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member.
I am glad that we are considering bipartisan legislation
today, but I am still deeply worried. If I were the average
person sitting back home watching this hearing, I think I would
doubt that any of our Nation state adversaries were shaking in
their boots, especially now that they have franchised a lot of
their activities to criminal gangs that are even doing things
like conducting ransomware attacks on small businesses across
America.
So, I think the first question in a hearing like this
really should be what is Congress' role, if we have a role at
all in this? It has already been cited by one of the witnesses
that we took 12 years one time to update the legislation. It
took seven years another time. That sounds to me like too
little too late. We can't always be playing catch-up.
So, is there a way that Congress could delegate or step
aside or get this done faster? Because I am worried, we will
always be late and slow.
Mr. Bitko. Congressman, if the approach is to provide
recommendations on specific technologies, then absolutely.
That's setting everybody up for failing, to be too late and be
too slow. The pace that technology moves at just does not allow
for legislation to keep up with that.
But I think if you have a risk framework and you have clear
authorities within the Government about who is responsible for
saying this is the highest risk or highest risks and these are
the things that we need to hold agencies accountable to do, you
can have the right balance of centralized control and
prescription with flexibility that you need for each agency to
deal with its own risks, to understand that its landscape is
different, that the threats it faces might be--might be varied.
So, I think you need to strive to find the right balance
there, not have legislation that is super prescriptive but
allows the right framework to have that flexibility within
agencies to provide particular technology solutions.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you. My second question is even more
aggravating. Isn't this all just a vendor gold mine? Companies
sell us software that turns out to be easily hackable. We get
hacked, and then they sell us more software that is also easily
hackable.
And people know out there that the Federal Government is
one of the biggest, dumbest customers in the world. We also
have the slowest reaction time. So, that makes the breaking and
entry even more violative, even more dangerous for us, and yet
we are not asking vendors for warranties or closer
collaboration. It just, as I say, ends up being a gold mine for
the companies.
How am I wrong?
Mr. Schneider. So, Congressman, I think I would say that,
you know, certainly the vast majority of the companies and the
ones that I work with are seeking to produce tools and
capabilities that are resilient and are defendable and don't
have vulnerability. As Gordon mentioned earlier, you know,
technology is immensely complex, and technology is written by
humans and ends up having failures.
And you're certainly right. You know, some of the companies
that are bringing us solutions are getting hacked and then
claiming to be the solution to the hacks as well. And you know,
I do think, you know, we need more diligence, and we need more
accountability, and we need to expose that type of behavior and
those instances. But at the same time, I don't know what
another solution would be.
We are dependent on commercial industries to bring us these
capabilities. I would also say that it's not unique to
Government. Government is buying commercial capabilities are
the same ones being employed in industry, and industry is
facing a lot of the same challenges.
Mr. Cooper. I only have a minute left. Government is well
known to have a slower reaction time. Remember, in many other
areas of commerce, the products come with warranties and
guarantees.
Final question. There are some major utilities in the
United States who have a day without cyber. That is even a day
without cell phones, a day without smartphones, so that they
can guarantee to their customers that they know how to run a
business in the event of a major catastrophic hack. Is that too
catastrophic of planning techniques? Is that too much red-
teaming or preparing for the worst?
How can we guarantee our folks back home that they are
going to be safe from electricity outages in cold weather or
communications outages if companies don't even know how to run
in the event of a major hack?
Mr. Bitko. Congressman, companies and the Government need
to be prepared for all scenarios. The core of the cybersecurity
framework, which I think has come up already a couple of times,
has in it how do you respond when an incident happens, and how
do you recover? Agencies and companies, if they're not taking
that seriously, and that means senior management in the
companies or the agencies actually exercising that and being
prepared, then they're being delinquent.
They need to understand that that's a risk that they face,
just like if you're a utility and you're faced with a natural
disaster and that takes your capability offline. You need to
have a response plan for that, the same way you need to have a
response plan for a major cyber attack. And we should expect
the same of Government agencies.
That's just the world that we live in, as Grant noted. And
you know, it's been said by cyber experts the only way to be
secure is to take your computer, unplug it, disconnect it, turn
it off, and bury it underground. And then maybe it will be--it
will be safe, right?
But that's not what Americans expect as the services that
they're going to get from Government. So, I don't think that
that's a viable solution. We've got to find ways to work
together.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, is now recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much.
And by the way, this is a very successful hearing, and I
want to thank you and Mr. Comer and, in particular, both staffs
for the preparation.
I would like to focus on two things. No. 1, we received in
our packet what is called GAO at 100 Highlights, and it says,
``Preliminary results show that agencies' implementation of
FISMA requirements was inconsistent.'' And this tends to show
at least preliminary in--preliminarily that consistently 2017,
2018, 2019, and 2020, about 6 or 7 agencies had effective
rating scores, and the others were called, some 17 or 18, not
effective.
We are now talking about us updating, highlighting, and
revising things that we have since learned in law, and yet it
is taking agencies a long time. What keeps them from
effectively becoming effective under this rating system by GAO?
Mr. Bitko, I will go with you.
Mr. Bitko. Congressman, thank you for the question.
I think that there's a few things that are inherent
challenges to agencies' ability to be effective when it comes
to FISMA scoring. They do not appropriately prioritize it at
senior-most levels in the agency sometimes to ensure that the
right resources are focused on the right activities. And it's
got to really start there. So, that's--that's No. 1.
But then I would say that they faced a lot of the
challenges that we've talked about during the course of this
hearing. The lack of reciprocity means work needing to be
redone from agency to agency, and that's not the most effective
solution.
The focus on purely the compliance and the implementation
of the upfront activities, rather than looking at the outcomes
in themselves, I think that all of those, when you take them
together, mean that agencies just are not focused on the right
things when it comes to successful cybersecurity a lot of the
time, unfortunately.
Mr. Sessions. Very interesting. And that goes back to your
comments about compliance rather than outcomes or processes,
that the management of the organizations find a way to move,
kick the ball down the road perhaps. Perhaps it is difficult.
Perhaps it is muddy. Perhaps it is lack of management intent.
I would like to now shift the other half of my time--and
Chairwoman, thank you very much. We have not talked about
prosecution levels and the ability--and, sir, you represented
the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a number of years, and
I know it is essentially an internal process that you did. But
I have not the word really ``FBI'' or ``Secret Service'' today
from the perspective of their deterrence to actually go and
prosecute.
Do any of you have an opinion, while it may not be your
main source, an opinion about what we need to do proactively to
have a strong law enforcement perspective of prosecution?
Mr. Bitko. You're talking, Congressman, about cyber threats
and criminal investigations of cyber actors?
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir. I am talking about once you have
figured out that you had an intrusion and then you then go to
law enforcement and share that information, I have not heard
the word ``Secret Service'' today. I have not really heard the
word ``Homeland Security.'' But how are we doing at then
passing this to law enforcement and expecting them to do
something about these bad actors?
Mr. Bitko. Well, I think that there have been steps taken.
It's clear that--I'll speak a little bit to what I know from
the FBI Department of Justice perspective. They have certainly
elevated cyber threats and cyber crime, ransomware, and things
like as priorities that they look at and focus on.
It takes a lot of work and a lot of resources for sometimes
difficult returns because the bad actors are not in a territory
where we can actually arrest them a lot of the time, right? And
so it's particularly challenging. I think it's something that's
got to be continually discussed by all stakeholders.
I also think, Congressman, it's important to ensure that
there are the right mechanisms within Government to find the
right balance of offensive and defensive. I don't know that
those conversations are always happening today at the right
levels within Government to make a determination about what is
the right mechanism in this case. Does it continue to live with
the vulnerability because it's allowing for a law enforcement
investigation to continue? But there's a cost to Government
agencies or the private citizens who might be compromised.
I think that in the roles and responsibilities in FISMA
that you're looking to define where there's clarity for the
National Cyber Director and others, that's got to be a part of
their responsibility, too, to help figure out what that balance
is.
Mr. Sessions. Just as a response back to you and our other
witnesses, I believe our chairwoman, I believe our ranking
members on both sides have done a very good job at trying to
highlight this. We had a hearing a few weeks ago from Homeland
Security and others, and I have now heard it from your
perspective.
Madam Chairwoman, I want to thank you for conducting this
hearing and the quality of witnesses we have had. Madam
Chairman, I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from Virginia,
Mr. Connolly, is now recognized. Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And let me just begin by responding to our friend Mr.
Cooper and some of his observations about the Federal
Government. I do think we in Congress need to take
responsibility for the fact that, frankly, this is a much
neglected subject.
The fact that it took 12 years to update FISMA, you know,
and another seven years to have a hearing about it, I don't
think speaks well about the legislative branch and the
priorities we put on information technology and its security.
And you know, the President asked for $10 billion as part of
his COVID relief bill earlier in March, and the Senate zeroed
it out, zeroed it out, arguing that IT wasn't directly relevant
to COVID.
Well, everything we do sits on an IT platform, and yet the
lack of awareness of that by Members of Congress, serious
Members of Congress who control appropriated dollars, was--you
know, told us we still have a lot of work to do in educating
ourselves and our colleagues about the criticality of IT,
protecting it, making it efficient, upgrading it, and making
investments in it. And that has been the work of our
subcommittee for the time I have been on the committee.
Ms. Franks, in your testimony, you talk about impediments
for agencies to address 900 open GAO recommendations related to
cybersecurity. Is that right? Nine hundred?
Ms. Franks. Yes, it's 900 open recommendations.
Mr. Connolly. That is a lot of recommendations. Just really
quickly, but I mean, what are these impediments to addressing
those recommendations?
Ms. Franks. So, starting with the lack of resources, both
financial and people. Obviously, we know talent acquisition
across the Federal Government is a significant concern and has
been since we put cybersecurity on the high-risk report 25
years ago. So, looking at the IT and cyber work force issues, a
lot of agencies have to contract out certain services because
of those resources.
Management attention, like you just noted. A lot of folks
understand a breach once it's happened because it significantly
perhaps may impact you as an individual and compromise your
personally identifiable information. However, there is a lot of
work to do with just understanding that almost all processes
that we have operating through the Government to service the
American people come from an automated service.
So, like we noted the example earlier of shutting it off
and then burying your device. That is the only way to prevent
some type of cybersecurity event from perhaps causing a
vulnerability in those networks. And with the increasing
technologies, as Ms. Wynn discussed earlier, and the growing
rate that they're increasing, it's hard for some agencies to
kind of stay ahead of looking at open recommendations while
they're also trying to implement new strategies to ward off
these cybersecurity threats in their environments.
So, it's not from a lack of trying. I do highlight of those
900, it's fully implemented. We do work with the agencies quite
a bit to understand where they are in the progress of meeting
the intent of closing those recommendations, but sometimes even
their partial addressing doesn't fully close a recommendation.
Mr. Connolly. So, we may want to work with you and followup
on that. You know, we are getting ready for the FITARA hearing,
our 13th FITARA hearing, and we are working very closely with
your agency. We may want to fold what you just talked about
into that in terms of how we can help in encouraging
compliance.
Final question, Mr. Bitko. You talk about ensuring
consistency through a holistic Government-wide approach to
updating FISMA. That sounds like a lot of buzz words. Could you
in plain English tell us what you mean, what we have to do as
we look at this draft legislation?
Mr. Bitko. Congressman, thanks for the question.
A few things I think are important to bear in mind. One
when I say that is consistency in definitions. We have in
FISMA--and it's been discussed here a little bit already--
incident reporting and what the Government's responsibilities
are, what their responsibilities are internally to report to
you and to report to private citizens. Separately, Congress is
considering incident reporting legislation. So, that's an
example where it's important to have, I think, consistency in
the language, in the terms and the definitions as much as
possible.
Every time we don't, it creates additional work, additional
overhead, additional things that get in the way of people being
able to be effective and efficient.
I'll translate that to in the specifics of FISMA and
security approvals. A company sells a product to one agency.
They go through the full ATO process, the authority to operate.
They get all the security controls that they've got in place
approved, and that's great. Then they can use it in that
agency. It does not always directly translate to another agency
being able to just take all of that good work that's been done
and say we can apply that in our environment.
Frequently, what happens is they go through the same
exercise all over again themselves. They find all the same
issues. They come up with all the same solutions, but they've
just spent a lot of time and energy being inefficient instead
of leveraging the work that's already been done.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you so much.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Franklin, is now recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
My first question is for Mr. Nodurft. In the wake of the
disclosure of the Log4j vulnerabilities, the Director of CISA
cited this as another reason for agencies to gather and utilize
software bills of materials, SBOMs, which was a new term for
me, as part of their cybersecurity programs. Do you recommend
we codify in law the requirement for agencies to collect these
software bills of materials from their vendors for critical
assets?
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I
appreciate it.
I think that there is a lot of work right now going on in
the administration in the wake of the cybersecurity executive
order that talks about what exactly is in an SBOM. So, I think
when the committee discusses what it would look like to codify
SBOM language, it's important to--to consider the availability
of SBOMs, what the extent of them looks like, how those SBOMs
are going to be utilized, what the definition of what's
incorporated inside those SBOMs look like.
So, to answer your question, I think that it is a--you
have--the committee would have to give, if they were going to
codify it, they would have to give the flexibility to apply the
use of SBOMs in targeted manners that make sense for the risk-
based environment. And I know that's a nuanced answer, but you
may not need an SBOM for every piece of software everywhere
across all of the environments if they're not really risky
assets.
So, I think we need to be very conscious, the committee
should be very conscious about how--if they were to consider
codifying it, how that would be applicable in the Federal
environment. We don't want to--we don't want to overburden the
industry providers that are building this backbone for the
departments and agencies.
Mr. Franklin. Great. Appreciate that.
Ms. Wynn, speaking of--and you talked about supply chain
risk management and the burden on our vendors. This had me
thinking there are--there are already a number of provisions
that codified there in law that require vendors to use trusted
sources and their components. Unfortunately, though, we know
that many times vendors are accepting attestations of
compliance from their subcontractors instead of doing the asset
security training themselves to verify.
How do you recommend that we enforce the existing
provisions? Are those necessary? Are they stringent enough? Are
they over-stringent on these vendors supplying assets to the
Federal agencies?
Ms. Wynn. Thank you for the question.
I personally believe that you need to take very strong
action regarding supply chain risk and cybersecurity. This is--
we have seen in the classified world actual efforts to target
various aspects of software by well-resourced nation states,
and then they go after the software that the U.S. Government
and other government agencies use.
And so, if we take a strong stance and enforce against this
and go further than attestation or accept attestation and when
your attestation is proven to be false, then maybe that's where
you need to place some of your enforcement.
Another thing, and then I'll give you your time back, is we
also see that businesses may not always be very responsible in
terms of the software that they hand back to the U.S.
Government and how to use it. And so we need to be able to
ensure and set the stage that if you're going to provide
services and software to the U.S. Government, we need you to
give us the best that you've got possible, and you've got to be
responsible for the cyber threats that could come through that
software.
Mr. Franklin. And what sort of teeth should we put in that,
in your view?
Ms. Wynn. Well, you know, having been penalized as an
individual through my schooling quite a bit, I preferred the
lighter method first, right? Let's have the discussion with the
principal to talk about the behaviors that were not acceptable
in terms of that, and then a few times there were needed to be
some elevation, both to parents and then when we got to
detention, fortunately not suspension. And I do believe that
the elevation and layering the amount of enforcement matters
first because sometimes people really do just make a mistake.
Humans do make mistakes. And so maybe making it on a tiered
level so that the repeat offenders are actually called out a
lot more harshly.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you.
In the little time we have left, Mr. Schneider, I am
encouraged by that the bill has strong language around zero
trust but concerned that securing the Federal agencies isn't
enough considering our reliance on the outside industrial base.
What recommendations would you have for extending zero trust
and other requirements beyond to the broader industrial base?
And I realize I have given you 10 seconds left to answer that,
so that may be unfair.
Mr. Schneider. Yes, I mean, I'll try to be brief. It's
going to be really important to flow down, you know, the key
cybersecurity requirements to vendors and contractors that are
providing capabilities, and we're very dependent on, you know,
DOD, the defense industrial base, but industry writ large. And
we need industry to be providing and, you know, A, protecting
their tools and then delivering us tools that are secure and
resilient. So, I think there's a lot of work that we need to
do, and it's going to have to be a collaboration with industry.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Krishnamoorthi, is recognized.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I thank you so much, Chairwoman
Maloney, and thanks for a great hearing.
I find this subject to be incredibly fascinating, but so
frustrating because it seems like we are constantly on the
defense in this particular space.
Mr. Schneider, I read an article in the New York Times
talking about how in the last 18 months of the Obama
Administration, security researchers and intelligence officials
observed a notable drop in Chinese hacking. That is during the
last 18 months of the Obama Administration. I wanted to ask you
why did that happen?
Mr. Schneider. So, thank you for the question, Congressman.
The short answer is we don't know. I will say what we think
is that we think there was an aspect of the engagement post the
OPM brief--breach, excuse me, with the Chinese government with
President Obama directly making a case to President Xi, and
that perhaps had a direct impact.
And I think that, you know, that said, I don't think we're
going to--well, I guess what I would say is in order to get at
this, we need a whole of government response, right? We need
diplomatic actions. We need offensive cybersecurity
capabilities in order----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me--let me----
Mr. Schneider. Sorry.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me jump in because, otherwise, I
know my time is limited. I think I know where you are going,
and so I want to ask you a related question, which is in the
law, you know, when you are attacked, there is a concept of
self-defense. And most jurisdictions allow for self-defense
measures.
In cyber crime or in a cyber attack situation, is there a
similar concept of cyber self-defense where let us say a
private company was attacked. Is it allowed to take any
offensive measures to defend itself and to exact a price on the
attacker in the name of self-defense?
Mr. Schneider. Sir, today, organizations are not able to do
that. And I personally don't believe that we want commercial
entities doing what's often to as ``hack back,'' right?
Attacking hackers. I think that there need to be consequences--
--
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Let me--let me--can I jump in? Because
I want to--I want to build on that. Not so much hack back or an
offensive strike on the source, but what if it were something
that would exact a price on the attacker at the time of the
attack?
In other words, is there any deterrent whatsoever for a
Chinese criminal gang hacker who was attacking a U.S. entity or
agency that would prevent them from doing it continuously and
without any stoppage?
Mr. Schneider. I think those deterrents are going to need
to be--come diplomatically and come from the Department of
Justice perhaps in sanctions. But I think they're going to have
to be Government-led deterrents and responses as opposed to
individual company-led responses.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. OK. I guess it just sounds pretty weak
to me at this point, given the merciless attacks from these
criminal gangs. Secretary Blinken said that the Chinese
Ministry of State Security has fostered an ecosystem of
criminal contract hackers to go after our companies and our
agencies at this point, both for state-sponsored activities and
for private gain.
Is there a concept or an idea or a vision for us to employ
a set of legal, almost contract bounty hunters on our side to
defend our agencies against these criminal gangs from China,
Russia, or elsewhere? How do we employ individuals or the best
minds on our side, just the way that they are in going after
us, in defending us as well?
Mr. Schneider. I think the--I think the current structures
allow for the people with those authorities and the
intelligence community and the Department of Defense to bring
in outside support and help and assist them, but I personally
think they need to do that under the authorities that exist, as
opposed to any sort of like a vigilante or bounty system.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I understand, but it is not working. It
is just not working right now.
Last question. Is there another government that does it
better than the U.S. Government in defending its cybersecurity
assets?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
you may answer the question, please.
Mr. Schneider. So, I don't know about specifics. I
certainly think smaller governments and smaller organizations
have an advantage. We have an advantage to our Nation of size
and scope, but it's a bit of a disadvantage when it comes to
cyber defense.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
LaTurner, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And welcome to all of the panelists today. I appreciate you
being here, and Happy New Year.
My first question is for Mr. Nodurft. The SolarWinds attack
exposed a lot of confusion among different Government agencies
on how to organize information and who was responsible. Do you
agree that assigning the National Cyber Director as the primary
executive branch official under FISMA to coordinate and report
major Federal cyber incidents to Congress would effectively
streamline the flow of information?
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you, Congressman, very much for the
question.
I think that the legislation you're considering right now
has an opportunity to ensure that what you're speaking about,
which is aligning and streamlining reporting requirements and
reporting to Congress, is enacted appropriately. I think right
now we have several different leaders within the Federal
Government space who are monitoring incident response,
monitoring breach response, monitoring vulnerability response,
and I think that this is an opportunity for the members of this
committee to really direct--direct the Federal Government on
ensuring that that flow occurs.
So, the National Cyber Director is just standing up, and
I'm encouraged and bullish that that is going to be a great
addition to the ecosystem to allow you guys--to allow the
members of the committee to have the oversight and interaction
that the committee is looking for.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you.
Let us stick with you. What is the most effective way to
update FISMA metrics and reporting to ensure necessary agency
administrative compliance burdens don't take--that they don't
overtake the mission immediate security workflow?
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you again for that question.
So, I want to talk about two separate parts of that. First,
I think updating--updating the metrics is going to be very
important, given the migration to more modern ecosystems,
whether it's cloud-based, zero trust architectures. So, I think
right now directing OMB to make sure that we are focusing less
on how many controls and piece parts are in place and more on
are we actually stopping and preventing outcomes is a key part
of updating FISMA metrics.
For the second part, I want to discuss the--your question
around how are we streamlining compliance requirements. And I
think that--I said this in my testimony, I've heard Gordon talk
about it as well--this is an opportunity for the committee to
look across the different compliance frameworks that we have
within Government right now, whether it's FedRAMP, whether it's
FISMA, whether it's the impact levels of DOD, the forthcoming
CMMC, and make sure that when a--when an innovative company
comes forward and says we have the following solutions in place
to ensure that our product or service is secure enough to go
into the Federal ecosystem, that that process is reusable and
is reused across both the agencies and the compliance
frameworks that we just talked about.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you for that.
Ms. Wynn, in your experience as a former agency CIO, can
you explain the role of FISMA reporting requirements and how
they affect the day-to-day operations of an agency?
Ms. Wynn. The reporting requirements did begin to drive
behaviors within the organizations that I had worked, and I
liked to see that. But what it took was actually paying
attention to the metrics at a level outside of the agencies
where I served and coming back to the heads of the agencies and
saying here's where you are on the spectrum of performance.
I happen to, unfortunately, have sat in the seat of being
at the end of the pack in terms of that performance, but having
that conversation, having those metrics, and talking to the
heads of the agencies gave the head of the agency the energy to
delegate to me and to the CISO to go get stuff done. And we
looked at every single network within the agency, which meant
the complex mission networks were assessed on this one.
So, it has some really good benefit as long as you actually
hold the agencies accountable to it.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you very much.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin, you are now recognized.
Mr. Raskin. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair, and
thanks for organizing this great hearing. I think we are all
concluding that it is time to really modernize and kind of
uproot and improve our Federal cybersecurity policies to meet
the challenges of the cyber threats that are out there.
During our investigation into the SolarWinds cyber attack,
we found several differences in how agencies viewed their
responsibilities under FISMA, particularly whether a cyber
attack counted as a ``major incident.'' Some agencies, like
Commerce, reported the SolarWinds breach as a major incident,
but other agencies, like HHS, did not. Under current law, OMB
is the one responsible for defining ``major incident,'' and
Federal agencies determine if an incident they have identified
counts as one.
Mr. Schneider and Mr. Nodurft, I understand that both of
you worked on furnishing the definition of ``major incident''
while at OMB. Can you describe the process of crafting the
definition and what kinds of challenges you faced in creating a
definition that would be both comprehensive and flexible and
that reflects the evolving nature of cyber attacks?
Mr. Schneider?
Mr. Schneider. Yes. No, happy to. Thank you for the
question, Congressman.
And you absolutely nailed it. The challenge is in having
something that is specific enough to drive the behavior that
we're looking for and make sure that Congress is getting
reported to appropriately, as well as being flexible enough to
allow agencies to have a risk management approach. And in
SolarWinds, you know, it could be that an agency had SolarWinds
installed in a lab on some network that was only in a lab and,
therefore, didn't meet the threshold of--of, you know, rising
to a major incident in the determination of that agency head.
And that's understandable.
When we were building the definition, there were two parts
to it. One about the severity of the impact of a particular
incident, and then one around the breach of potentially
sensitive or personally identifiable information. And you know,
and I think Ross can talk to or would concur that when we first
did the breach piece, we set a threshold at 10,000 individuals'
information being compromised, and we rapidly realized we were
going to overwhelm Congress with a whole bunch of reporting
and, in some cases, unauthorized access that really hadn't met
the threshold for a compromise.
And so, we raised that number to 100,000, which is where
OMB has kept it. But you're absolutely right. It's fine-tuning,
and I think having that done in the executive branch, where
they can fine-tune it regularly and Congress can hold OMB
accountable to that.
Sorry for the long answer.
Mr. Raskin. So, thank you--well, Mr. Nodurft, let me ask
you, do you think that defining ``major incident'' in statute
and embodying one definition in the law would be beneficial or
detrimental to the flexibility of our responses?
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
I think that from my experience, prescriptive codification
would be extremely detrimental. Given again the timeframes
between--between FISMA reform efforts in Congress, it makes it
very challenging to tweak the--especially if you're
prescriptive about the number or the scope or the scale of the
incident.
And frankly, I know Grant mentioned it, when we had the
10,000 instances of PII as the threshold, not only were we
reporting more incidents than were necessary, there was a
numbness that occurred with our interactions with the
committees of jurisdiction. It was that at first it was a
very--it was a very robust response. There was a lot of
interaction with members of this committee, members of other
committees that do oversight over incident response.
But to be honest, after--after probably the 10th or 11th
incident that really may not have been a good incident, the
interaction dropped precipitously. So, I think that what I
would caution as you--as the committee considers whether or not
to codify major incident is make sure that if the committee
does do that, it is not prescriptive and allows for
flexibilities for change when necessary.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you for that.
Ms. Franks, I wonder if you would weigh in on this same
question. There is the danger that Mr. Nodurft recommends to
us, which is the problem of an overly rigid definition that has
a numbing effect on people. But do you think that Federal
agencies today have the tools to adequately make the
determination themselves on a case-by-base basis to determine
whether there is a major incident, and is it a problem to have
the situation that Mr. Schneider discusses when different
agencies are calling the same incident different things?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
you may answer the question, please.
Ms. Franks. OK. So, the short answer is, yes, most agencies
definitely have tools in place to be able to identify what
incident has taken place and even perform some of those
necessary forensic analyses to further contain whatever
vulnerability has impacted their environment and then start
those eradication procedures.
What's different is that timeframe we discussed a little
earlier, and so agencies definitely take their time to really
comb through what forensically could have happened, starting at
the indicator of compromise and then perhaps looking at if that
malicious actor was able to laterally move throughout their
environment, what were they able to touch? What were they able
to access once they did find another system, another service?
Because of that, such as the SolarWinds incident, agencies
did identify it as impacting their environments differently
from another. For example, you mentioned Commerce. But
Homeland--HHS basically did not. They--NIH was mainly impacted,
but NIH's data was not breached in the sense of where
Commerce's data was compromised.
So, it just depends on the agency. It depends on the
leadership. All the agencies have applicable security response
teams in place to make those necessary identifications, but it
becomes a risk process of really combing through that data to
really figure out if it's major for their environment versus
another environment. So, no two environments or two agencies
are alike.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller, is recognized. Mr. Keller?
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you to
our witnesses for taking time to be here today.
As we continue to move toward heavier reliance on automated
systems, cybersecurity becomes more and more important to
protecting our national interests. The annual Office of
Management and Budget's Federal Information Security Management
Act report disclosed over 30,000 agency cyber incidents in
Fiscal Year 2020 alone. Congress must ensure that our Nation's
cybersecurity laws offer the framework and the flexibility to
allow agencies to handle cyber attacks quickly and efficiently.
Mr. Bitko, the FBI executes most enforcement actions
regarding Federal criminal laws dealing with cybersecurity,
including investigating cyber attacks by bad actors both
foreign and domestic. In your former role as the FBI's Chief
Information Officer, did you run into any interagency legal or
jurisdictional difficulties as you worked to investigate or
enforce cybersecurity issues? And if you did, what
recommendations would you give Congress to streamline
Government reaction to cyber attacks?
Mr. Bitko. Congressman, thank you for the question.
My role was largely internal, looking at the FBI's own
enterprise technology, not directly involved in the authority
or their ability to conduct investigations. I don't know that I
can give you too much deep insight, but I can tell you for sure
that there are--there are issues and challenges that exist just
within the Government today over what authorities does CISA,
for example, have to help in investigating, to going onto other
agencies' networks, to having access to sensitive data. All
those are things I think it's important and there's an
opportunity for FISMA, for Congress to establish clearly where
those authorities lie so there is direct authority and
responsibility for CISA, for the FBI, for other agencies to
ensure that they can--they don't need to get those authorities
resolved in the heat of the battle, but that they've been
clearly defined in advance.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And if I could, you know, for Mr. Schneider, attacks such
as the SolarWinds hack in 2020, while conducted on a private
company, are an immense threat to our national security. So,
Mr. Schneider, how does the public sector work in tandem with
the private sector to ensure the safety and privacy for all
Americans?
Mr. Schneider. Yes, thank you, Congressman, for the
question.
And I think one of the areas, and I think that CISA, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, has really
done an excellent job over--you know, since it came into
existence in 2015 of working closely with private industry,
helping with the creation of information-sharing analysis
centers, which are industry driven, industry run by different
sectors. You know, opportunities to share threat information
and share vulnerability information, and I think that, you
know, we have to have that dialog open.
Gordon mentioned earlier that you need trust in order to
trust what you're sharing and who you're sharing with. And so,
we can't wait until we have an incident to start the sharing.
We have to be sharing information continuously, and we have to
be building those relationships and that trust continuously
because this is truly, you know, it's needed to have a true
public-private partnership in cybersecurity for us as a nation
to be successful.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And I guess if I could just ask Mr. Nodurft, can you please
detail how zero trust cybersecurity principles might help
prevent SolarWinds or other types of cyber attacks in the
future?
Mr. Nodurft. Absolutely. Thank you for that question,
Congressman.
I think that when you break down zero trust into its core
components, what you're--what you're moving agencies toward is
a very hardened center, and it's hard all the way out. You are
constantly--you are--you are enabling interactions by
continuously, continuously authenticating whether or not those
interactions need to occur.
And you have to rely on digital identity solutions. You
have to rely on encryption. You have to rely on endpoint
detection and response. You have to rely on multiple types of
cybersecurity tools and services to come together in a uniquely
architected way to provide for that no trust environment that
is constantly assessing and checking for the interactions that
occur and making sure that anything that touches or deals with
the data is dealing with it in a way that's approved and
validated and authenticated.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I appreciate that, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlelady from Ohio, Ms. Brown, is now recognized.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney and Ranking Member
Comer, for holding this important hearing.
And thank you to all the witnesses for joining us today. I
appreciate your contributions to improving FISMA.
Technology is ever evolving, and IT systems are inherently
at risk and vulnerable to cyber attacks. In 2002, FISMA became
law, requiring each Federal agency to put an agency-wide
program in place to ensure the security of its information and
systems. Since the enactment of this legislation in 2002 and
the subsequent update in 2014, the cyber threat landscape has
transformed remarkably.
The slew of harmful cyber-attacks has exposed
vulnerabilities and revealed some of the flaws in our existing
laws. The fact that DarkSide, a cyber crime group with Russian
ties, was able to force the Colonial Pipeline Company to shut
down the largest pipeline in the U.S. is a threat to our
national security.
In September 2020, the Ashtabula County Medical Center, a
Northeast Ohio hospital, spent more than a week offline after
being hit by a cyber attack. Just a few months ago, Southern
Ohio Medical Center, another hospital in my home state,
suffered a cyber attack that resulted in continued
cancellations of patient appointments a week later.
These attacks are deeply concerning because they have
profound impacts on the lives of real people, in addition to
our national security. I thank the chairwoman and ranking
member for working to address emerging cyber threats and
finding ways to better protect our cyber infrastructure, and I
look forward to making positive changes to FISMA that create a
clear, coordinated, and holistic approach to Federal
information security to meet the ever-changing cyber frontier.
I have a question for Ms. Jennifer Franks. Ms. Franks, let
me ask you what the GAO is learning about the effectiveness of
risk assessment metrics during its review of FISMA
implementation. First, how is the data incorporated into risk
assessment currently collected and reported? And second, does
GAO have preliminary recommendations about how to improve the
coordination between Government agencies responsible for
ongoing risk assessment?
Ms. Franks. So, thank you for that question.
So, in short, our FISMA review, the ongoing review that we
plan to take to agencies this month for comment, didn't
necessarily get into what those risk assessments would look
like from a FISMA implementation scoring metric timeline. We
focused our efforts on what the IGs do and their various
evaluations of the metrics they are to use that are prescribed
by OMB.
Those metrics definitely at this point do not highlight
risk outward facing. But some of the intricacies of identifying
what's in your environment, protecting what's within your
computing environments, those get to the implications of risk
assessments.
NIST does have the Risk Management Framework, and in that
framework that agencies do utilize to implement control in
their environment, it looks at assessing risk from the
identification down to the implementation of whatever
likelihood of events and cyber threats that could be impacting
the various agencies. We have had cybersecurity risk management
work in the past, our last report issued late 2019. As of right
now, we do not have any ongoing work specifically to risk
management assessments.
Ms. Brown. OK, thank you so much.
My next question will be for Ms. Renee Wynn. In the past,
agencies have had to focus much of their time on making sure
they are compliant with FISMA and other cybersecurity measures,
which often means they focus less of their time on risk
management. I applaud the updated guidance on FISMA
implementation that OMB released last month, which aims to
shift the focus of FISMA assessment from compliance to actual
observable security outcomes.
The draft legislation that the chairwoman and ranking
member released today recognizes this shift by requiring
ongoing and continuous risk assessment instead of periodic
point-in-time assessment. Ms. Wynn, can you explain to us how
performing risk assessment on a continuous basis will
strengthen an agency's security system?
Ms. Wynn. Thank you for the question.
I think performing continuous risk assessment is an
absolute necessity. Environments change rapidly within the
Federal Government, as new mission requirements change or new
software, new capabilities come out, and you want to bring
that, the best of a breed into the United States Federal
Government to meet mission requirements. And so doing it on a
continuous basis is really critical.
A quick example on that is having assigned numerous
authorities to operate, it wasn't shortly after assigning
authority to operate when there was a software update, and it
actually broke some of the controls that we had put into place.
And so, several weeks later, after saying we're good and we've
accepted the risk, we discovered this glaring hole, reported it
back to the software developer, which then got fixed.
But in this period of time, you've made an assessment.
You've made a statement, but then two weeks later, and then
ultimately took two more weeks to get that gap closed. So, on a
continuous basis, you can get what I'll call red alerts so you
can make sure that your holes or your backside is not so
exposed.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Ms. Wynn, and it appears my time has
expired. I will yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much. The gentlelady from
Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, is now recognized.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank
you for having this important hearing, as many others have
said.
In recent years, my home state of Florida has been in the
crosshairs of the onslaught of devastating cyber attacks. The
targets range from large Federal agencies like NASA to local
school districts, major hospital systems, and the private
sector has faced equally dire threats with far-ranging impacts
much like we saw in the ransomware attack on a Miami-based
software company, Kaseya. And for them, they endured a
ransomware attack that resulted in fallout to hundreds of
downstream businesses.
Cyber criminals clearly want the World Wide Web to be a
lawless ``Wild West,'' and it is critical that we modernize our
approach to meet the challenge of this evolving cyber frontier.
One simple fact makes this clear. There are two entities with
important roles in Federal cybersecurity, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, or CISA, and the Office of the
National Cyber Director. And that was established in just the
last few years after the last FISMA update, which was in 2014.
The draft FISMA reform bill that the chairwoman and ranking
member released today integrates these offices into the
cybersecurity Government structure, and they are careful to
strike the appropriate balance with OMB to create a clear and
effective dynamic.
Mr. Schneider, you previously served as the Chief
Information Security Officer at OMB, and based on your
experience, can you characterize how CISA and the National
Cyber Director fit within the FISMA framework and enhance our
national cybersecurity defense posture?
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Congresswoman. Thank you for the
question.
Yes. I think how they fit in is the National Cyber Director
is really the overarching voice and specifically to Federal
cybersecurity because both organizations have roles beyond
that. But for Federal cybersecurity, I view the National Cyber
Director as having that overarching voice, being a bit of the
conductor. I view CISA as really being the operational partner
with agencies. CISA should be there to help agencies who are
tasked to implement their risk management programs.
And then the other two really important players are the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, who is charged
with the establishment of standards and creation of guidance,
and then the Office of Management and Budget, who has--and I
think should continue to have--the lead for developing policy
and overseeing the programs, providing the oversight, being the
hammer to agencies while CISA is being the partner to agencies.
And I think the interaction with OMB and the National Cyber
Director is going to need to be absolutely seamless to make
this work.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
Mr. Nodurft, can you illustrate why it is so important to
have these roles clearly defined?
Mr. Nodurft. Yes, Congresswoman. Thank you so much for the
question.
The necessity of streamlined reporting requirements from
the agencies up makes it much easier for them to know how to
respond, when to respond, with whom to speak with on the
backend of responding to incidents. So, that's one.
Two, when agencies are proactively trying to mitigate their
cyber risks, they need clear reporting channels and clear areas
of jurisdiction to go and propose budgets and work on budgeting
with. They need clear direction from a strategic standpoint as
well as an operational standpoint, and I think by clearly
delineating who owns what, agencies will know where to look and
where to go, and it will make it much easier for them to work
together to build a broader defensive structure.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
The Senate's version of FISMA reform would create a liaison
between CISA and each agency by assigning a CISA adviser to
each agency, much like every agency has a White House liaison,
for example. And this role is intended to be a two-way street,
providing additional support to the agency while also helping
CISA better understand the agency's nuances and unique needs.
Ms. Wynn, do you think such a dedicated liaison role would
be helpful, or would that be an unhelpful intrusion of CISA
into agency operations?
Ms. Wynn. From my perspective, I worked--when I was within
the Federal Government, I worked very closely with CISA on a
couple of matters. I was very proactive in terms of engaging
them, the Office of Management and Budget, DHS, and in fact, on
a couple of occasions, the FBI. And having somebody to call
makes a huge difference.
So, if CISA's effectiveness depends upon having a liaison,
and they agree that that's what's necessary for them to operate
better within their organizational structure, then absolutely
would support codifying having a liaison. The important thing
to walk away with is we have to work together in order to solve
very hard problems.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. My
time has expired.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back. The
gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, you are now recognized.
Ms. Kelly?
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Move to the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Davis. You are now recognized for five minutes. Mr. Davis?
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And like others have
already said, thank you for holding this important hearing.
The Department of Homeland Security issued a binding
operational directive in 2020 that requires most Federal
agencies to have a vulnerability disclosure policy, which
describes how someone who uncovers a cybersecurity
vulnerability in a Federal system can report that vulnerability
to the affected agency without fear of legal action.
According to HackerOne, a cybersecurity firm that employs
hackers and cybersecurity researchers to audit security
hackers, reported more than 66,000 verified vulnerabilities in
2021, a 21 percent increase from 2020. That is tens of
thousands of vulnerabilities that may not have been found by
automated process.
It is crucial that these cybersecurity researchers have the
ability to report to the Federal Government, and I am pleased
that the draft legislation we are discussing includes a
provision to codify Federal vulnerability disclosure programs.
Mr. Schneider, before you left OMB, only a handful of
Federal agencies had published a vulnerability disclosure
policy. Fortunately, today, almost all Federal agencies have
such policy. In your opinion, how efficient are Federal
agencies at managing their vulnerability disclosure programs?
Mr. Schneider. Congressman, thank you for the question.
And vulnerability disclosure is a really important area. As
you mentioned, and just before I left the Government or as I
was departing, we published an OMB memo that went out in
conjunction with that binding operational directive, memo--OMB
Memo 20-32, which also directed agencies to implement
vulnerability disclosure programs.
And the fact that most agencies have one in place today I
think is a testament to, A, the agencies' recognition of the
importance of being able to leverage the research community to
get vulnerabilities in and get them identified. I think the
other really important aspect of a vulnerability disclosure
program, though, is how you get those vulnerabilities sent back
to industry or whoever the responsible party is to develop a
mitigation for them, and how do you protect that information in
the meantime?
You know, the Log4j vulnerability that we're experiencing,
you know, it had been identified by a researcher. It had been,
you know, reported to Apache and was being worked on. And then
another company identified it, put out a patch to their own
software, and then it became public.
So, really the, you know, disclosure of the vulnerability
with Log4j got out ahead of the remediation, and that's why we
have to be so careful about how we treat that vulnerability
information as it's identified before there's a mitigation in
place.
Mr. Davis. Most agencies respond within a period of about
three days. Do you think that is adequate in terms of response
time?
Mr. Schneider. For responding, I think you're talking about
responding to the researcher. And I do think three days is
adequate. I think, you know, you need to get back to the
researcher quickly. They need to know that you're taking it
seriously and that you're going to do something about it.
Otherwise, they may go disclose--disclose the vulnerability
more broadly and more publicly to potentially disastrous
results.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much.
Ms. Wynn, let me ask you how can we ensure that agencies
have the ability to keep up with the influx of vulnerability
reports? A lot of them are coming in.
Ms. Wynn. Thank you for that.
So, I had the pleasure of having well over 100,000
vulnerabilities reported to me on a regular basis because of
the complex systems used at NASA. And so, what we ended up
doing was we established actually a vulnerability management
program, and that's because you can't always address every
vulnerability right away. And that sounds like that you might
be ignoring risk, but what we would have at NASA are something
called the flight freeze, and this was to ensure the risk on a
flight was mitigated as fast as possible.
And so during those flight freezes, we wouldn't be able to
address the vulnerabilities that the system might have had, but
that system, we would put other risk mitigations in place like
making sure the system didn't go online, which is very, very
much the case on mission control systems and that.
And so you have a spectrum of risks you have to deal with.
By having a vulnerability management program, you can hold
mission and mission support heads accountable for dealing with
their vulnerabilities in the right amount of time so that you
don't disrupt operations.
Mr. Davis. And quickly, Mr. Bitko----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman----
Mr. Davis. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much, Mr. Davis. The
gentlelady from California, Ms. Speier, is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I am delighted that
this particular hearing is not only happening, but that the
American people can see that Democrats and Republicans can work
together.
I want to focus on the work force because certainly in my
work on the Intelligence Committee, the biggest hole is in
getting the talent we need to perform the various functions.
So, I would like to ask you, Mr. Schneider and Mr. Nodurft,
what your experience was at OMB in terms of the staffing
challenges, and what recommendations you would make to us to
make sure that we have the talent and are able to afford the
payments necessary in terms of salaries to attract the kind of
talent we need.
Mr. Schneider?
Mr. Schneider. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman.
You are absolutely correct. The work force is--I mean, is
so critical in cybersecurity. The work force are the ones that
are doing literally all the work, making all the decisions, and
it is an immense challenge. We don't have enough skilled
cybersecurity professionals nationwide, and then the Federal
Government is competing and, as you alluded to, challenged from
a wage standpoint, from an ability to--compensation standpoint
to bring people in.
And so, what I saw is that we have a lot of really
excellent and a lot of really dedicated people who are inside
the Federal Government. I think we need more programs that
allow people to come into the Government, maybe for a short
period of time, or at least thinking it's for a short period of
time. Because some of them will find out that they love the
mission, and they'll stay.
I think we also need the ability to have people move in and
out of Government more easily. There's a whole bunch of
challenges associated with----
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Schneider. Oh, I'm sorry.
Ms. Speier. I need to move on, but is there any--Mr.
Nodurft, do you have any ideas on how we can attract this
talent----
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you for the question, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. that Mr. Schneider has suggested?
Mr. Nodurft. So, yes, ma'am. Thank you.
The one idea I want to bring up is you're absolutely right.
This is an ``all hands on deck'' moment. I think we need to or
the committee should consider and should encourage the
administration to consider new approaches that bring in and
leverage industry expertise in certain areas in finite periods
of time. And whether that's through contractual relationships,
through different GSA vehicles or contract vehicles, or whether
it's public-private partnerships that we currently have in
place, we need to be able to access the talent that is in
whatever part of our ecosystem that is possible.
So, for example, the committee's work on the bill is
encouraging agencies to move to zero trust environments. I
think, ma'am, the committee has an opportunity to really
encourage the administration to put in place specific
authorities that allow for folks who are very familiar with the
technology to work side by side with the departments and
agencies to build out those environments, help them configure
them, teach them how to manage and continue to grow them, and
then move out.
And we need--we need to be able to do that seamlessly. So,
it's big ideas that talk about those types of partnerships that
we're proposing.
Ms. Speier. OK, thank you.
Ms. Franks, Mr. Connolly had asked you about those 900
recommendations that have not yet been complied with. Could you
provide us with--and you can do this offline, but provide to
the committee the most critical ones that still haven't been
addressed so that we can review it, please?
Ms. Franks. Yes, absolutely. I can provide that to you.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Ms. Franks. You're very welcome.
Ms. Speier. And Ms. Wynn, you had mentioned that there are
companies that repeatedly have, I guess, break-ins that we
continue to contract with, if I remember or interpreted your
testimony correctly. Could you actually specify those
companies, please?
Ms. Wynn. I don't have that list handy. I'm happy to
followup maybe afterwards to share some of the information
about having to work with vendors and contractors about some of
their repeated challenges that they were creating for the
agencies that I worked for.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Madam Chair, I think that is really
important because we can't continue to contract with those that
have inappropriate cyber hygiene. And there are lots of
companies out there, new startups, particularly in my district,
that are doing some very exciting things, and our procurement
process is so long and arduous that we oftentimes get the
contract and it is already out of date with a particular
software company.
So, I hope that we look at that as well because there is
much that needs to be done. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The lady yields back, and that is a
very important point. Thank you very much, and we will look at
that.
Thank you.
We now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Kelly.
You are now recognized.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The proliferation of smart devices across society has
helped to improve some of the everyday functions of our lives.
Examples include watches tracking our health analytics, voice-
activated light switches, and smart cities where sensors can
analyze traffic patterns, water supplies, or energy use to
better serve citizens.
These smart devices that connect to the Internet, known as
Internet of Things, or IoT devices, that are increasingly part
of the market for both home and business operation. Last
Congress, my IoT Cybersecurity Improvement Act was signed into
law to help create Federal standards for Government-used IoT
devices. The law sets minimum security standards for Internet-
connected devices purchased by a Federal Government agency and
created a vulnerability disclosure program for Government IT.
Despite this law, I am still concerned that our
cybersecurity standards have not kept pace with the rise of IoT
devices. This is really worrisome because it is not just smart
refrigerators that can be at risk to hackers, but as you guys
know, medical devices, security cameras, and even automobiles
all offer inroads for hackers to enter network systems.
Mr. Schneider, what are some of the important functions of
IoT devices on Federal networks?
Mr. Schneider. Congresswoman, thank you for the question.
I think we're going to see--you know, we're seeing today,
you know, numerous places where Internet of Things, where IoT
devices are being integrated into Federal agencies. But, and I
think some of them are going to serve important purposes. My
concern is also about the ones that might not.
You mentioned the Internet-connected refrigerator that
might be in a breakroom, and someone might decide it would be a
good idea from the facilities to be able to monitor the
temperature of that refrigerator and connect it to the agency's
network and if that device now could be the access point into
the entire agency's network, into truly where the sensitive
information is.
So, I think agencies need to pay attention as they're
implementing IoT devices. IoT devices need to be more secure.
But we also need to find a way, when possible, to keep them
segmented within the environment so they're not, you know, an
entry point, if you will.
Ms. Kelly. I know you talked about the refrigerator, but
how do hackers exploit vulnerable IoT devices on a network? How
do they do it?
Mr. Schneider. So, I mean, hackers will do it like they
will with other devices. They will identify a vulnerability.
They are often able to remotely determine if the individual
device is, you know, still vulnerable. Is it still running the
version, the vulnerable version of the software? In some cases,
with IoT devices, they can't even be updated. So, they know
it's vulnerable.
And then they're able to, you know, use whatever the
exploitation is to gain access to that device, and then
they're--you know, kind of once they're in, they start working
their normal approach of elevating privileges, moving laterally
through the system, and starting the reconnaissance phase of
what information do they want to steal, gain, get access to.
You know, what are they trying to achieve inside and really
starting to look around to see what they can do inside the
environment.
Ms. Kelly. In 2020, Palo Alto Networks reported that--and I
quote--``57 percent of IoT devices are vulnerable to medium or
high severity attacks, making IoT the low-hanging fruit for
attackers.'' And the risk of an IoT hack across the Federal
Government is even greater since it is not sensitive
information at risk for actual equipment or devices that
underpin our infrastructure.
Now reporting on these vulnerabilities is also necessary
and critical to informing improvements to our cybersecurity
system. Again, Mr. Schneider, how will reporting of
vulnerabilities improve coordination of the Federal
Government's cybersecurity infrastructure?
Mr. Schneider. Yes, great question and great points, ma'am.
And I think it highlights the need to take action when this
information is reported, right? We need the vulnerabilities
identified. Agencies need to be aware of them, and then
agencies need to take action.
It's really exciting for us to talk about something like
SolarWinds that was a very sophisticated attack, but quite
frankly, most cyber incidents, as the statistics you just
mentioned, you know, come from a known vulnerability that could
have been mitigated with a known patch that was out there that
just had not been applied by organizations. That's where most
cyber attacks, successful attacks take place.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
And Mr. Nodurft, how is the situation complicated by
individual enterprises across the Government/dot-government
landscape?
Mr. Nodurft. Thank you very much, ma'am, for the question.
So, we have individual enterprises across the Federal
landscape that within them have their own individual
enterprises across the Federal landscape. It is a very diverse
enterprise environment, and what you have is the diverse set of
missions requires technology purchases, acquisitions that want
to bring in some of the--and leverage some of the most modern
advanced technologies that are out there right now.
I think that we, as a--or the Federal Government should
encourage use of the latest and greatest and most modern
technologies, whether it's for mission or for enterprise
management. Both of those should be highly encouraged. And we
just need to think through what are the--what are the
frameworks, whether it's the NIST cybersecurity framework. What
are the solutions?
Are there--I can tell you that member companies of mine, of
the Alliance for Digital Innovation can independently audit IoT
environments for these new technologies to make sure that they
are up to date, and they are secure. And I think we should take
a look at how we are, again, partnering from a public-private
standpoint to make sure that the talent that we need to secure
these new environments is accessible to the agencies so that
they use this modern technology.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, and I am way over time. I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back, and now I
recognize myself.
I, first and foremost, want to thank Ranking Member Comer
for working with us in a bipartisan way to confront this
tremendous challenge. He has indicated he does not want a
closing statement.
But as we have seen here today, the breadth and the
complexity of cybersecurity threats to the Federal Government
are absolutely staggering. I am grateful to all of our
witnesses for sharing their deep knowledge and personal
experience from both the Federal Government and the private
sector perspectives. The combined years of Government service
represented on our panel must be around 100, and it shows in
the high caliber of the recommendations shared today.
I am tremendously grateful to Congressman Comer for his
strong partnership on this issue and to all our committee
members, Democrat and Republican, for their engagement during
this hearing and for our staffs. Today's hearing showed there
is a strong bipartisan commitment to modernizing FISMA, and I
have been encouraged by similar strong support in the Senate
and the Biden administration.
So, we have a real opportunity to pass FISMA reform this
year and to protect the intellectual property, sensitive data,
and networks that are essential to our country's economy and
national security. I am committed to getting FISMA reform done
right, and I am looking forward to working in a bipartisan way
to achieve this for the American people. And I thank all of the
participants.
Before we close, I want to take care of one piece of
business. Without objection, Ms. Shontel Brown is added to the
Government Operations Subcommittee and the Economic Consumer
Policy Subcommittee. Without objection.
I also ask unanimous consent to insert into the br a
statement from the SecurityScorecard. Without objection, so
ordered[SA1].
Chairwoman Maloney. In closing, I want to thank again our
panelists for their remarks, and I want to commend my
colleagues for participating in this important conversation.
With that, and without objection, all members have five
legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials
and to submit additional written questions for the witnesses to
the chair, which will be forwarded to the witnesses for their
response. I ask our witnesses to respond as promptly as
possible.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:54 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
