- EXAMINING THE WORLDWIDE THREAT OF AL QAEDA, ISIS, AND OTHER FOREIGN TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE WORLDWIDE
THREAT OF AL QAEDA, ISIS, AND
OTHER FOREIGN TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 7, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-283 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Vacancy
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Daniel Rebnord, Team Lead
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on National Security

Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts, Chairman
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin, Ranking
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,          Minority Member
Georgia                          Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Vacancy
Jackie Speier, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on December 7, 2021.................................     1

Witnesses

Ms. Milancy D. Harris, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense,
Special Operations and Combating Terrorism, Department of
Defense
Oral Statement...................................................     4
Mr. Christopher A. Landberg, Acting Principal Deputy Coordinator,
Bureau of Counterterrorism, Department of State
Oral Statement...................................................     5

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

No additional documents were entered into the record for this
hearing.

EXAMINING THE WORLDWIDE
THREAT OF AL QAEDA, ISIS, AND
OTHER FOREIGN TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS

----------

Tuesday, December 7, 2021

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on National Security
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m.,
2154 Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom. Hon. Stephen
F. Lynch (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Lynch, Maloney, Welch, DeSaulnier,
Wasserman Schultz, Grothman, and Comer.
Also present: Representatives Trahan and Franklin (waived
on).
Mr. Lynch. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time. I now recognize myself for
an opening statement.
Good morning, everyone, and thank you for attending today's
hearing. Today's Subcommittee on National Security will
reexamine and reassess the varied and evolving terrorist
threats facing our Nation and our democratic allies, with the
goal of better preparing for and effectively responding to
those threats.
While the current challenges posed by the global COVID-19
pandemic has claimed the attention and resources of our
government, we cannot afford to ignore the active and emerging
threats that continue to develop, and in some cases have
shifted to ungoverned regions of the globe and have evolved in
ways that may become more difficult to defeat.
As terrorist threats to the United States continue to
evolve, so too must our counterterrorism approach. Terrorist
organizations around the world have started to exploit local
conflicts and insurgencies to advance their own violent and
twisted ideological objectives. Denying safe haven to these
organizations and de-legitimatizing their ideology requires a
whole-of-government approach that lessens our reliance on
massive, long-term military presence and instead looks to over-
the-horizon partnerships and quick-strike capabilities.
Recent history has demonstrated that the value of robust
intelligence sharing, diplomatic engagement, and civilian and
humanitarian assistance to address root causes of conflict.
Experience has also shown that broad democratic goals are best
accomplished in coordination with our allies, by, with, and
through local partners in the lead, whenever possible.
We do owe a solemn debt of gratitude to the hundreds of
thousands of men and women who have fought to defend our
country against terrorism over the past 30 years.
Notwithstanding that service and patriotism, which has depleted
the ranks of al Qaeda and ISIS leadership, the long-term
success of our effort remains a challenge. In some ways, the
terrorist threats we face today are more complex and diffuse
than ever before, and once again we are in search of a strategy
and a policy that will succeed against these new threats going
forward.
I look forward to the hearing--excuse me. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today about their assessment of the
terrorist threats facing the United States. I also look forward
to hearing more about how the Biden administration is working
to protect Americans from these threats by building and
strengthening our counterterrorism partnership and leveraging
all available tools of national power, including military
force, when necessary.
Finally, while I believe the decision to end the massive
20-year military presence in Afghanistan was the correct one,
the withdrawal does create additional counterterrorism
challenges, and I look forward to hearing more about how the
Biden administration will continue to contain those threats.
In an effort to gain a more thorough insight of these
issues, by agreement, we have also arranged for a classified
question-and-answer session following this hearing to provide
answers to members' questions which may require disclosure of
sensitive and classified information and materials.
And with that I will now yield to the ranking member, the
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, for his opening
remarks.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. First of all, I would like to
thank you for allowing, to a degree--I know this was not the
day we were expecting it, but to allow some of us to attend the
hearing in person, and it is appreciated and it has not gone
unnoticed.
Good morning. I want to thank our witnesses for being here
today. We are here to discuss the worldwide threat of
terrorism. Interestingly, we originally invited this hearing
weeks ago with a different theme. Back then, the hearing was
going to cover the continued threat posed by terrorist
organizations following the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan. I
wonder why that changed.
I wish this hearing was focused on Afghanistan. The world
watched as the Biden administration botched the withdrawal,
leading to the deaths of 13 servicemembers in an explosion
outside the Kabul airport.
President Biden promised we would not see another Saigon.
He was wrong. He promised he would get all Americans and our
allies out of harm's way, but he abandoned them. He promised
that al Qaeda was gone, but common sense will tell us that is
not true. He promised his over-the-horizon capabilities were
just as good as traditional means of counterterror, then
launched a drone strike that killed 10 civilians, including
children.
Any one of these failures warrants a hearing, but we have
not had them. I wonder why.
Since withdrawal, life in Afghanistan has not improved. For
example, the Taliban's new government contains U.S.-recognized
terrorists. The Taliban threw a military parade with American
equipment. The Taliban have brutally beat women and children
for protesting for their rights. And the Taliban are actively
hunting our allies for execution. But this committee remains
silent while it has held hearings on bills not under the
committee's jurisdiction, paychecks for soccer players, and the
Green New Deal pipeline.
I hope we can learn today how the Biden administration
plans to ensure the safety of Afghanistan, including our former
troops who are former allies, and the women and girls, what our
current over-the-horizon capabilities are and how the Biden
administration plans to stop Afghanistan from becoming a safe
haven for terrorism.
The last time Taliban controlled Afghanistan the result was
the worst attack on the homeland is six decades. I sincerely
hope we are well positioned to stop that from happening again.
I would like to thank our witnesses again for being here
today, and I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman, and I do appreciate his
comments about the scope of this hearing. Certainly Afghanistan
is in bounds for our discussion in this hearing. As I am sure
you share, our priority is the safety of American citizens,
both at home and overseas, and the scope of this hearing is
broader because we want to make sure that the discussion is
germane to other countries, such as Somalia, Mali, Syria, and
other theaters where we are also seeing terrorist activity.
So that is the reason we expanded it, but certainly
Afghanistan is well within bounds to talk about what is
happening there and what is happening with the over-the-horizon
strategy.
So I would like to now introduce our witnesses. Today we
are joined by Ms. Milancy D. Harris, who is the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and
Combating Terrorism at the Department of Defense. Ms. Harris
was sworn into her position in February 2021. She has extensive
experience working on U.S. counterterrorism policy, including
through prior service as Chief of Staff of the Director of
Intelligence at the National Counterterrorism Center and as the
Director for Counterterrorism on the National Security Council.
We are also joined by Mr. Christopher A. Landberg, Acting
Principal Deputy Coordinator for the Bureau of Counterterrorism
at the Department of State. Mr. Landberg is a career member of
State Department Senior Foreign Service and has previously
served in several roles at the Department, including as
Director of the International Narcotics and Law Enforcement
Program at Embassy Bogota and Director of the Counterterrorism
Bureau's Office of South and Central Asia and Near East
Affairs. I want to thank you both for attending, and especially
attending in person. We appreciate that courtesy. I look
forward to your testimony.
Pursuant to rules of the committee, would you please both
stand and raise your right hands so we can swear you in.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Ms. Harris. I do.
Mr. Landberg. I do.
Mr. Lynch. Let the record show that the witnesses have each
answered in the affirmative. And without objection, your
written statements will be made part of the record.
With that, Ms. Harris--please be seated, both of you. Thank
you. With that, Ms. Harris, you are now recognized for a five-
minute summation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MILANCY D. HARRIS, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE, SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND COMBATING TERRORISM, DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE

Ms. Harris. Good morning Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member
Grothman, and esteemed members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak with you today, particularly in
person, about the Department of Defense's approach to
counterterrorism. I am grateful to appear with my Department of
State colleague and look forward to today's discussion.
While we have significantly degraded the terrorist threat
with the last 20 years of sustained pressure, we still face a
potent challenge. The terrorist threat to the U.S. homeland
from externally directed attacks is at its lowest since 9/11,
but we still face a number of terrorist groups committed to
targeting U.S. interests and personnel abroad. These groups
seek to take advantage of instability and ungoverned spaces and
have a new and evolving set of tools readily available.
Today's terrorist groups are proficient with new
technologies, agile in the information environment, creative in
circumventing traditional financial systems, and remain
ideologically influential enough to motivate generations of new
people to join them or conduct independent attacks on their
behalf.
But let me be clear. The United States has met this
challenge at every evolution. Our capability to counter
terrorist threats has grown exponentially since 9/11. While it
is critical to preserve the option for unilateral U.S.
counterterrorism operations where necessary, we often see that
the most effective counterterrorism approach is a mix of
kinetic and non-kinetic capabilities and working with our
partners and allies.
For the Department, this includes collaborating with allies
and partners on partnered operations, using our education and
capacity-building programs to help develop increased
counterterrorism capability in critical regions and ensuring
our security cooperation efforts integrate with other
complementary U.S. Government efforts.
As we process the lessons from our time in Afghanistan and
set the conditions for a new counterterrorism mission, we will
seek to leverage intelligence, diplomacy, and military
capabilities to ensure Afghanistan never again becomes a safe
haven for terrorist organizations. Any approach will not be
static. We will continue to iterate and adjust based on the
terrorist threat and what will keep America safe. We will rely
on the whole-of-government approach as we seek to deepen
relationships in the region, understand the evolving state of
Afghanistan's government, and maintain our commitment to the
Afghan people.
Our withdrawal from Afghanistan does not diminish the
Department's vigilance in our counterterrorism mission, and our
full intention remains on protecting our homeland, citizens,
and interests from the continued threat terrorism poses, not
only from Afghanistan but around the world. We will never
waiver in that mission.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and distinguished
members of the committee. I look forward to your questions
today.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. And, Mr. Landberg, you are now
recognized for five minutes for a summation of your testimony.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER A. LANDBERG, ACTING PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
COORDINATOR, BUREAU OF COUNTERTERRORISM, DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Landberg. Good morning. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member
Grothman, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for this opportunity to appear before you today with my
Department of Defense colleague to discuss the State
Department's and broader U.S. government's efforts to counter
the evolving terrorist threats around the world. I would ask
that my full written statement be entered into the record.
The United States is confronting a terrorist threat
landscape that is dynamic, complex, and fast moving. Foreign
terrorist groups remain a persistent and pervasive threat,
despite the significant progress we have made in degrading
their ability to directly threaten the United States.
Globally, ISIS and al Qaeda remain resilient and
determined. Despite significant losses in leadership and
territorial control, both groups are leveraging their branches
and networks across the Middle East, Asia, and Africa to
advance their agendas.
Countering these terrorist threats remains at the forefront
of the Biden-Harris administration priorities. The United
States' global counterterrorism engagement is a whole-of-
government effort, as you said, Mr. Chairman, with the
Department of Defense, the intelligence community, and civilian
assistance and law enforcement agencies all playing important
roles. Today I wish to focus on the State Department's efforts
to protect the United States, our citizens, our allies, and our
interests from terrorists.
The State Department is taking concrete and specific
actions to counter these complex and evolving terrorist threats
worldwide. We play a critical role in the United States
government's efforts to promote counterterrorism cooperation,
strengthen partnerships, and build civilian capacity to counter
the full spectrum of terrorist threats confronting the United
States and our allies.
This includes bolstering the professionalism and capability
of partner nations' law enforcement to identify, deter,
prevent, disrupt, apprehend, investigate, prosecute, and
convict terrorists and their supporters, including through
support for key regional and multilateral institutions and
global initiatives.
The State Department is leading the U.S. government's
diplomatic engagements with key partners to ensure broad
international counterterrorism support and assistance. State
engages with foreign partners and leverages multilateral
organizations such as the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, to
bolster information-sharing and coordinate and intensify
international support.
State, in coordination with interagency and international
partners, is using foreign assistance to build partner capacity
to enable them to address terrorist threats. We are
strengthening these partner nations' capabilities to secure
their borders, investigate and disrupt terrorist plots, track
terrorist financing, prosecute and incarcerate terrorist
offenders, and prevent and counter violent extremism, and also
rehabilitate and reintegrate former terrorists.
State is using counterterrorism designations to counter
terrorism threats and disrupt terrorism financing. For example,
on November 22, we designed three ISIS Khorasan leaders as
specially designated global terrorists.
State is also working with our interagency and
international partners to prevent terrorist travel. We actively
encourage partner governments to nominate terrorist actors, as
appropriate, into their own national watch lists and
international law enforcement platforms such as Interpol. We
also continue to negotiate and implement bilateral terrorism
screening arrangements with select foreign partners, which
position them to better identify and disrupt terrorist travel
around the world.
Amid this diverse and dynamic threat landscape, the path
forward to countering terrorism required continued diplomacy,
dialog, and diligence. We must remain vigilant and proactive in
protecting the United States, our citizens and our allies, and
in promoting U.S. national security interests.
The State Department remains committed to working with
interagency partner nations and with Congress to address the
evolving threats of terrorism. We very much welcome the
interest of Congress on this issue, and I look forward to your
questions in the discussion. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Before we move to questions I have a couple of quick
housekeeping matters. As I understand, several members from
outside of the committee wish to participate today. First,
without objection, the gentlewoman from Massachusetts, my
friend and colleague, Representative Lori Trahan, is recognized
for the purpose of participating in the questioning of
witnesses. And, without objection, the gentleman from Florida,
Representative Franklin, is also recognized for the purpose of
participating in questioning the witnesses. Thank you.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes for questions.
In September, Director of National Intelligence Avril
Haines stated that while intelligence community will continue
to monitor the terrorist threats in Afghanistan, that country
is not currently at, quote, ``the top of the list for terrorist
threats against the U.S. homeland.'' Instead, Director Haines
said the intelligence community sees the greatest threats
emerging from places like Yemen and Somalia, where al Qaeda-
affiliated groups continue to operate, and from Syria and Iraq,
where ISIS maintains the ability to carry out attacks, despite
the defeat of its so-called caliphate in 2019.
Ms. Harris, President Biden has stated that the United
States will continue to counter terrorist threats in
Afghanistan from an over-the-horizon basis. That term has been
used multiple times to describe the new profile of our
response. To the extent that you can describe it, can you
please help explain for our subcommittee members what that
means. What does that mean and how is it working? How does it
work and how is it working with that effort? Thank you.
Ms. Harris. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman. When
we think about over-the-horizon it is not a static concept. It
is an iterative approach, tailored to the individual terrorist
threat that we are looking at. It is a way to bring the
Department and the whole-of-government's full capabilities to
bear against a terrorist problem and scale it based on the
terrorist threat that we see.
As we seek to set conditions in Afghanistan, for example,
we are seeking to deepen our relationships in the region, work
with our allies and partners who have a shared interest in
preventing Afghanistan from becoming a terrorist safe haven and
continue to understand how ISIS-K and al Qaeda are taking
advantage of the new situation. As such, we will continue to
iterate on how best to counter that threat, but we maintain the
full suite of the Department's capabilities to bring to bear as
we learn more.
Mr. Lynch. We have had the chance to, on this committee,
look at some of the problem areas. I have led multiple codels
to Yemen, Somalia, and the one thing that strikes me in Africa,
and Mali as well, but the one thing that strikes me is the
sheer size of the continent of Africa and the difficulty that
that presents. How does over-the-horizon work on the continent
of Africa, places like Mali and the Sahel, and the Horn of
Africa, given the fact that we are talking about huge spaces
there and most of the areas are ungoverned so the
infrastructure is very thin, and it would be difficult to
maintain an over-the-horizon presence, I believe, in a timely
fashion to address terrorist threats in those locations. Could
you talk about the strategy there?
Ms. Harris. Absolutely. I think Africa provides a good
example of a tailored approach. So it does not necessarily mean
we do not have, you know, U.S. forces stationed in Africa, to
be operating over the horizon. It means that we can use the
full suite of capabilities that are available in Africa, based
on the terrorist threat we see.
Some of it is a by-within-through effort. We work with
allies and partners, when you think about our activities in the
Sahel, and what we are trying to pursue against JNIM and ISIS
in West Africa. In Somalia, you have seen we have had both
forces in Somalia and stationed nearby, but an approach that
focuses on episodic engagement, building partner capacity,
working with Somali partners to build increased
counterterrorism capacity.
Both, I think, involve elements that could be described as
over-the-horizon but are tailored to the nature of the
terrorist threat.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Mr. Landberg, does the State
Department have a role in this?
Mr. Landberg. Absolutely, sir. Thank you for the question.
As my DoD colleague was saying, we look at this especially in
places like the Sahel and in East Africa as a whole-of-
government approach. In counterterrorism, that includes State
Department, U.S. law enforcement, and DoD, and other
interagency allies. That is part of the equation. But the
Administration actually is looking at it as an approach that
includes development assistance and governance and working with
other countries.
So one of the things I wanted to highlight is that we work
very closely with our allies, through a number of international
organizations. The D-ISIS Coalition is something that we have
been working on intensively, and in a meeting just a few days
ago they created, in the D-ISIS Coalition, the Africa Focus
Group, which is now going to help the 84 members of the D-ISIS
Coalition focus efforts, leverage all our capabilities on
addressing terrorist threats in Africa. So this is like a
whole-of-government but also really an international community
approach.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Have we resourced this enough? I
mean, this is a new and additional responsibility, I think, for
State Department. Have we provided the resources necessary to
undertake this change?
Mr. Landberg. Thank you. I can speak for only the
Counterterrorism Bureau. We have robust resources that we are
working to implement effectively. That is our mission. We have
the capability to do more and so do our partners. We work to
leverage DHS, DOJ, FBI to help build law enforcement
capabilities wherever we are working.
We have more capabilities and we could do more, but right
now we are mostly focused on effective implementation of the
funding we have.
Mr. Lynch. OK. Thank you. My time has expired. I now
recognize the ranking member, the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman, for five minutes for questions.
Mr. Grothman. Thanks. We will ask Mr. Landberg the
questions. In February 2020, the Trump administration signed
the DOHA Agreement with the Taliban, and this agreement
required that the Taliban sever all ties with al Qaeda before
the U.S. withdrew. Did the Taliban, to the best of your
knowledge, meet all the requirements of the 2020 agreement
before the Biden administration withdrew?
Mr. Landberg. Thank you, sir. We have been very clear--we
are very mission-focused right now, and we have been very clear
with the Taliban what we expect of them in terms of
counterterrorism. They are aware that they need to--if they
want to build any legitimacy with the United States and the
international community, cut ties with al Qaeda and also ensure
that Afghanistan never again becomes a source of terrorist
threats to the United States or any of our allies. And they are
absolutely focused on degrading ISIS-K, and also there have
bene many discussions on our concerns about al Qaeda and the
persistent presence in parts of Afghanistan.
Mr. Grothman. Since you did not answer yes I take it that
means there are still some ties there, or what is the deal?
Mr. Landberg. The Taliban have, including in a meeting just
a few days ago, have assured the United States and also
international partners that they will never again allow
Afghanistan to become a source of terrorist threat to the
United States or any other country.
Mr. Grothman. You are still kind of weaseling around the
question. Do they have ties with al Qaeda?
Mr. Landberg. Our--we are going to have a classified
session later on today I would be happy to talk in a little bit
more detail about terrorist activities and threats emanating
from Afghanistan. I will say that right now we have been very
clear in our messaging with the Taliban, on numerous occasions.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Now we have a leadership vacuum in
Afghanistan, and we have kind of that empty airport there. Will
Russia, China, or Iran attempt to make geo-strategic gains
through Afghanistan now that we are not there, including at the
airport?
Mr. Landberg. Sir, so I am happy to take back the question
regarding the future of the airport, which is outside my
purview in the Counterterrorism Bureau. What I can say is that,
as my DoD colleague said, we are working in the region to
bolster our partners' capabilities. We are not the only power
in that region. We know that Russia and China and others have
interest in that region. Where we can work collaboratively with
them, we will, and where our interests diverge we will follow
U.S. priorities and interests.
And I absolutely know that there have been a number of
meetings with the Russians and the Chinese that the United
States has been a part of, and there is a lot of concern among
all the parties in the region about discussing specifically
terrorist threats and instability emanating from Afghanistan.
Mr. Grothman. That is interesting. So you mean that Russia,
China, and the U.S. all sit together with the Afghans?
Mr. Landberg. We had one meeting that I am aware of with
Russia and China. There is definitely a press statement on
that. And we have had interaction with both countries where we
highlight--and also there has been, actually, interaction in
the United Nations as well. So there are a number of fora where
we interact with both and where we highlight our major concerns
about Afghanistan, what we expect of the Taliban, and also what
we expect of the countries in the region to do.
Mr. Grothman. Do you believe terror networks will begin to
re-form in Afghanistan?
Mr. Landberg. I am sorry. I didn't----
Mr. Grothman. Do you think terror networks will re-form in
Afghanistan?
Mr. Landberg. So we are very concerned about terrorist
threats in Afghanistan, and I think there have been a number of
public comments on ISIS-K threats, in particular, but also
potentially over time al Qaeda threats emanating from
Afghanistan. We are monitoring it closely, and we are putting
in place not just the unilateral, over-the-horizon capability
to degrade that threat but also working to bolster the
capabilities in the region.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Were counterterrorism officials involved
in the vetting of Afghan refugees?
Mr. Landberg. The vetting of Afghan refugees is handled by
law enforcement and security professionals.
Mr. Grothman. OK. So you don't know.
Mr. Landberg. The Counterterrorism Bureau is aware of all
that and involved in a lot of the negotiation of international
agreements, but we are not involved in the actual vetting. No,
that is DHS and some other agencies.
Mr. Grothman. Were any suspected terrorists or individuals
with ties to terrorism, that you know, evacuated from
Afghanistan?
I think I am going to followup and give you another
question here.
When the people come here from Afghanistan, one of the
problems we have at the southern border is people are showing
up without IDs. Do we know who these people are for sure? Do
they just make up a name, or what is the deal there, before we
let them in the country?
Mr. Landberg. So this is what I can assure you, that we
have robust vetting and screening of every single individual
that would come into the United States, and that includes
biographic and biometric information. So we have a lot of
information about individuals that does not rely on documentary
evidence, for example.
Any Afghan that came out of Afghanistan was thoroughly
vetted before coming to the United States. If there are issues,
certainly DHS has the authorities to prevent those individuals
from entering into the United States.
Mr. Grothman. Well, I suppose I should say that is good. I
don't know. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Massachusetts, Mrs. Trahan, for
five minutes for her questions. Welcome.
Mrs. Trahan. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this important hearing. It is so important that we
get our chance to ask our questions.
Mr. Landberg, in September 2014, just months after the
Islamic State announced the formation of the Islamic caliphate
in Syria and Iraq, the United States created a new global
coalition with its international allies and partners to conduct
counterterrorism operations against ISIS. And over the next
five years, the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS worked by,
with, and through local military partners to eliminate the
Islamic State's territorial holds.
The coalition also utilized non-military measures to reduce
the Islamic State's access to funds, undermine its ability to
spread its messages online, and stabilize areas that had been
liberated from ISIS' grasp.
While the fight against ISIS continues, the coalition's
efforts succeeded in eliminating the physical ISIS caliphate in
2019. So, Mr. Landberg, can you please describe how the
coalition connected military pressure with diplomatic and other
non-military efforts to successfully degrade ISIS' hold in Iraq
and Syria?
Mr. Landberg. Thank you. I think you could characterize the
D-ISIS Coalition as the most successful international
counterterrorism organization in history. As you said, it
combined the capabilities of many different partners, not just
the United States, including all of our most capable partners,
really. And it also took a whole-of-government approach, so it
was not just, you know, bringing to bear military use of force
but also all of the civilian capabilities that many of our
governments are very capable of. So the complete destruction of
the caliphate was a huge success.
We continue to be concerned about ISIS in the core. One of
the things we have seen and been able to pivot the coalition to
address, especially over the last year--and I will say actually
there was a meeting of political directors on the 2nd of
December, and there is a meeting in Bucharest today, and in
both meetings they are discussing how this coalition, which is
now 84 members, because Burkina Faso just joined, is now going
to leverage our combined capabilities in places where ISIS
affiliates are operating, like in Sub-Saharan Africa, but also
bringing to bear our capabilities, and not just kinetic
capabilities but civilian-led capabilities to address the
threat of ISIS Khorasan coming out of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Trahan. That is great that the coalition is growing,
because the global coalition rightfully focused its efforts on
degrading ISIS' capabilities in Iraq and Syria. The ISIS threat
is obviously not contained to those two countries, and that
became painfully and devastatingly clear on August 26, when
militants associated with ISIS-K carried out an attack in Kabul
that killed 13 U.S. servicemembers and at least 170 Afghan
citizens. One of those servicemembers, Sergeant Johanny Rosario
Pichardo, was from my district. She was a proud daughter of
Lawrence, Massachusetts, and her community will forever
remember her and the 12 other servicemembers killed as heroes.
Mr. Landberg, on November 17, you testified to the House
Foreign Affairs Committee that immediately after this attack
the State Department asked members of the Global Coalition to
Defeat ISIS to, quote, ``consider how it might leverage its
experience and expertise to counter ISIS-K.'' You further
stated that the coalition has, quote, ``responded and
identified potential efforts against the ISIS-K threat.'' Why
does the State Department believe the global coalition's
counter-ISIS efforts can be expanded to Afghanistan, and can
you elaborate on the potential lines of effort the global
coalition members identified to counter ISIS-K?
Mr. Landberg. Thank you, Congresswoman. So in the
announcements that came out of the political directors' meeting
a few days ago, they highlighted how we can leverage each
other's experience and capabilities in the area, especially of
counter-messaging related to ISIS in Afghanistan, also foreign
fighter flows, which is of deep concern to many people, related
to ISIS-K operating in Central and South Asia, as well as
countering ISIS financing.
So these are some of the areas where working groups within
the coalition have already started to consider how we can
collectively manage any ISIS Khorasan threat emanating from
Afghanistan.
Mrs. Trahan. Great. Well, my time is almost up. I will say
that the creation of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS
heralded a new way to conduct counterterrorism, one that relied
not only on our military power but also on diplomatic and
civilian lines of effort to degrade terrorist capabilities and
assist vulnerable populations directly affected by the Islamic
State's rule. And if we are to effectively counter the threat
of ISIS-K we will need to do so in coordination with our allies
and partners, using all of the military and civilian tools of
national power at our disposal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again, for letting me waive on,
and I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back, and we are grateful
for her participation, and we share in her loss for her local
constituent who gave her life so that others would be able to
exit Afghanistan.
The chair now recognizes the full committee ranking member,
Mr. Comer, the gentleman from Kentucky, for five minutes for
his questions.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On July 8, 2021,
President Biden said a Taliban takeover was not inevitable. At
that point that was not true. President Biden was warned of a
Taliban takeover well before July 8. He knew a Taliban takeover
was likely but said otherwise.
Ms. Harris and Mr. Landberg, first of all, do you all trust
the Taliban? Yes? No?
Mr. Landberg. This a verify-before-trust situation. We have
been very clear of what we expect from the Taliban. The ball is
in their court. They have the ability to demonstrate to the
world their commitment to what we have been asking for.
Mr. Comer. OK. Ms. Harris?
Ms. Harris. I would agree with my Department of State
colleague. I think at this point all we can do is be clear in
our expectations, in our commitment to not let a terrorist
threat grow.
Mr. Comer. All right. Yes or no. Mr. Landberg, is there an
al Qaeda presence in Afghanistan today?
Mr. Landberg. I think talking about the specific presence
in Afghanistan would probably be better left for the classified
session.
Mr. Comer. I assume yes. Mr. Landberg, do the Taliban and
al Qaeda have a mutually beneficial relationship?
Mr. Landberg. Sir, going back, there has been a
relationship, and I think that is well known.
Mr. Comer. So are al Qaeda operatives within the Taliban?
Mr. Landberg. Again, sir, I think any discussion on--any
level of detail about specific terrorist group activities in
Afghanistan probably should be deferred.
Mr. Comer. Does the Taliban actively shield al Qaeda?
Mr. Landberg. I think what is clear from conversations so
far with the Taliban is that they are aware of our clear
message that they cannot allow al Qaeda to use Afghanistan as a
safe haven, and I think they are wary of allowing al Qaeda to
do that. I think it is a situation in flux, and we can talk in
more detail later.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Landberg, can you confirm that after the
withdrawal of U.S. troops the Taliban were going door to door
and quietly executing U.S. sympathizers and other allies? Was
that true or false, that story?
Mr. Landberg. I do not think I am in a position to respond
to that. The Counterterrorism Bureau was not tracking that. But
I would refer you to maybe other parts, or I could take that
question back and the other parts of the government would be
able to respond.
Mr. Comer. OK. Ms. Harris or Mr. Landberg, let me ask you
this question. To conduct counterterror operations or collect
intelligence, is the U.S. currently operating with the Taliban
in any shape or form? Ms. Harris?
Ms. Harris. We are engaged in an active diplomatic
conversation with the Taliban, where we have made clear that we
are not going to let any terrorist threats evolve in
Afghanistan, and our expectations for what they will allow
within that territory. But I would defer to my State colleague
for specifics on that discussion.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Landberg?
Mr. Landberg. So the interaction so far has been dialog. It
has been mainly with our special representative for
Afghanistan. In every single interaction, and in the recent
press release from the meeting just at the end of November we
are clear on what we expect from them, and the counterterrorism
expectations are top of the list, always.
Mr. Comer. OK. Ms. Harris, do you need permission from the
Taliban for the United States to strike terrorists in
Afghanistan?
Ms. Harris. I am happy to elaborate further on our use of
force policies in the closed session. However, what I can say
to you is we have been clear that we will do whatever is
necessary to keep Americans safe right now, as we engage in
this dialog, and that our commitment to the counterterrorism
mission in Afghanistan and preventing it from becoming a safe
haven have remained unchanged.
Mr. Comer. So if we have pretty significant confidence in
intelligence that a terrorist is at a certain spot in
Afghanistan, the United States can go ahead and pursue those
terrorists without getting permission from the Taliban.
Ms. Harris. I will refer you to comments that have been
made by others from the Department. We will do whatever is
necessary. We have said as much to the Taliban, and left no
mystery there that if we have actionable intelligence and
understand a credible threat to U.S. personnel, U.S. interests,
we will seek to counter that threat.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz,
for five minutes for her questions. Welcome. Thank you.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity to ask questions, and I appreciate
you sponsoring this important hearing.
Since 2001, we have faced a terrorist threat that is
rapidly evolving. Instead of plotting, organizing, and carrying
out attacks directly, terrorist organizations are increasingly
relying on individuals who are inspired by their ideology to
take up arms on behalf of their cause.
In September, FBI Director Chris Wray testified that these
home-grown violent extremists, along with domestic violent
extremists, are, quote, ``the most significant terrorism danger
to our country.''
Sadly, the violence perpetrated by home-grown violent
extremists has already had a devastating impact on the United
States. For example, in December 2015, two individuals inspired
by ISIS carried out a mass shooting in San Bernardino,
California, that killed 14 people and wounded 22 others, and
the following year a terrorist who pledged allegiance to ISIS
killed more than 50 people at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando,
Florida.
Mr. Landberg, do groups like ISIS and al Qaeda have a
deliberate strategy to inspire political sympathizers to
conduct attacks on their behalf?
Mr. Landberg. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think all
terrorist groups over the last 20 years, and this is
intensifying, have sought to use modern technology to inspire
and radicalize, so absolutely, ISIS and al Qaeda attempt to do
that in many parts of the world. That includes the United
States. And I think where we have seen a lot of activity and a
lot of movement by ISIS and al Qaeda affiliates to radicalize
and take advantage of ungoverned spaces and local grievances
has been in places like Sub-Saharan Africa.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. And why is terrorist
plotting by home-grown violent extremists so challenging to
disrupt? And I am asking this on a question, because certainly
we have to continue to really focus on terrorism anywhere we
might be attacked, but we have got a very serious problem right
here in our country, inspired by foreign terrorists, and I
would like a sense from you of the challenges that we face in
disrupting those plots.
Mr. Landberg. Well, it is challenging. We are certainly not
the only country struggling with it. I think maybe a way to
respond is to talk about some of the things we are doing to
counter terrorist use of the Internet. We are working very
closely with social media companies to get them to enforce
their terms of service. We are working internationally to build
capabilities of many of our partners, to be able to also
counter terrorist messaging and use of the Internet. We are
working through the United Nations with different partners. And
we do our own counter-messaging.
So there are a number of lines of effort that we do to
counter terrorist use of the Internet to radicalize and
inspire, but absolutely, it is a challenging problem.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. To address the threat of home-grown
violent extremism, we really need to be proactive about de-
legitimizing terrorist ideology and countering their messaging.
Mr. Landberg, can you talk about the counter-messaging
efforts being undertaken by the State Department, including the
Global Engagement Center, and how that work is being
coordinated with the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS?
Mr. Landberg. Thank you. Yes. Counter-messaging is a key
part of what we do. The way the United States approaches it is
really to counter negative messaging with positive messaging
and to build long-term resistance to terrorism messaging
instead of, for example, trying to control content.
So the GEC is certainly the lead for the Department in that
effort, but since the CT Bureau and the CT coordinator is dual-
hatted as a special envoy for counter-ISIS, CT Bureau and GEC
work very closely, specifically with our coalition partners, to
do counter-messaging and have expanded those efforts.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. Madam Chair--Mr.
Chairman, excuse me--if we are to effectively counter the
terrorist threats that exist today we have to work fully with
our international allies and partners to ensure foreign
terrorist groups cannot spread their hateful messages and
inspire others to commit violence, not just in foreign
countries but against the United States as well, from within.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back, and we are thankful
for her participation. Thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Franklin, for five minutes for his questions.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this really important hearing today, and thank you to
our witnesses for being here. It is unfortunate the
circumstances and the logistics did not work out to have more
people participate, but it does not, in any way, diminish the
significance of the topic here.
Mr. Landberg, the Haqqani Network is currently designed a
foreign terrorist organization. Is that a fair assessment in
your mind? Do they deserve to be on that list?
Mr. Landberg. They are designed as a foreign terrorist
organization and have been for a while, and they deserve to be
on that list.
Mr. Franklin. And you see them still continuing the
activities that they have been known for conducting?
Mr. Landberg. So we see--we would be happy to talk in more
detail, with more granularity, during the follow-on session,
but the Haqqani group has been traditionally more inwardly
focused in Afghanistan. But absolutely, they continue to be
designated as an FTO, and we are continuing to monitor them
closely.
Mr. Franklin. OK. And the head of the Haqqani Network is
currently the Taliban's Interior Minister. Is that correct?
Mr. Landberg. Yes.
Mr. Franklin. All right. In light of that, and also there
are plenty of reports out there that people who we have worked
with, who are sympathizers to the U.S. cause, have been rounded
up. There are reports of execution. I have not verified that,
but I would certainly think in your line of work that would be
important to know and that you would be investigating that.
But in light of that, should the Taliban have been removed
from the list of designated terrorist organizations?
Mr. Landberg. So we are under no--we have regular reviews
of FTO designations. We are not at that five-year mark yet. We
are under no pressure obligation to reconsider that.
I think it is a wait-and-see situation in Afghanistan, and
a lot of it is up to the Taliban and to see how they behave
going forward, and whether they are going to fulfill their many
commitments made to the United States and international
community, specifically related to counterterrorism.
I will note that, as you mentioned, some of the concerns
about abuses. In the recent meeting with the Taliban, or the
dialog that our special representative had, it notes this in
the subsequent press release, it was highlighted our deep
concerns about some of these reports. So we are monitoring it
and tracking it very closely.
Mr. Franklin. So as of today the Taliban has not been
removed from that list?
Mr. Landberg. The Taliban is designated as a specially
designated global terrorist, not as an FTO. Also for
immigration purposes, they are actually considered an FTO.
Those are very strong tools. Again, it is really the Taliban
have it in their hands to fulfill their commitments, and it is
not just counterterrorism. I think we have been very clear
about freedom of movement, return of Mark Frerichs, inclusive
government, protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
So there are a number of expectations we have, and that is
going to determine how we deal with the Taliban going forward.
Mr. Franklin. Well, considering that their Interior
Minister is still on the FBI's Most Wanted List, I would hope--
I have strong concern about that and would hope that the
Department would not take them off.
Ms. Harris, moving on there, there were estimates, when we
had testimony before the Armed Services Committee, of al Qaeda
re-emerging in Afghanistan within six months. It is now three
months later. I understand you probably cannot get into a lot
of detail in this environment, but without the specifics is
that bearing true? Are we seeing activity there?
Ms. Harris. So as you rightly said I cannot get into a ton
of specifics here. What I can say is that we are well
positioned to monitor terrorist organizations. We continue to
try to improve our intelligence picture, day over day, to make
sure that we are monitoring those threats. What I can tell you
is that we are focused on making sure we have the capability to
counter any threats we see crop up.
Mr. Franklin. We unilaterally blinded ourselves in
Afghanistan. General McKenzie, when he spoke before Armed
Services, had testified that, you know, with 2,500 troops he
could have held Bagram, we could have still maintained that in-
country ISR capability, but given the caps, the political caps
of 700 people to defend the embassy, the airport, and Bagram,
it just simply could not be done. But he wanted to make it
clear that it could have been done had they been given the
authority to do that.
In light of our inability to see what is happening in the
country there now, do you think that was a mistake?
Ms. Harris. I think we have to consider what we need to
cultivate to understand what is going on in Afghanistan. I
think it is more complex than just maintaining ISR coverage. I
think we need the full suite of intelligence capabilities. We
need to work with our allies and partners. We need to ensure
that we have a robust kind of intelligence picture across all
of the intelligence ins to make sure we really understand what
is going on.
I think, day over day, we are trying to iterate and improve
on that picture. We have a sense of what is going on in the
country. I think it is better than it was three months ago, and
I think if I come back and see you in three months we will have
a more nuanced understanding then. Some of that is from the
diplomatic channel. Some of that is from continuing to kind of
understand where we are with our intelligence picture and seek
to improve in different ways.
Mr. Franklin. Well, from the outside observation it appears
to be diplomacy of wishful thinking and also the same on the
military side. We have unilaterally handicapped ourselves.
Mr. Chairman, I am past my time but I yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman for yielding. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Vermont, a long-time member
of this committee and one of our hardest workers in this area,
the chair recognizes the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for
five minutes for his questions.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Landberg, in September, Christy Abizaid, the Director
of the National Counterterrorism Center, told the Homeland
Security Committee that the current worldwide terror threat is,
quote, ``less acute to the homeland but which continues to
become more ideological diffuse and geographically diverse.''
My question is, even if foreign terrorist threats to the
U.S. homeland have diminished, and you can comment on whether
you agree with the progress she states, they still pose a
threat to our national security interests. Is that right? And
can you explain why?
Mr. Landberg. Yes, sir. Thank you. I think, absolutely,
although it is evolving we have also evolved our approach. The
Biden-Harris administration, as my DoD colleague said, is
actually taking a whole-of-government approach to dealing with
these threats.
While we have had great success over the last 20 years in
securing the homeland and creating a network of alliances that
include information sharing and vetting and screening to
prevent terrorist travel, and we have really increased the
security of our country, threats continue to multiply, as we
have noted in many places, specifically Sub-Saharan Africa, but
that is not the only location.
So to deal with this we are evolving from what has maybe
been a little bit military-heavy counterterrorism approach over
the last 20 years to a more balanced approach, as we also start
to deal with a broader range of threats that goes way beyond
counterterrorism, to cyber threats, to strategic nation state
competition. By dealing with this as a whole-of-government our
focus is going to be more on building the partner capabilities
and also leveraging these international relationships that I
have been talking about, like, for example, the D-ISIS
Coalition.
Mr. Welch. Ms. Harris, do you have anything you would like
to add to that?
Ms. Harris. I think with regards to Director Abizaid's
remarks, I do think we see the threat from foreign terrorist
organizations abroad as at its lowest point since 9/11. But
what we see is a committed group of terrorist organizations
that want to radicalize and inspire, and that is a different
kind of threat for us. It presents a different challenge when
you think about trying to counter that. I think, as my
Department of State colleague said, the tools that you use
there are things like, you know, engaging with social media
companies on use of the Internet and working to try to counter
messaging from, you know, the Global Engagement Center, and
other U.S. Government entities.
Mr. Welch. Thank you. Mr. Landberg, are you able to comment
in a public setting to what extent al Qaeda and ISIS, the core,
maintain operational control over any other prospective
branches and affiliates?
Mr. Landberg. I think it may be better to discuss details
in the follow-on session, but there is connectivity, and I
think it is publicly acknowledged between the ISIS affiliates
networks and leadership.
Mr. Welch. Let me ask you this. You know, the African home-
grown extremist groups have objectives and disproportionately
target regional governments and civilians. Is that your view as
to the focus of their main attention, not that they don't
affiliate with other terrorist groups that may have global
aspirations? Can you comment on that, Mr. Landberg?
Mr. Landberg. So to make sure I understand, so there are
ISIS and al Qaeda affiliates spreading throughout the world,
and interacting with different elements in many of the spaces
that they are moving into. And as we mentioned before, they
take advantage of local grievances, ungoverned spaces, and
often in these spaces there is already criminal and terrorist
activity that these more organized affiliates are able to then
take and focus to further, really, the ISIS and al Qaeda
objectives in those regions.
Mr. Welch. OK. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the full committee chair, the gentlelady from New
York, Ms. Maloney, for five minutes. Welcome.
Ms. Maloney. Thank you. Thank you very much, Chairman
Lynch, for holding this important hearing, and thank you for
calling on me.
The United States is a force for good in the world because
we take extraordinary steps to avoid civilian casualties when
conducting military operations. We are not perfect. The loss of
innocent life is a tragic reality of war, but when we harm
innocent civilians we must take responsibility for our errors
and investigate what happened so that the same mistakes do not
happen again.
Ms. Harris, I would like to ask you, do you agree that
protecting innocent life while conducting military operations
is a moral and strategic imperative?
Ms. Harris. Thank you for the question, and, ma'am, I agree
wholeheartedly. I think at the center of our very ethos are
accountability and transparency. We abhor the loss of innocent
life. We take all possible measures to prevent them. And when
we have incidents it is our duty to learn from those and seek
to be better.
Ms. Maloney. Thank you, and I agree. That is why I am so
concerned by recent examples under both Democratic and
Republican administrations. There are examples of the Defense
Department concealing or downplaying civilian casualties.
The New York Times recently reported that under the Trump
administration, when ISIS was making its last stand in Syria,
in March 2019, U.S. forces conducted an airstrike that may have
resulted in the deaths of dozens of innocent civilians. Instead
of acknowledging the mistake, the military reportedly concealed
the strike, downplayed the death toll, classified key reports,
and even destroyed the site of the attack.
And more recently, the August 29 airstrike in Kabul, which
was intended to prevent another ISIS terrorist attack at the
Kabul airport, tragically killed 10 civilians, including 7
children. Yet DoD only admitted this after a New York Times
report challenged the military's claim that the targeted
vehicle was carrying explosives to be used in a terrorist
attack.
Ms. Harris, I appreciate that Secretary Austin has directed
General Michael Garrett to conduct an independent review of the
March 2019 strike in Syria. I also understand that the Air
Force inspector general has reviewed the August 29 strike in
Kabul and found that the personnel involved, quote, ``truly
believed at the time that they were targeting an imminent
threat to U.S. forces.''
But nonetheless, as the United States of America we need to
do a better job of protecting civilians and acknowledging our
mistakes so that they may be corrected. So I would like to ask,
what steps is DoD taking, following these two incidents, to
protect innocent life and ensure that civilian casualties are
appropriately documented and reported, and will you commit to
providing our committee with a briefing following the
conclusion of General Garrett's review of the March 2019 strike
in Syria? Ms. Harris.
Ms. Harris. Ma'am, we are committed to working with
Congress once the investigations are complete.
With regards to how we are processing the lessons learned,
what I can assure you is that at all levels we are focused on
understanding the investigation, understanding the mistakes
that were made, and instituting processes by which we take
accountability internal to the Department but also ways in
which we will incorporate those lessons moving forward.
Ms. Maloney. Well, thank you. Even when we make tragic
mistakes we have a moral obligation to acknowledge our
shortcomings. I look forward to working with you and the Biden
administration to uphold America's reputation as a force for
good in the world.
And I yield back. My time has expired.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back. We will now conclude
with myself and the ranking member on closing remarks.
I do want to go back to allegations made by one of our
members that President Biden knew, or could confirm that the
collapse of the Afghan government and the subsequent takeover
by the Taliban was inevitable. I just want to push back on that
statement with the facts.
No. 1, we have had multiple hearings at this subcommittee,
beginning with the special envoy for Afghan negotiations with
the Taliban, under the Trump administration. Zalmay Khalizad
came here, sat at that table, representing the Trump
administration in those negotiations, and reaffirmed that a
Taliban takeover was not inevitable. He came back afterwards
when he became the representative for the Biden administration,
and again on the ground, in the meetings, able to make an on-
the-ground assessment himself. And at that second hearing that
he appeared before this subcommittee, now representing the
Biden administration, said that a Taliban takeover was not
inevitable.
We had the Afghan Study Group come before us, led by an
esteemed Republican Senator, Senator Kelly Ayotte, also with
General Joe Dunford, former head of the Joint Chiefs, and Nancy
Lindberg from the Afghan Study Group. They did not say that the
takeover by the Taliban was inevitable.
We had President Ashraf Ghani's Defense Minister come here
to the Capitol. I personally, with a group, met with him, and
he assured us, the Defense Minister of Afghanistan said a
Taliban takeover is not inevitable.
We sat down with Ashraf Ghani, the President of
Afghanistan, with Speaker Pelosi and Republican leadership. He
assured us that the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan was not
inevitable.
I met with a larger group, Republican and Democrat, at the
Munich Security Conference, with the Trump negotiating team,
the team that was negotiating with the Taliban over the U.S.
withdrawal, and they assured us that a Taliban takeover was not
inevitable.
So all of that evidence, from people who were directly
involved with the negotiations and had personal experience and
information from their own involvement in that process assured
us, multiple times, over and over again, that a Taliban
takeover was not inevitable, as a result of the Trump agreement
to withdraw.
So those are the facts, and I am compelled to defend the
President's actions here and his position were trying to follow
a fact-based response to the situation in Afghanistan.
With that I yield to my colleague for any closing remarks
he might have.
Mr. Grothman. I would like to thank our witnesses for
coming over here today. Obviously, we are still very concerned
about how things wrapped up in Afghanistan, very concerned
about the airport there in northern Afghanistan and what is
going to become of it, and what is going to become of all the
equipment that we left behind.
I understand, or I think I understand why a lot of my
questions remain unanswered, because you are saying we have to
wait for a more secure location to answer them. But I, and I
think many Americans, most Americans, should be very concerned,
not only with what is going on in Afghanistan, what is going on
with people who are associated with our efforts in Afghanistan,
and reports that at least I hear of people dying, you know,
being kidnapped and dying. I am very concerned about the huge
number of people coming here in this country and whether they
have been appropriately vetted, and very concerned about our
lack of presence in all the countries surrounding Afghanistan,
which is a recipe for trouble down the road.
I am also very interested, and maybe you guys can be
prepared for this if we have a closed-door meeting, in what our
relationship is with Pakistan and the degree to which they will
help prevent terror from emanating from that part of the world.
But I will thank the chairman for having this subcommittee
meeting, and hopefully we will have more in the near future.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman.
In closing, I want to thank our witnesses for their remarks
today. I want to commend my colleagues for participating in
this important conversation. I also want to remind everyone
that immediately following this hearing we will have a
classified briefing for members in HVC-301.
With that, and without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses to the chair, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response. And consequently
I would ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
are able.
This hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.

[all]
