- FUELING THE CLIMATE CRISIS: EXPOSING BIG OIL'S DISINFORMATION CAMPAIGN TO PREVENT CLIMATE ACTION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FUELING THE CLIMATE CRISIS: EXPOSING
BIG OIL'S DISINFORMATION CAMPAIGN TO
PREVENT CLIMATE ACTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 28, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-50

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-026 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Greta Gao, Team Lead
Elisa LaNier, Chief Clerk and Director of Operations
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on October 28, 2021.................................     1

Witnesses

Mr. Darren Woods, Chief Executive Officer, ExxonMobil Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................     7

Mr. Michael K. Wirth, Chief Executive Officer, Chevron
Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................     9

Mr. David Lawler, Chief Executive Officer, BP America Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    10

Ms. Gretchen Watkins, President, Shell Oil Company
Oral Statement...............................................    12

Mr. Mike Sommers, President, American Petroleum Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    13

Ms. Suzanne Clark, President and Chief Executive Officer, U.S.
Chamber of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    14

Mr. Neal Crabtree (Minority witness), Former Welding Foreman,
Keystone XL Pipeline
Oral Statement...............................................    16

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

The documents entered into the record during this hearing, and
Questions for the Record (QFR's) for this hearing are listed
below.

* Opinion by New York District Court Judge Valerie Caproni
regarding San Francisco v. Exxon; submitted by Rep. Raskin.

* Article on oil companies fund to defeat Alaska's tax
proposal; submitted by Rep. Tlaib.

* Ad campaign by Michigan group Energy Citizens ahead of energy
vote legislation; submitted by Rep. Tlaib.

* Articles, L.A. Times; submitted by Rep. DeSaulnier.

* Articles, Climate Action News; submitted by Rep. DeSaulnier.
* Correspondence between Reps. DeSaulnier, Lieu, and Welch with
Exxon Mobile; submitted by Rep. DeSaulnier.

* Article, ``With a Pen Stroke, President Joe Biden Cancels the
Keystone XL Pipeline Project''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Biden Lifts U.S. Sanctions on Major Russian
Pipeline''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``While Western Nations Kill Energy, China Builds
Coal Plants by the Dozen''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``China is Planning to Build 43 New Coal-Fired Power
Plants''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Russia Projects Oil Output Near Post-Soviet Highs
in 2022''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Europe Has Become a Hostage to Russia Over Energy,
Analysts Warn''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Europe Warns Its Gas Prices Surge Will Drive Up
Food Costs''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Biden Asks OPEC to Up Oil Production While
Limiting U.S. Energy Production''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Qatar Petroleum Signs a 15-Year LNG Supply Deal
with China''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Qatar Petroleum Boosts LNG Production''; submitted
by Rep. Cloud.

* Articles, ``Qatar Places a $760 Million Order with China for
Liquid Gas Ships;'' ``Energy Costs are Stoking Inflation. Just
Look at U.S. Gas Prices''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Home Heating Sticker Shock: The Cost of Natural
Gas is Up by 180 Percent''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Article, ``Food Prices Poised to Surge with Fertilizer Prices
at the Highest in Years''; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* Letter from Ranking Member Comer; submitted by Rep. Donalds.

* Report, US Energy Information, ``Winter Fuels Outlook'';
submitted by Rep. Keller.

* Statement for the Record from Lee Raymond in 1996 regarding
the human impact on the climate crisis; submitted by Chairwoman
Maloney.

* Statement from James Black, Exxon scientist, regarding the
impact of burning fossil fuels on climate change; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Statement from Mr. Glaser, Exxon manager of environmental
affairs, about the impacts of climate change; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Statement for the Record, quote from letter regarding OPEC
and world oil supplies by Maria Cantwell, Senator Menendez,
Senator Schumer, and Senator Markey from 2018; submitted by
Rep. Graves.

* Questions for the Record:to all witnesses; submitted by Rep.
Bush

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Michael K. Wirth, CEO,
Chevron Corp; submitted by Rep. Tlaib.

FUELING THE CLIMATE CRISIS: EXPOSING
BIG OIL'S DISINFORMATION CAMPAIGN TO
PREVENT CLIMATE ACTION

----------

Thursday, October 28, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:44 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom. The
Hon. Carolyn Maloney [chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Lynch, Cooper,
Connolly, Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Khanna, Mfume, Ocasio-Cortez,
Tlaib, Porter, Bush, Davis, Wasserman Schultz, Welch, Johnson,
Sarbanes, Kelly, DeSaulnier, Gomez, Pressley, Quigley, Comer,
Jordan, Foxx, Hice, Grothman, Cloud, Gibbs, Higgins, Norman,
Sessions, Keller, Biggs, Clyde, Franklin, LaTurner, Fallon,
Herrell, and Donalds.
Also present: Representatives Casten, Levin, Jones, Omar,
Brady, and Graves.
Chairwoman Maloney. [Presiding.] The committee will come to
order.
This is a historic hearing. For the first time, top fossil
fuel executives are testifying together before Congress under
oath about the industry's role in causing climate change and
their efforts to cover it up. For far too long, Big Oil has
escaped accountability for its central role in bringing our
planet to the brink of a climate catastrophe. That ends today.
Big Oil has known the truth about climate change for
decades. In the 1970's and 80's, Exxon's own scientists
privately told top executives that burning fossil fuel was
changing the global climate. Exxon and other Big Oil companies
had the opportunity to tell the truth and lead the way to find
alternative energy sources, but instead, Big Oil doubled down
on fossil fuels. Working with the American Petroleum Institute,
and the Chamber of Commerce, and other front groups and PR
firms, the industry ran a coordinated campaign to mislead the
public, hide the dangers of its own product, and derail global
efforts to reduce greenhouse emissions.
At the same time, they were lining their own pockets.
Between 1990 and 2019, the four oil companies here today
reported nearly $2 trillion in profits, but the costs of
inaction on climate have been far higher. The American people
lost more than 30 years when we could have curbed climate
change. Today we face stronger hurricanes, dangerous wildfires,
and destructive floods. As the effects of climate change have
become undeniable, Big Oil has changed its record and its
rhetoric. Now they say they believe in climate change and they
support the Paris Agreement and a price on carbon. They promise
they will reduce their carbon emissions and even aspire to net
zero emissions, and they have spent billions of dollars on PR
firms to paint themselves as climate champions, but Big Oil's
actions tell a different story.
These companies not only continue to sell millions of
barrels of oil every day. They are also investing in new oil
fields. Their lobbying also tells a different story. Today the
committee is releasing a new staff analysis showing that over
the past 10 years, these four companies have dedicated only a
very tiny fraction of their immense lobbying resources to enact
the policies they publicly claim are key to address climate
change, while spending tens of millions to protect their
profits from oil and gas.
Earlier this year, a senior lobbyist at Exxon admitted the
truth. He was caught on video saying that Exxon's support for a
carbon tax was merely a ``talking point'' which would never
become reality. And even today, lobbyists from American
Petroleum Institute and other industry groups are fighting
tooth and nail against key climate provisions in the Build Back
Better Act. But we must act. Just this week, the United Nations
released a new report stating that nations' current pledges
fall far short of what is necessary to avert catastrophe. These
experts agree that we will still have a narrow and fast
disappearing window to prevent the worst outcomes from climate
change. To do that, we need to immediately cut fossil fuel
emissions by 3 to 4 percent each year and rapidly transition to
net zero carbon emissions.
Twenty-seven years ago, seven tobacco executives appeared
in this room before Congress. Rather than admitting the truth
about their product, the executives lied. This was a watershed
moment in the public's understanding of Big Tobacco. I hope
that today's hearing represents a turning point for Big Oil. I
hope that today the witnesses will finally own up to the
industry's central role in this crisis and become part of the
change we need. That also means cooperating with this
committee's investigation. We asked each of these companies for
documents six weeks ago, but they have not come close to
producing the key internal documents about climate change and
the money trail we asked for. So let me be clear. We are at the
beginning of this investigation. I assure you we will not stop
until we get to the truth, and if we need to call the CEOs back
to testify again, we will.
After four decades of deception and delay, it is time for
the fossil fuel industry to finally change its ways. Thousands
of companies have already recognized the imminent threat of
climate change and are working with community leaders and
scientists to bring down emissions. It is time for Big Oil to
finally join the rest of us in this fight. We can prevent a
climate disaster while keeping energy costs low and creating
good-paying jobs, but only if Big Oil acknowledges its central
role in this crisis and commits to meaningful and immediate
action.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr.
Comer, for an opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, and I want to
thank the witnesses for their willingness to testify before the
committee today. However, I have concerns about today's hearing
and the legitimacy of Democrats' so-called investigation of
America's oil and gas companies. First, let me remind
Chairwoman Maloney and committee Democrats that the Oversight
and Reform Committee exists to root out waste, fraud, and abuse
in the Federal bureaucracy. When are we going to hold a hearing
with a Biden Administration Cabinet member so we can hold the
Federal Government accountable?
It is critical that this committee examine the pressing
concerns of American citizens. Inflation caused by the Biden
Administration's economic policies is sitting at 5.4 percent,
gas prices are at a seven-year high, and heating bills are
expected to rise as much as 54 percent this winter. The Biden
Administration continues to allow illegal immigrants to pour
over the southern border. Questions remain about the disastrous
handling of the Afghanistan withdrawal, all while the White
House fails to manage the COVID-19 pandemic they said would be
over by July 4.
Instead of convening hearings on any of these topics and
holding the Biden Administration accountable for its actions,
committee Democrats have called this hearing because they
watched a deceptively recorded and edited eight-minute video
clip of an Exxon lobbyist. Committee Democrats won't tell the
American people that the basis of their misguided inquiry
appears to be a multi-month operation launched by activist
group, Green Peace UK, involving fake websites and LinkedIn
profiles, false job opportunities, and deceptive emails and
interviews. Given the questionable activities undertaken by
Green Peace U.K. to obtain the so-called information at the
heart of this investigation, the American people must question
the legitimacy of the Democrats' actions.
When committee Republicans asked Chairwoman Maloney to join
us in requesting the full video back on August 12, 2021, they
refused. Ironically, just yesterday, over two months later, the
Democrats wrote saying they now would like to join our request.
I don't know what took so long, but they apparently didn't want
the full video to be shown at today's hearing. In reality, they
don't want to see it and they don't want the American people to
see it. Democrats didn't invite the person who was secretly
recording to the hearing today because they are more interested
in a spectacle.
Instead, committee Democrats took this questionable
information and wrote letters to the CEOs who are appearing
today. They requested internal documents and communications
that these entities had with the Federal Government and
lawmakers. They struck at the very heart of the First Amendment
protections that exist for these groups and any American to
petition their government. We raised objections to Chairwoman
Maloney about the protected nature of these communications and
the chilling effect these requests would have on the ability of
entities to petition their government. However, Democrats have
not bothered to respond to our concerns. The purpose of this
hearing is clear: to deliver partisan theater for prime-time
news. Subcommittee Chairman Khanna went to the media
threatening subpoenas months before any of the witnesses were
even invited to testify. Now, despite receiving well over
100,000 pages of documents from today's witnesses, Democrats
are complaining that no one is cooperating with them.
Chairwoman Maloney, this hearing is simply a distraction
from the crises that the Biden Administration's policies have
caused for the American people. Just last week, President Biden
admitted that he had no solution for the skyrocketing gas
prices. He said prices will not go down until 2022. That is a
problem for all Americans, especially low-income households.
Meanwhile, hours after President Biden took office, he canceled
the Keystone Pipeline and put 11,000 workers out of a job
overnight, including the Republican witness, Neal Crabtree, who
is still looking for work.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today, and I
yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize Chairman Rho Khanna for his opening statement.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Madam Chair. Representative Comer
and I have a good relationship. This isn't about partisanship.
This is about getting at the truth. Today, the CEOs of the
largest oil companies in the world have a choice. You can
either come clean, admit your misrepresentations and ongoing
inconsistencies and stop supporting climate disinformation, or
you can sit there in front of the American public and lie under
oath.
Now, let me remind you of a fact that I am sure your many
lawyers have brought to your attention. In 1994, the CEOs of
the seven largest tobacco companies appeared right here before
our committee. They, too, faced a choice. They chose to lie
under oath, denying that nicotine was addictive. As I am sure
you realize, that didn't turn out too well for them. I hope Big
Oil will not follow the same playbook as Big Tobacco. You are
powerful leaders at the top of the corporate world at a turning
point for our planet. Be better.
Spare us the spin today. Really, we have no interest in it.
Spin doesn't work under oath. We have all heard your
spokespeople's talking points. Speak from the heart today. You
will tell us your companies have contributed to academic
research on climate science. That is true, but that is not the
issue at hand. Despite your early knowledge of climate science,
your companies and the trade associations you fund chose time
and again to loudly raise doubts about the science and downplay
the severity of the crisis. In short, the question is not did
you prevent academic research on climate science--no one says
you prevented that--but did any of your executives at any point
mislead the American public?
You will say you have now seen the light. You will say you
are for a carbon tax to have a ``talking point,'' even though
the former Exxon lobbyist, Keith McCoy tells us you believe
``it is not going to happen.'' You will say you are for the
Paris Accords, of course. Most of you will say you are working
to reduce emissions, though, notably, one of you will say not
the 80 to 90 percent of emissions that actually come from the
gas you sell, just the 10 percent arising from your own
operations. You will tout carbon capture and storage even
though all of the carbon capture--and I want to make this point
clearly--all of the captured carbon is being used to enhance
oil extraction and actually increasing CO2 emissions in the
world, even though there is no economically proven way to store
CO2 indefinitely.
Here is the problem. This hearing will show that your
actions continue to be inconsistent with the climate goals you
now espouse. I wish they were consistent. My goal honestly is
not to embarrass you. It is not to have a ``gotcha'' moment.
That doesn't help any of us. You actually have a moment to
shine today. You could commit to changing course and taking
actions that would avert a climate catastrophe, or you could
continue to deny and deceive out of a sense of institutional
loyalty to your companies' past. The choice is really yours. As
you make it, think of the indigenous-led demonstrations last
week and the five young activists from the Sunrise Movement who
have been outside the White House on a hunger strike for nine
days and counting. They are putting their lives on the line
because they know that countless thousands will suffer and die
if we continue on our current path.
Just today, don't think of yourselves as the CEOs. Just
think of yourselves as human beings. And I have this question:
what will you do to end the hunger strike? What do you have to
say to America's children born into a burning world? Find it in
yourself today to tell the truth. It will be better for your
companies' futures, and it will be better for humanity's
future. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. And I now recognize Congressman Norman
for an opening statement.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, and I want to
thank the witnesses for their willingness to testify before the
committee today.
Today, committee Democrats have contrived yet another
hearing to demonize the oil and gas industry. The folks
represented before us today run organizations that are
providing good-paying jobs and secure, affordable, and clean
energy for all Americans, something this Administration is
attempting to dismantle. Instead of conducting actual
oversight, as Congressman Comer mentioned, oversight that shows
the disastrous decisions the Biden Administration has made this
year, the Democrats are focused on destroying an industry and
the jobs it provides to distract us from the fact that they
have no plan to recoup our energy work force or energy
independence. I assume that is why they canceled the Keystone
Pipeline. I assume that is how they justify buying gas and oil
from countries that don't like us. I assume they do not
understand the effects of the Colonial Pipeline shutdown, what
it had on this country. Now we are begging OPEC to make more
oil and make it affordable.
Members of this committee need to start focusing on the
issues that are impacting everyday Americans and the
consequences of an overly ambitious and unrealistic climate
agenda. I don't know about the rest of you all on this
committee, but the people of South Carolina did not send me to
Washington to bankrupt our country. And even the phrase,
``Build Back Better,'' needs to be changed to ``bankrupt
America quicker.'' We should have a hearing about some of the
proposals by Democrats to spend hardworking American taxpayers'
money on liberal pipe dreams.
I would love to learn more about the proposal to spend $3.5
billion for the Green New Deal youth patrol aimed at helping
jobless climate activists. Does anyone really believe the youth
patrol will reduce the impacts of climate change? Will the
youth patrol make China and India less of a polluter than they
are now? China continues to pollute at record levels while the
United States continues to reduce emissions. Do Democrats
really believe that putting the oil and gas industry out of
business will suddenly make China less of a polluter? I am
afraid extreme proposals by Democrats will do nothing but
destroy good-paying American jobs and ruin our economy.
What Democrats will not discuss is how President Biden and
his Administration's policies have caused a litany of issues
for the American people. This Administration's out-of-control
spending is causing inflation to skyrocket. As a result,
Americans are now paying more for goods and services while
taking home less money in their paychecks. Everyone can see
that. Look on your screen. The price of gasoline today is $1.22
more per gallon than it was this time last year under the Trump
Administration. As we enter the upcoming holiday season, the
price of a Thanksgiving dinner will be a minimum of five
percent more expensive than it was last year. Americans are
feeling the effects of inflation in their wallets, and I fear
it will only get worse.
Chairwoman Maloney, we will be getting you a letter to
hopefully have the Democrats' expert, John Kerry, fly over
here, I assume in his private jet on fossil fuel, to
participate in a debate with him as the expert for the Democrat
side, and let us have another expert that would contradict many
of his statements. Mr. Kerry has a large contingent from the
Biden Administration, and I am sure he can bring them in to
help him out.
The Biden Administration is headed to attend this
conference this year on climate change without a clear mandate
from the U.S. Congress to make vague commitments that will
never be met, while the top leaders from the largest polluters
in the world, as I mentioned--China--President Xi refused to
participate. While the Biden Administration is in the United
Kingdom, back here in America, our constituents are dealing
with the growing crisis related to supply chain, gasoline
prices, the rising prices at every level. It is truly sad that
the American people are being abandoned by their leaders at
such a critical moment. This crisis is not Democrat, it is not
Republican, but it is intentionally caused by the Democratic
Party of today. The oil and gas industry provides good-paying
jobs that help Americans reliably heat their houses, power
their cars, and keep the lights on through the storm when the
sun doesn't shine.
Folks, we are heading down a dangerous path with the Biden
Administration's policies. I fear this winter and going into
2022 will only continue to get worse. It was recently reported
that the home heating costs this winter would rise as much as
54 percent. The Biden Administration, as it has done on all the
crises it has had over the last nine months, has no plan to
confront these mounting problems, especially that affect
everyone, but especially low-income Americans. The United
States has abundant clean energy natural resources. We must use
these resources to advance America's interests while continuing
to lead the world in emission reductions. This is the path
forward, but the Democrats want to block it every chance they
get.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Now I would like to
introduce our witnesses. Our first witness today is Mr. Darren
Woods, who is the CEO of ExxonMobil. Then we will hear from
Michael Wirth, who is the CEO of Chevron. Next we will hear
from David Lawler, who is the CEO of BP America. Next we will
hear from Ms. Gretchen Watkins, who is the president of Shell
Oil. Next we will hear from Mr. Mike Sommers, who is the
president of the American Petroleum Institute. Next we will
hear from Ms. Suzanne Clark, who is the president and CEO of
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Next we will hear from Neal
Crabtree, a former welder. Thank you.
The witnesses will be unmuted so we can swear them in.
Please raise your right hands.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
[A chorus of ayes.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Mr. Mfume. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you, and without objection, your
written statements will be made part of the record.
And with that, Mr. Woods, you are now recognized for your
testimony.
Mr. Mfume. Madam Chair? Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Maloney. Who seeks recognition?
Mr. Mfume. Right here. I have a question. I am curious. Is
there a reason why none of the witnesses traveled here to
Washington today to represent their respective companies?
Chairwoman Maloney. They elected to appear remotely, and
they have that right.
Mr. Mfume. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Woods, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF DARREN WOODS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, EXXONMOBIL
CORPORATION

Mr. Woods. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member
Comer, Chairman Khanna, Ranking Member Norman, and members of
the Committee on Oversight and Reform. My name is Darren Woods.
I am the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of ExxonMobil
Corporation. On behalf of the company, I welcome the
opportunity to participate in this important discussion today.
ExxonMobil provides an essential component of modern society:
affordable, reliable, and abundant energy. For more than 150
years, oil and gas has played a critical role in our society,
improving human lives, raising standards of living, and
enabling unprecedented economic growth. Without them, the
living standards that we enjoy today would not be possible.
Those of us fortunate enough to live and work in the United
States and other developed countries often take for granted our
ready access to energy. That is not the case for billions of
people around the world. Many still lack basic electricity or
clean cooking facilities for their homes. Access to reliable
and affordable energy is more than a convenience. Energy
delivers longer, healthier lives, better education, greater
mobility, and improved living conditions. It's one of the basic
requirements that power economies and societal progress.
ExxonMobil and its roughly 70,000 employees are proud of
the contributions we make every day to improving the lives of
people all around the world. It is vitally important work. We
also recognize that society must continue to diversify our
energy mix to address climate change. ExxonMobil has long
recognized that climate change is real and poses serious risks,
but there are no easy answers. As the International Energy
Agency has said, oil and gas will continue to be necessary for
the foreseeable future. We currently do not have the adequate
alternative energy sources. At the same time, we know the
combustion of oil and gas releases greenhouse gases, and that
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has
concluded that increased greenhouse gases can contribute to the
effects of climate change. That is one of the issues we must
address and one that we are well positioned to continue our
work on: reducing the emissions that result from the combustion
of oil and gas.
This hearing comes at an important time as the world is
challenged with how to meet the growing need for energy while
reducing emissions to mitigate climate change. The recent
disruption of energy supplies in parts of the world has
resulted in outages, fuel lines, and manufacturing shutdowns.
The very real impact on families and businesses demonstrates
how critical it is to thoughtfully manage the transition to a
lower emissions future. ExxonMobil is committed to being part
of the solution. Our scientists and engineers are applying
their expertise to help responsibly meet the world's need for
energy while working to find ways to accelerate the transition
to a world with fewer emissions, starting with our own
operations.
We reduced emissions by 11 percent between 2016 and 2020.
Our plans through 2025 are consistent with the goals of the
Paris Agreement. They are expected to deliver significant
additional reductions in both emissions' intensity and absolute
emissions. We launched a low-carbon solutions business to
commercialize carbon capture and other technologies, such as
hydrogen and biofuels, to reduce emissions in the parts of the
economy that are the hardest to de-carbonize. As the
International Energy Agency recognized this year, carbon
capture contributes to the transition to net zero in multiple
ways, and it represents one of the biggest opportunities for
innovation to address emissions.
ExxonMobil is the world leader in this technology as a
share of approximately one-fifth of global CCS capacity and is
responsible for approximately 40 percent of all the captured
anthropogenic CO2 in the world. We are pursuing several
projects that can deliver large-scale emission reductions in
hard-to-decarbonize sectors, like heavy industry and power
generation. In addition, we are investing in breakthrough
research to develop the next generation of lower emission fuels
and fuels technologies, including advanced biofuels. We do that
through research and development by our scientists and by
collaborating with leading universities, governments, and
private companies around the world.
Finally, ExxonMobil has been engaged in policy discussions
related to the energy and environment for years. Our views on
policies and its implications have been guided by our
understanding of the science. We have been vocal and
transparent in our support for governments to implement
policies that are cost-effective and achieve the greatest
emissions reductions at the lowest overall cost to society. We
have advocated for an economy-wide revenue-neutral price on
carbon for more than a decade and have publicly supported the
Paris Agreement since its inception. I hope that today's
hearing stimulates thoughtful discussion and a greater
understanding of the need for meaningful action from all of
us--governments, businesses, and individuals.
All of us use and depend on today's energy system. We all
have a role to play in finding solutions to climate change that
will reduce emissions while meeting the growing need for energy
in order to improve lives around the world. I welcome your
questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Wirth, you are now
recognized for your testimony. Mr. Wirth.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL K. WIRTH, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CHEVRON
CORPORATION

Mr. Wirth. Chairwoman Maloney and Ranking Member Comer,
Subcommittee Chairman Khanna and Ranking Member Norman, members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with
you today. My name is Michael Wirth, and I am the chair and CEO
of Chevron.
For more than 140 years, Chevron has proudly delivered
energy that drives the world forward: light, heat, mobility,
mechanized agriculture, modern medicine. Quite literally the
food we eat, the clothes we wear, and the standard of living we
enjoy are made possible by affordable, reliable, and ever-
cleaner energy. In many ways our story and that of our industry
tracks the history of human progress. These are stories of
extraordinary achievements over the past century plus,
achievements that were once believed impossible.
Today we are one of the world's leading integrated energy
companies. We contribute to the communities where we operate by
creating jobs, sourcing from local suppliers, and giving back
to the community. Just as when we were founded in 1879, we
continue to believe in the power of human ingenuity to overcome
obstacles and find responsible solutions for meeting the
world's growing energy needs to deliver a better future for
all. The issue we are here to discuss today, climate change, is
one of the biggest challenges of our time. At Chevron, we've
been very clear about where we stand. We accept the scientific
consensus. Climate change is real, and the use of fossil fuels
contributes to it. We are committed to helping address this
challenge.
I also want to address directly a concern expressed by some
of those calling for today's hearing. While our views on
climate change have developed over time, any suggestion that
Chevron is engaged in an effort to spread disinformation and
mislead the public on these complex issues is simply wrong. In
recent years, conversations about climate have intensified,
innovation and technology have accelerated, and the energy
system that underpins our global economy has continued to
evolve. So has Chevron. We believe the future of energy is
lower carbon, and we're committed to being a leader in making
that future a reality.
We have set ambitious targets for our own greenhouse
emissions. We've announced a net zero aspiration for our
upstream Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions, and we intend to invest
more than $10 billion to reduce emissions and grow new energy
businesses. Our strategy is straightforward. We'll continue to
be a leader in efficient and lower carbon production of the
traditional energy the world uses today while growing new
lower-carbon businesses that will be a bigger part of the
future. I look forward to sharing the action we're taking, and
more details about those actions are included in my written
testimony.
We welcome a thoughtful discussion about the path ahead and
how we can achieve a lower-carbon energy future, while at the
same avoiding supply disruptions and preserving American
leadership in energy. As part of this discussion, the
undeniable reality is that oil and gas remain an important part
of the energy equation. Honest, thoughtful climate policy
discussions should account for that.
Chevron is a proud American company. The affordable,
reliable energy that the more than 35,000 women and men of our
company produce every day has improved the quality of life and
enabled a higher standard of living for people around the
world. Our products fuel hospitals, schools, offices,
restaurants, stores, and homes. They enable the movement of
goods around the world and right to our very doorsteps. They
create good-paying jobs that support families across the
country, and they enhance our national security by reducing
dependence on foreign energy. This should all be part of the
conversation as we seek an orderly and predictable energy
future that works for everyone.
Confronting the climate challenge requires critical
thinking about investment, technology, pace, goals, and
timetables. This must be a comprehensive effort. No one
company, no one industry, and no one country can meet this
global challenge alone. This is a conversation necessarily
about both supply, which Chevron helps to provide, and demand
driven by consumers worldwide. At Chevron, we believe
government action, in partnership with the private sector, is
essential to enable evolution of the energy system, and we
stand ready to work with you.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Lawler, you are now
recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DAVID LAWLER, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, BP AMERICA
INC.

Mr. Lawler. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
Chairman Khanna, Ranking Member Norman, and members of the
committee, I'm Dave Lawler. Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today about BP's low carbon transformation and our
ambition to get to net zero by 2050 or sooner, and to help the
world get there, too.
I first joined BP in 2014 as head of our oil and gas
operations in the Continental United States. I was named
chairman and present of BP America last year. Our U.S.
operations are part of the economic fabric of this country. We
directly employ some 10,000 people, support nearly a quarter
million jobs, and contributed $60 billion to the national
economy last year. Almost a quarter century ago, BP was among
the first major companies in our industry to recognize publicly
the scientific consensus about the human contribution to
climate change and supported policies to address it. That
recognition has guided many of our decisions since then. These
decisions include launching a separate low-carbon energy
business in 2005, which invested more than $8 billion over 10
years. By 2007, BP publicly supported carbon pricing.
When we announced our net zero ambition in February 2020,
we recognized it wouldn't be easy, but we believed it was vital
for both society and the success of our business. We know that
the world's carbon budget is finite, and we've set clear,
verifiable short-and longer-term targets on our path to net
zero. By 2025, we aim to grow our low-carbon investments to $3
to $4 billion per year, and then to $5 billion per year in
2030. This would represent nearly a third of our projected
capital expenditures. At the same time, by 2030, we expect to
reduce our global oil and gas production by 40 percent from a
2019 baseline. Beyond capital investment and reduced
production, we plan to eliminate routine flaring in our U.S.
onshore operations by 2025. We also have an ambitious global
methane intensity target of .02 percent based on our industry-
leading measurement approach.
I recognize that some may doubt how serious we are about
our net zero ambition. I get it. Our progress hasn't always
been a straight line, but we've learned a great deal and we
view the path we're on as a business imperative. That's one
reason we continue to report regularly on our progress, and
we've already taken concrete steps to meet our targets. Through
the first half of 2021, we more than doubled our 2019 low-
carbon investments to $1.1 billion, undertaking transformative
offshore wind and solar energy power generation projects in the
United States. This doesn't mean BP is getting out of the oil
and gas business. As we transition, our oil and gas business
will continue providing the energy the world needs while
funding our investments in wind, solar, and other renewable
energy sources.
As we work to make BP a net zero company, we are trying to
help the world get there, too. We've redoubled our advocacy in
support of policies to address climate change. We've advocated
directly and with a range of partners to advance carbon pricing
at the state and Federal level. We're advocating for the direct
regulation of methane emissions from the oil and gas industry.
We aim for alignment between our positions and those of the
trade associations to which we belong. We recognize that
associations' positions are often a compromise of various
perspectives, and we advocate within them for our views on
climate change.
With world leaders on the verge of an important
international climate gathering in Glasgow, it's more critical
than ever that governments and industry work together to find
solutions to this challenge. We know we have a hard road ahead,
but it's also filled with opportunities. Along the way, we
welcome debate and public scrutiny because succeeding in the
energy transition is critical both for BP and for the world.
Thank you for this opportunity. I look forward to your
questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Ms. Watkins, you are now
recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF GRETCHEN WATKINS, PRESIDENT, SHELL OIL COMPANY

Ms. Watkins. Chairwoman Maloney, Chairman Khanna, Ranking
Member Comer, Ranking Member Norman, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to be here today to
discuss the urgent need for action on climate change and
Shell's effort to advance society's transition to a lower-
carbon future.
Through Shell's Global Power and Progress Strategy, we are
working with our customers across sectors to accelerate our own
progress and support the transition to net zero emissions in
the United States and globally in step with society. Shell has
been and remains vocal about the needed energy transition, and
we continue to advocate for sound carbon policies that support
the transition to renewables and lower carbon energy sources,
including seeking to ensure a transition that is fair and
equitable. This kind of challenge is not new to Americans. We
have tackled enormous challenges before, and we can do it
again.
I lead Shell Oil Company, the U.S. subsidiary of Royal
Dutch Shell in the Netherlands. Shell's position on climate
change has been publicly documented for nearly three decades.
As early as 1991, our annual reports discussed concerns about
climate change. Our first sustainability report in 1998 noted
that human activity and the use of fossil fuels could affect
the climate. Shell has issued a sustainability report every
year since, and the subsequent reports have discussed climate
change and the challenges that it poses. Shell has long
advocated for governmental policies that will reduce fossil
fuel demand, stimulate innovation and cleaner energy
technologies, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and ensure
access to reliable and affordable energy.
Shell strongly advocated for the United States to remain in
the Paris Climate Agreement and later to rejoin it. Shell has a
long history of advocating for carbon pricing, such as Waxman-
Markey, which passed the House in 2009. Shell supports a number
of provisions in the pending infrastructure legislation related
to climate change, and we support climate provisions in budget
reconciliation, including electric vehicle infrastructure,
hydrogen production, carbon capture and storage, and a well-
constructed methane fee.
In 2017, Shell was the first energy business to announce an
ambition for reducing net carbon intensity, and in the years
since, Shell's ambitions have progressively developed. In 2020,
we announced our intention to be a net zero by 2050 company in
step with society. We have short-, medium-, and long-term
intensity-based reduction targets, and today, in announcements
made early this morning in Europe, we've announced our intent
to reduce our Scope 1 and 2 absolute emissions by 50 percent by
2030 on a net basis.
Shell companies have invested billions in lower carbon
energy, including solar and wind, electric vehicle charging,
and infrastructure. For example, we've purchased a large stake
in Silicon Ranch, a leading solar farm developer in Nashville,
Tennessee with more than 145 operating facilities coast to
coast, and we acquired Green Lots, a California-based company
that provides electric vehicle charging solutions.
Meeting the demand for reliable energy while simultaneously
addressing climate change is a huge undertaking and one of the
defining challenges of our time. Fuel is needed to power
trucks, airplanes, and ships that move people and commerce
around the globe. Petrochemicals are needed for everything from
clothing to cellphones, from hand sanitizer to the fibers in
the masks we have all become accustomed to wearing. For this
reason, Shell will continue to develop fossil fuel energy
sources, yet even here we are seeing an energy transition. For
example, Shell's production in the Gulf of Mexico is among the
lowest in the world in greenhouse gas intensity, and we do not
anticipate frontier exploration for new oil and gas
repositories after 2025.
We are committed to a leadership role in the energy
transition and continuing to provide the life-sustaining and
life-enabling products that Americans need. Shell is proud of
its history providing energy to consumers in the United States
and around the world, and we look forward to enabling a future
where we all move to net zero emissions.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here, and I would be
happy to answer your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Sommers, you are now
recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MIKE SOMMERS, PRESIDENT AMERICAN PETROLEUM
INSTITUTE

Mr. Sommers. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
Chairman Khanna, Ranking Member Norman, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today. My name is Mike Sommers, and I am president and chief
executive officer of the American Petroleum Institute. API is
the national trade association representing all segments of
America's oil and natural gas industry. Our nearly 600 members,
from large integrated companies to small independent operators,
provide much of our Nation's energy, and develop safe,
responsible operational standards. API's mission is to promote
safety across the industry globally and to advocate for public
policy in support of a strong, viable U.S. oil and natural gas
sector.
I would like to focus on three points. First, our member
companies make products that enable modern life. Every day, the
men and women of America's oil and natural gas industry provide
the energy to maintain our quality of life, power our economy,
and improve the condition of people here at home and around the
globe. This industry meets Americans' needs with a strong
commitment to safety, reliability, and environmental
performance, and it is my high honor to work in this essential
industry.
Second, we meet today at a defining moment, one where
energy demands are rising, and the focus on a cleaner
environment has never been greater. Climate change is real,
industrial activity contributes to it, and the challenges of
ushering in a lower-carbon future are massive and intertwined,
yet fundamental. It is the opportunity of our time to address
climate change while meeting the world's growing need for
energy.
API released a series of policy proposals, industry
actions, and initiatives in our Climate Action Framework to
make a measurable difference in advancing energy and
environmental progress. This plan is centered around advancing
innovation and technology to tackle this challenge. The five
main actions are, one, accelerating technology and innovation
to reduce emissions while meeting growing energy needs; two,
further mitigating emissions from operations to advance
additional environmental progress; three, endorsing a carbon
price policy by government to drive economy-wide market-based
solutions; four, advancing cleaner fuels to provide lower
carbon choices for consumers; five, driving climate reporting
to provide consistency and transparency.
In the meantime, API and its members are not waiting for a
government mandate to address the real and serious challenge of
climate change. Our view is that innovation is the foundation
of meaningful action and, as such, our industry is making
significant investments in carbon capture, hydrogen, and
cleaner fuels. API companies are actively reducing methane
emissions from their operations through technologies and other
solutions. More work remains, but one area where experts agree
is that oil and natural gas will continue to be the leading
energy sources for decades to come, and it is important that we
take action to reduce emissions while providing that energy.
In closing, API supports climate action. Governments,
industries, and consumers must accelerate policy and technology
solutions together. Yet legislative proposals that punitively
target American industry will reverse our Nation's energy
leadership, harm our economy and American workers, and weaken
our national security. We look forward to continuing to work
with Congress and others to shape and advance effective energy
and climate policy.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Ms. Clark, you are now
recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE CLARK, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Ms. Clark. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
Chairman Khanna, Ranking Member Norman, distinguished members
of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify today.
Since March, I've had the privilege to serve as the
president and CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and I
appreciate this opportunity to discuss our efforts to address
climate change. The Chamber's position is clear: the climate is
changing, and humans are contributing to these changes.
Addressing the climate challenge with old solutions and
advancing economic prosperity are not mutually exclusive. We
can achieve both goals, and the Chamber is dedicated to doing
so. The Chamber's message on climate is also clear: inaction is
not an option. We advocate for market-based solutions to reduce
emissions plus supporting U.S. competitiveness, national
security, and working people across America. We have focused on
effective climate solutions, and we see ample common ground for
all sides to come together to advance policies that are
practical, predictable, and durable.
The American business community is essential to developing,
financing, building, and operating the solutions needed to
effectively combat climate change and meet our energy needs.
Businesses are already taking action by investing in technology
and enhancing their efficiency. Their actions are good for
business, the economy, and our planet. The government also
plays a critical role in our country's efforts to address
climate change. We believe Congress must enact durable climate
policy with bipartisan support. This will help ensure that
policies withstand the changing priorities of different
Administrations and reduce uncertainty for businesses.
The Chamber supports policies that encourage innovation and
investment in market-based climate solutions. We believe in
transparent, well-designed market mechanisms that reduce
emissions while supporting economic growth and job creation.
Our implementation of these principles has led to meaningful
progress over the past few years. Let me share a few examples.
The Chamber played a leading role in the 2020 passage of
the Energy Act, the most significant climate and energy
legislation adopted in more than a decade. Over several years,
we've mobilized business community support and partnered with
NGO's and others to get the bill enacted. We worked closely
with policymakers on both sides of the aisle to ensure that it
contained innovation-focused measures that addressed climate
change, promoted American technological leadership, and
fostered economic growth. The Chamber also played a leading
role in bipartisan legislation to implement a phase down of
hydrofluorocarbons, which will significantly reduce emissions
that contribute to global warming. We have called for direct
regulations on methane emissions from oil and gas operations
and worked with Congress to improve pre-disaster mitigation in
its science policies. We also strongly supported the Biden
Administration's decision to rejoin the Paris Climate
Agreement, and we engaged early with this Administration and
provided principles for its consideration as it revised the
U.S. emission reduction commitments.
Finally, this year, we organized a coalition in support of
bipartisan infrastructure legislation that would advance
efforts to decarbonize the economy. Building smart, modern,
resilient infrastructure has long been a priority at the
Chamber. The bipartisan infrastructure framework is exactly the
type of bold, economy-growing action needed to address climate
change. The Chamber and its members are proud to support it as
standalone legislation.
Our country has made positive strides forward and could
build greater momentum with bipartisan cooperation on the
solutions before us, and we must. More needs to be done to
protect our planet for future generations. Earlier this year,
President Biden's climate envoy, former Secretary of State,
John Kerry, stated that 50 percent of the reductions we have to
make to get to net zero are going to come from technologies we
don't yet have. Whether or not 50 percent is the right figure,
Secretary Kerry's central point is correct. We must take urgent
action now to develop the technologies necessary to meet our
climate goals. I'll say it again: inaction is not an option.
For more than 100 years, the Chamber has advocated for pro-
growth policies that help businesses of all sizes create jobs,
strengthen communities, and grow our economy. There is broad
consensus across our membership and the business community that
combatting climate change is an urgent issue requiring
citizens, government, and business to work together. The
Chamber remains dedicated to working with Congress to identify
solutions that improve our environment.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Crabtree, you are now
recognized for your testimony. Mr. Crabtree.

STATEMENT OF NEAL CRABTREE, FORMER WELDING FOREMAN, KEYSTONE XL
PIPELINE

Mr. Crabtree. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, and Ranking
Member, and all the distinguished committee members. It's
definitely not something that I'm proud of, but I may have been
the first casualty of the Build Back Better plan. Three hours
after President Biden's inauguration, I lost my job on the
construction of the Keystone pipeline. Now, I realize this was
only one project, but what I really feared was the consequences
the decision would have on my future, and now I see those fears
being realized. Not only did I lose an opportunity for
employment on the Keystone, but I'm losing employment
opportunities because energy companies seem to be hesitant to
plan other needed projects that we need in this country. And
all this is happening while the demand for energy is rising.
The Build Back Better shouldn't mean the total neglect and
destruction of our energy infrastructure as we know it. People
from coast to coast are feeling the pain of rising energy
prices, and there seems to be no thought given to the hundreds
of thousands of workers in this industry or the millions of
products that we use every single day that, you know, are
provided by fossil fuels. And there shouldn't be a fear of a
heating shortage in the Northeast this coming winter, yet here
we are.
And Americans need to know that there isn't a fuel
shortage. That's not the cause of the rising prices. Rising
prices are a direct result of the lack of infrastructure that
it takes to get the products moved to where they are needed
mostly, and it's mainly pipeline construction. The construction
of the Atlantic Coast pipeline, the Constitution, the Penn East
would've all taken much-needed energy to the Northeast this
year. Instead of being built and being in service, they're now
canceled, and they were canceled because of overregulation and
a push for a green new energy sector that just isn't capable or
reliable enough to provide the energy that we need right now.
Every penny in the increase of energy takes roughly a billion
dollars out of the pockets of Americans over a year's time.
These can't be popular decisions, and I believe elections in
the years to come will prove that.
The CEOs and the presidents of the companies that are
gathered here today have provided this country with something
that we've all demanded, and that's clean, affordable, reliable
energy. We've built military bases in other countries to
protect resources. Our government has contributed to this, and
to treat these CEOs as villains, I don't agree with it. The
disruption of the Colonial pipeline earlier this year should've
proven just how important the work that myself and these
companies do really is. I mean, we took one pipeline that was
down for one week, and we seemed to panic at the cost. I was
hoping it would shed light on a bigger problem, and that is why
we only have one pipeline servicing such an important part of
this country. And the answer is simple. It's because it costs
right now more to permit and plan a new pipeline than it does
to actually build one and neglecting to add to the capacity
with new pipelines is a dangerous thing for our country, just
like neglecting roads and bridges.
Now, I believe it's going to take an all-of-the-above
approach for our energy future. Renewables are going to play a
part. They will need to be developed, carbon technology needs
to be developed, but we can't demonize the fossil fuel
industry. It's only going to hurt the economy and the country.
Now, I belong to a union that specializes in pipeline
construction, and I've spent over 25 years, you know,
developing the skills that I have, and I'm compensated well for
it. And the government's idea of shutting down my industry and
retraining me in another career is not realistic. I'm too far
in life to be starting over in an entry-level position. It's
just not realistic for me. Now, there's a whole generation of
workers coming up, and if they want to pursue careers in the
green energy, then I support that, just like I support private
companies' rights to develop green energy. What I don't support
is the government limiting my employment opportunities in my
chosen field, especially when the product is in huge demand.
To sum this up, the Administration is having a direct
negative impact on energy prices in this country. They're
having an impact on my ability to find work right now. My
crisis right now isn't the climate. My crisis is the mortgage
payments I have due every month, it's the food I need to put on
my table, and it's the healthcare I need to provide to my
family. And instead of demonizing these CEOs and presidents
that are here today, I would like to thank them for the
opportunities they've provided me and my family and my union to
work in these past few decades. And I look forward to any
questions you might have.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much.
Pursuant to Rule 9(c), the chair authorizes an hour of
extended questioning to be equally divided between the majority
and the minority for this hearing. I have consulted with the
ranking member and we have agreed to divide up the hour of
extended questioning in four 15-minute blocks. First, the chair
will ask questions, then the ranking member, then Mr. Khanna,
and then Mr. Norman. The ranking member intends to yield a
portion of his time to Mr. Brady and Mr. Graves.
And without objection, both members are authorized to
participate in today's hearing.
With that, I now recognize myself for 15 minutes, and I
want to start with a few simple questions, and I would
appreciate a ``yes'' or ``no'' answer on each of them.
Mr. Woods, CEO of Exxon, do you agree that climate change
is real?
Mr. Woods. Yes.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Lawler, CEO of BP
America, do you agree that climate change is caused by human
activities?
Mr. Lawler. Yes.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Wirth, CEO of Chevron, do you agree
that burning fossil fuels is a significant cause of climate
change?
Mr. Wirth. Chairwoman, we have been clear on where we
stand, and we accept the scientific consensus that the use of
fossil fuels contributes to climate change.
Chairwoman Maloney. So that I am taking as a ``yes.'' Ms.
Watkins, president of Shell, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change released a new report in August concluding that
climate change is widespread, rapid, and intensifying. The
Secretary General of the United Nations called the report, and
I am quoting, ``a Code Red for humanity,'' and said, ``The
alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable.''
Ms. Watkins, do you agree that addressing climate change is now
a Code Red for humanity? ``Yes'' or ``no,'' please.
Ms. Watkins. Chairwoman, Shell agrees that this is an
urgent issue that needs addressing by companies, governments,
and society.
Chairwoman Maloney. And it is not just the United Nations
that called it a Code Red. Last week, the Defense Department
issued a report calling climate change ``an existential threat
to our Nation and the world.'' Ms. Watkins, do you agree
climate change is a threat to our existence?
Ms. Watkins. Chairwoman, I agree that climate change is one
of the biggest challenges that we have in the world today,
which is why, at Shell, we are in action on providing lower and
no carbon products to our customers. We believe this is
something we are all in together. We need to work in
collaboration with society, with governments, with other
companies, and other industries.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, do you agree that it is an
existential threat?
Ms. Watkins. I agree.
Chairwoman Maloney. ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Ms. Watkins. I agree that this is a defining challenge for
our generation, absolutely.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, let me put it another way. Does
anyone on the panel disagree with the statement from the United
States and the Defense Department that climate change is an
existential threat to our existence? Does anyone disagree?
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. So the truth is clear. Climate change
is real, burning fossil fuels is the primary cause of this
crisis, and it is urgent that we fix it. This is the first time
each of you has told Congress this and the companies that you
represent, and it is significant and important. Thank you. But
it is also true that if it weren't for the actions of the Big
Oil companies, we might have taken action to fix this problem
decades ago.
Mr. Woods, I want to ask you about some public statements
that your predecessor, Lee Raymond, made in 1996 and 1997 as
the world was debating an agreement to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions known as the Kyoto Protocol. Here is what Mr. Raymond
said in 1996, and I quote: ``Currently, the scientific evidence
is inconclusive as to whether human activities are having a
significant effect on the global climate.'' And I would like to
place his statement in the record, without objection.
Chairwoman Maloney. And this was no slip of the tongue. In
1997, he gave another speech where he denounced the effects in
Kyoto and said, ``The case for global warming is far from
airtight.'' Mr. Woods, when Exxon CEO made these remarks about
the inconclusive nature of the scientific evidence, were they
consistent with the views of Exxon's own scientists?
Mr. Woods. Yes. Chairman, thank you for the question. I
appreciate the opportunity to address that. Our understanding
of the science has been aligned with the consensus of the
scientific community as far back as 20 years ago when you
referenced our chairman at that time's comments. And as science
has evolved and developed, our understanding has evolved and
developed as has our work and position on the statement.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, as you make your statement, I am
reminded of another hearing that we had with the tobacco
industry. And we had all the executives seated in this room,
and they were asked about their statements from their companies
that the science was uncertain, and they said they did not
believe that nicotine was addictive. Well, it came out that
they lied. Tobacco nicotine was very addictive, and now I am
hearing from you that the science that was reported publicly
where your executives were denying climate change, we know that
your scientists internally were saying that it is a reality. So
I was hoping that you would not be like the tobacco industry
was and lie about this, and I was hoping that you would be
better than the tobacco industry and that you would have come
out with the truth, and I am disappointed with the statement
that you made.
James Black was an Exxon scientist, and I would like to put
up on the screen what he told the company's top executives in a
secret briefing back in 1978, more than 40 years ago. And he
said, and I quote, ``There is a general scientific agreement
that the most likely manner in which mankind is influencing the
global climate is through carbon dioxide release from the
burning of fossil fuels.'' And Mr. Black was not the only Exxon
scientist to recognize that burning fossil fuels would cause
dangerous climate change. In 1982, Roger Cohen, one of Exxon's
most senior scientists, wrote a private letter to Exxon's
management, and I am putting it the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. He said there was a ``scientific
consensus about the impact of increased carbon dioxide on the
climate,'' and there was ``unanimous agreement in the
scientific community'' that doubling carbon dioxide levels
would lead to significant climate change. So I am asking you,
Mr. Woods, do you agree there is an inconsistency between what
Mr. Raymond, the Exxon CEO, told the public and what Mr. Black
and Mr. Cohen, both Exxon scientists, told top executives?
Mr. Woods. Chairman, no, I do not agree that there was an
inconsistency. If you look at the full extent of that report,
you will find that the comments in the report and that briefing
to our management committee, which was not a secret meeting,
was entirely consistent with where the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change was and the general consensus of the
scientific community. And I think our position on that has
continued to evolve with the scientific community. I think our
messaging has been that this is a complex problem that is going
to require thoughtful, practical solutions, and that has been
something that we have continued to emphasize over time.
Chairwoman Maloney. Reclaiming my time, I think the quotes
speak for themselves. I am putting them in the record. There is
a clear conflict between what the Exxon CEO told the public and
what Exxon scientists were warning privately for years, but you
don't need to take my word for it. In 2019, two former Exxon
scientists testified in this very hearing room. They were here
with the tobacco executives, and they testified before
Representative Raskin's subcommittee. They said Mr. Raymond's
statements were just plain wrong. One former Exxon scientist,
Dr. Martin Hoffert, testified, and I quote, ``Exxon was
publicly promoting views that its own scientists knew were
wrong, and we know that because we were the major groups
working on this.''
And the disinformation from Exxon did not end there. In
2000, Exxon ran an advertisement in The New York Times
entitled, ``Unsettled Science.'' And it said, and I quote,
``Even less is known about the potential positive or negative
impacts of climate change. In fact, many academic studies and
field experiments have demonstrated that increased levels of
carbon dioxide can promote crop and forest growth.'' So
Mr. Woods, was this statement that climate change could
actually be positive for our planet consistent with the private
views of Exxon's scientists?
Mr. Woods. Chairwoman, if you read the full article that
was advertised that you reference there, it concludes with the
statement that says we know enough now that governments,
people, and companies should be taking reasonable action to
address the risk of climate change. So again, I would come back
and say that our position in this space has been consistent
with the general consensus in the scientific community. Our
research was in line with that. It was a small portion----
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much. Reclaiming my time.
The documents tell a different story. Let me read you an
excerpt from a 1982 memo which I would like to place in the
record that M.B. Glaser, Exxon's manager of environmental
affairs, sent to Exxon management about the potential impacts
of climate change. And he wrote, ``There are some potentially
catastrophic events that should be considered.'' He said,
``Those events could include melting ice caps and flooding
along the East Coast, including in Florida and Washington.''
And another private memo from 1981 issued similar warnings. Mr.
Cohen, a top Exxon scientist, wrote that it was distinctly
possible that climate change would ``produce effects which will
indeed be catastrophic, at least for a substantial fraction of
the earth's population.'' And that also, unanimous consent to
place in the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Woods, given these grave warnings
from Exxon's own scientists over and over and over again, do
you believe that it was ethical for Exxon to run a New York
Times advertisement that downplayed--downplayed--the risk and
instead highlighted the potential positive impact of climate
change?
Mr. Woods. Chairman, I would again say if you look at the
full context of the memos that you are referencing, the
messaging that came across in those full memos is very
consistent with what the general consensus of the scientific
community was. And our advertorial that you mentioned again
concluded that there is enough knowledge to know that we should
be taking action, that people, governments, and companies
should respond and take practical reasonable action. And that
was consistent with where the scientific community was at the
time, and as time has progressed, we have continued to maintain
a position that has evolved with science and is today
consistent with the science.
Chairwoman Maloney. Our witnesses today would like you to
think that their actions that I have laid out and put in the
record are ancient history, but they are not. Just this year,
an Exxon senior lobbyist, Keith McCoy, was caught on a video
boasting about these efforts, these efforts that deceived.
Let's play that clip now, please.
[Video shown.]
Chairwoman Maloney. And how did Exxon respond? Did they
come clean about this shocking conduct? No. Mr. Woods called
Mr. McCoy's comments inaccurate and then they fired him, and
they are obviously lying like the tobacco executives were. So I
want to ask each of the witnesses here today representing
fossil fuel companies and trade associations to take a simple
pledge. I want each of you to affirm that your organization
will no longer spend any money, either directly or indirectly,
to oppose efforts to reduce emissions and address climate
change. Ms. Watkins, will you take that pledge on behalf of
Shell?
Ms. Watkins. Chairwoman Maloney, we spend a lot of money in
lobbying for climate policy right now, and I can pledge that
we----
Chairwoman Maloney. Will you take that pledge? ``Yes'' or
``no.'' If you just want to filibuster, I will take it as a
``no.'' ``Yes'' or ``no,'' will you take that pledge that you
will stop spending money with dishonest----
Ms. Watkins. I will pledge that we will continue to spend
our money on climate policy advocacy as we have for many years
now.
Chairwoman Maloney. So in the interest of time, let me ask
the rest of the industry representatives on this panel, do any
of you refuse to take this pledge? If you refuse to take this
pledge, will you please just raise your hand?
Mr. Lawler. Chairwoman Maloney, what I would say is that we
have stopped all reputational advertising at BP, but we do
advocate----
Chairwoman Maloney. But will you take the pledge? I know
that you have taken steps in the right direction. I heard that
in your testimony. Thank you. Will you take the pledge? ``Yes''
or ``no.''
Mr. Lawler. Well, for your specific pledge, what we are
pledging to do is advocate for low carbon policies that do, in
fact, take the company and the world to net zero. That is the
pledge I am willing to commit to.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, I am asking is----
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Maloney.--if you will stop spending money either
directly or indirectly to oppose efforts to reduce emissions
and address climate change. Just stop spending money.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Maloney. That is all lies. OK. I take it that
you don't want to take the pledge. All right. I hope that----
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Maloney. I hope that after----
Mr. Comer. We are nearly two minutes over.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. May I just close for one second? I
hope that after 40 years of misleading the public to block
climate action, our Nation's oil and gas industry will finally
change its behavior and join the many good corporate citizens,
community leaders, and scientists who are working together to
save our planet and our children.
I now yield to my good friend and colleague, Ranking Member
Comer.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Crabtree, thank you
for appearing here before the committee today, and I would like
to ask you what it is like to be a worker in this Biden
economy. How long had Joe Biden been President before you were
fired from your position working for the Keystone pipeline?
Mr. Crabtree. Thank you for the question, but I think I
made that clear in my opening statement that it was three hours
after I lost my job. Now, I have got to be truthful, and I have
got to be fair. I have got to work since then, but most of the
work that we are doing now is kind of maintaining the aging
infrastructure of the pipeline systems that we have in this
country now. And like I said in my testimony, not adding
additional capacity when there is still such a great demand for
it is causing these fuel prices to rise, and to me, it is a
serious national security issue when we have to write letters
to OPEC asking for more oil. It is a serious issue when we----
Mr. Comer. I couldn't agree more.
Mr. Crabtree [continuing]. Consider drawing oil out of the
strategic petroleum reserve. The strategic petroleum reserve
wasn't put in place to bail out incompetent decisions----
Mr. Comer. Let me say. We are going to talk a lot about
that during this hearing, and I appreciate that. But my next
question, did President Biden or anyone from the White House
ever apologize to you for creating a situation where you lost
your job immediately upon his taking office?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, of course not. I am just a simple
welder. I wouldn't expect an apology. It probably wouldn't have
been meant much to me, you know. An apology isn't going to put
food on my table. An apology doesn't pay my bills. Being able
to work is what I need.
Mr. Comer. Absolutely. Absolutely. Now, last week,
President Biden said that gas prices won't go down until 2022,
and he said during his town hall when asked what he was going
to do to reduce gas prices, he didn't have an answer on that.
What, in your opinion, impact does shutting down one pipeline,
in this case, Keystone, have on energy prices?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, I can give you a number. No. 1 is
transportation costs. This pipeline was going to replace the
transportation. This oil has already been coming to the
country. We are using it, and it is coming in by rail, and when
you can build a pipeline, you can cut transportation costs by
nearly a third.
Mr. Comer. And probably reduce your carbon footprint at the
same time, right?
Mr. Crabtree. Exactly. This was a pipeline that was going
to run off of green energy. A lot of people don't know that.
And No. 2 is market speculation. You know, the country has seen
what was happening, you know, the very first thing that
President Biden done. And when you see an attack on the
industry like that, you know, some of the prices, you know, on
the markets, a lot of it is speculation. They see this attack
on it, and you get people buying up contracts because they are
worried about not being able to have any.
Mr. Comer. Well, I tell you, I hate to see what has
happened to you and so many other union workers in America with
the disastrous Biden energy policies. It has just been a
terrible time in America to be a worker in this Biden economy.
It has been a good time to be on welfare and someone who
doesn't work or works from home, but a terrible time to be a
worker.
I want to shift gears and ask quick questions to the oil
and gas CEOs. I am going to start with Mr. Woods, and we are
going to try to run down these real quick because I am going to
yield to Kevin Brady momentarily. But, Mr. Woods, how long have
you been CEO of Exxon?
Mr. Woods. Since 2017.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Woods, in your time as CEO, have you ever
approved a climate disinformation campaign?
Mr. Woods. I have not.
Mr. Comer. Ms. Watkins, how long have you been president of
Shell?
Ms. Watkins. For three years.
Mr. Comer. Ms. Watkins, in your time as CEO, have you ever
approved a disinformation campaign?
Ms. Watkins. No, I have not.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Wirth, how long have you been CEO of
Chevron?
Mr. Wirth. For almost four years, Congressman.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Wirth, in your time as CEO, have you ever
approved a disinformation campaign?
Mr. Wirth. I have never approved a disinformation campaign.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Lawler, how long have you been CEO of BP
America?
Mr. Lawler. About a year and a half.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Lawler, in your time as CEO, have you ever
approved a disinformation campaign?
Mr. Lawler. No, I have not.
Mr. Comer. Well, thank you all for being here and answering
my questions. We are going to have a lot of questions
throughout the day. I look forward to working with the oil and
gas industry to create more jobs here in America. I would now
like to yield to the distinguished gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Brady, the ranking member on the Committee of Ways and Means.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Ranking Member Comer, for having me
this morning, and to Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you to America's
affordable energy leaders for joining us today.
American-made energy boasts an enviable track record of
hiring, training, promoting, and empowering all Americans. I
have seen this firsthand where our energy companies are
providing good-paying jobs, quality healthcare, and secure
retirement for workers from the lowest skills to the brightest
researchers in the world with remarkable opportunities for
women and people of color. The success of this industry isn't
just important to my state of Texas, but important to the
success of our Nation where we recognize good-paying jobs and
rising paychecks do so much more to lift Americans out of
poverty than the promise of never-ending government checks.
Today's disappointing economic report points out why good-
paying energy jobs should be protected. Today's report was
awful, and if you take out the inventories, America's growth
last quarter was zero. The President is a disturbing 0 for 3 in
meeting quarterly projections for growth this year, even with
expectations dumbed down in some cases by 80 percent or more.
The President's best economic growth peaked last spring, and he
remains nearly a million jobs short of his promises. He is
making an alarming labor shortage worse for Main Street
businesses and is demanding more government stimulus that will
drive prices up higher and longer.
Too many Americans have lost faith, and the President now
faces serious questions about his competency to heal our
economy. Part of that is due to a relentless attack on American
energy workers by the Administration and this Democratic
Congress, a taxation and regulatory attack that could kill over
a million-and-a-half good-paying American energy jobs over time
and drive prices even higher for struggling families and Main
Street businesses. Ironically, for an Administration that has
made climate change a central focus, these attacks damage the
very industry that holds the key to addressing greenhouse gas
emissions around the world in a smart way, that raises the
standard of living here in America and our poorer nations as
friends.
The solution to climate change isn't to drive energy prices
up higher for everyone and kill off American energy jobs. That
is flat earth thinking. The smart solution is to make
affordable energy cleaner through technology, and then American
technology, tax and tariff free, to help the entire world solve
our climate challenges. This industry has already proven it can
increase production of American energy to meet our growing
demand while reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This industry
continues to invest more in research, innovation, and
technology to make affordable energy cleaner than any other
industry. Instead of vilifying them and trying to end their
existence, Congress should be working with them to accelerate
this biology and clear the path for sharing it with the world.
Renewables do play a big role in reducing emissions, but
natural gas is the real bridge to the future. Since the major
shift away from coal and natural gas, the U.S. has reduced
carbon dioxide emissions by 32 percent more. Affordable energy
is the way to lift Americans out of poverty. It is the key to
ensuring that low-and middle-income Americans can grow and
thrive. And instead of demonizing the very industry whose
success has made our country independent and secure, instead of
raising energy prices on those who can least afford it, let's
empower America's innovators. Let's rebuild the momentum we
made in unleashing LNG and crude oil exports and use that
success to make America a leader in discovering new clean
energy technology. There is a smart way to transition to a
cleaner energy future, and it is time both political parties in
Congress joined forces with these energy leaders to achieve it.
With that, Ranking Member Comer, I yield back.
Mr. Comer. Thank you. Now I would like to yield the balance
of my time to Garret Graves from Louisiana, the ranking member
on the Select Committee on Climate Crisis.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Ranking Member Comer, and I want to
thank the chair for allowing us to participate today.
I want to first just point out, Madam Chair, that I am
going to take a guess that every single person that came to
Washington this week, that they came here using some form of
fossil fuel. Everybody. Madam Chair, I actually have two
electric vehicles, and I have actually rigged up a solar
generator to charge them, the most ridiculous and cost-
prohibitive thing I have ever seen in my life, but it is fun
anyway. I am from South Louisiana. If projections are correct,
then we are at absolutely ground zero--ground zero--for what is
going to happen moving forward. We have some of the fastest
subsiding straits in the world, so with sea rise, it means the
fastest relative sea rise in the world. We also are home to
some of the most robust oil and gas production in North
America, and at the same time, we have one of the most
productive ecosystems on the North American continent right
there where all this energy production is occurring.
Madam Chair, I also want you to know that when the
Deepwater Horizon accident happened, I ended up being the lead
trustee and the negotiator for the state of Louisiana. And in
that settlement, I will tell you we reached the largest
settlement in U.S. history from a single company, and I am
proud of that because, you know what? There were actions that
were wrong, and we held them accountable.
I want to ask the witnesses a question. Maybe Mr. Sommers.
If we stopped producing energy today, stopped producing oil and
gas in the United States, ``yes'' or ``no,'' would there be a
stoppage, or would folks cease to use oil and gas across the
world? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Sommers. No, Congressman.
Mr. Graves. No.
Mr. Sommers. In fact, as you know, the world consumes about
100 million barrels of oil every single day, and even during
the worst part of the pandemic, the world was still consuming
about 81 million barrels of oil every single day. So the world
is going to continue to consume a lot of oil and natural gas
from now and very long into the future.
Mr. Graves. Great. Thank you. I want to go back, and I
apologize. I was in and out because we had another hearing
going on. I believe it was Shell, but I may be mistaken, that
noted in their testimony that the most efficient energy
production in terms of emissions on the globe, some of the most
efficient on the globe, is actually offshore in the Gulf of
Mexico. Could any of you confirm that, whoever noted it in your
opening testimony, to make sure I heard that correctly?
Ms. Watkins. Yes, Congressman. Hi, it is me, Gretchen
Watkins from Shell. That is a fact. We are the largest operator
in the Gulf of Mexico, and we are really proud that the oil and
gas that we provide to the country from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico
is the lowest greenhouse gas that we can possibly----
Mr. Graves. So putting these two things together, if there
is clearly going to be continued demand for energy, because
there will because oil and gas has 32 times the energy density
of the next closest renewable 32 times--so there is going to
continue to be demand. We produce it most efficiently in the
United States. Why would we stop? Everybody on this committee
used it to get to work this week. Everybody did.
You know, something else that is really interesting as we
sit here and demonize the United States and these very people
that are here today on the witness panel, is the United States
has led the world. We have reduced emissions more than the next
12 emissions-reducing countries combined. I am going to
paraphrase a quote of the executive director of the
International Energy Administration who said, ``The United
States' progress on reducing emissions associated with energy
is the most historic in world history.'' Madam Chair, these
people on the panel, these are the people that did that.
Mr. Sommers, could you tell me what primary source of
energy resulted in this decrease in emissions?
Mr. Sommers. It was natural gas, Congressman.
Mr. Graves. Thank you very much. So natural gas, the very
thing that we are talking about banning here. Madam Chair, I
would like to read you a quote from a letter. ``Today we call
on you to use all your authority to take timely action to
pressure OPEC and cooperating countries to increase world oil
supplies,'' OK? I will say it again. Asking OPEC to increase
world oil supplies. You know which awful Republican Members of
Congress or people asked for this? That would be Maria
Cantwell, Senator Menendez, Senator Schumer, and Senator
Markey, quote, May 18, 2018. And I would like to ask that this
be included in the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Graves. Madam Chair, more recently, on August 12 of
this year, a number of Democrat Members of Congress effectively
asked the same thing. And as I heard noted earlier today, Jake
Sullivan as well as other White House officials asked OPEC to
increase oil production. If we produce it most efficiently,
what are we doing by stopping it? Why? Clearly, we are going to
see a 60-percent increase in global demand for energy. A 60-
percent increase. the strategy right now by throwing out all
conventional energy production, OK, so we are going to move to
solar. Guess who makes 90 percent of the solar panels? It is
China. Guess who has 80 percent roughly of the rare earth and
critical minerals in the world cornered? It is China. And by
the way, they use slave and child labor to produce that.
It simply doesn't make sense. These are the innovators. We
have watched our own President, Madam Chair, shut down the
Keystone pipeline, open up the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, shut
down domestic energy production, asked Saudi Arabia, Venezuela,
Iran, Nigeria, and others to produce more energy to address the
growing demand in the United States and globally. I am just
asking our own President to treat the United States like you
are treating other countries.
Last, Madam Chair, U.S. natural gas, as a result of the
efficiency of these very people, we have a 42-47-percent lower
emissions profile--lower emissions profile--than Russian gas
being delivered to Europe or Asia. This is part of the solution
as we move forward meeting this growing energy demand with
solar, with wind, with geothermal, with nuclear, with oil and
gas, and other efficient energy streams. It is against our
interest to shut these things down. We need to be focused on
the innovation, carbon capture storage, carbon capture
utilization, and other complementary strategies to meet this
growing demand. When the Clinton Administration stopped
producing energy domestically, barrel for barrel, we imported
more from Russia. It is a failed strategy which is not in the
best interest of United States.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Comer,
do you yield back?
Mr. Comer. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. I now recognize Mr. Khanna, who is
the chairman of the Subcommittee on the Environment, for 15
minutes.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Madam Chair. First, let me thank the
witnesses for appearing today voluntarily. I don't have any
interest in being adversarial. I actually want to see if we can
get some positive commitments.
Let me start out where I think we will agree. Mr. Woods,
what is impressive is that in 1977, Exxon had a report that
said, ``There is general scientific agreement that the most
likely manner in which mankind is influencing the global
climate change is through carbon dioxide release from the
burning of fossil fuels.'' Mr. Woods, I assume you would agree
with that Exxon conclusion, yes?
Mr. Woods. Our work was consistent with what the scientific
community was saying at the time, yes.
Mr. Khanna. And in your role as CEO, as you told
Representative Comer, you would never today endorse statements
that blatantly contradict climate science, correct?
Mr. Woods. Correct.
Mr. Khanna. And so if an organization, for example, today
were to say they do not believe in the linkage between fossil
fuels and warming, I assume you would say that is false,
correct?
Mr. Woods. I wouldn't support that statement.
Mr. Khanna. You would say it is false?
Mr. Woods. In looking at the full context of the statement,
I would make a judgment on that, but that is----
Mr. Khanna. I mean, you would say it is false that there is
no linkage between fossil fuels and warming, correct?
Mr. Woods. The combustion of fossil fuels leads to
emissions, which is linked to climate change, yes.
Mr. Khanna. OK. And I assume you know that your former
Exxon CEO, Lee Raymond, made exactly that statement in 2002,
nearly 25 years after Exxon's report. He said he does not
believe ``that the science establishes the linkage between
fossil fuels and warming.'' I am glad you admitted that that
statement is false, and I really don't want to dwell on the
past. But in the spirit of giving you the chance to turn the
page for the company, I assume you would acknowledge that Mr.
Raymond's statement was a mistake and the company regrets it,
correct?
Mr. Woods. I think Mr. Raymond's statement was consistent
with the science at the time. We have evolved----
Mr. Khanna. I don't want to even argue that. Mr. Woods, I
don't even want to argue that. We could go back and forth. You
said it is a false statement. You know, when I make a statement
that is wrong, when most people make a statement that is wrong,
they say, OK, it is a mistake, we regret it. I am just asking
you for that. I assume now that it is a false statement, that
the company regrets making it and would acknowledge that,
right?
Mr. Woods. I think the expectation would be that we would
look at that, the time it was said, and years ago that was
consistent at the time.
Mr. Khanna. But forget whether it was consistent or not.
Can you just acknowledge that it was a mistake to make? If
someone makes a mistake, just say it was a mistake and you
regret that that statement was out there. Would you say that
if----
Mr. Woods. I don't think it is fair to judge something 25
years ago with what we have learned since that time to today's
standard.
Mr. Khanna. Well, I am disappointed that you are not even
willing to say that something is a mistake. It doesn't inspire
a lot of confidence about, you know, introspection and going
forward. I am surprised actually. I thought you would just say
it is a mistake. It is not asking you much to say, yes, it is a
mistake that someone put that out. Anyway, let me move on.
The United Nations 2021 Production Gap Report says, ``To be
consistent with the 1.5-degree pathway, oil and gas production
would have to decline annually by four percent and three
percent, respectively. The IEA's 2021 net zero roadmap calls
for no new oil and gas developments.'' Mr. Lawler, BP has said
that it supports economy-wide net zero greenhouse gas emission
targets by 2050. You made a strong commitment actually to
reduce oil and gas production by 40 percent by 2030. I assume
you are doing this because you think it is important and part
of the solution to the climate crisis. Is that correct?
Mr. Lawler. That is correct, Mr. Khanna. What BP has
aligned its strategy on is in accordance with the Paris
Agreement. We have a new strategy. Just two years ago, just
before COVID started, we put this new strategy into place.
Mr. Khanna. Right. I don't want to cut you off. We have
limited time. And so you believe that the oil and gas
production must decline each year. Is that partly while you are
doing this?
Mr. Lawler. We think that is the best decision for BP and
that is our contribution.
Mr. Khanna. And, Ms. Watkins, Shell's Energy Transition
Strategy says, ``We have set our net zero target so it is fully
consistent with the Paris Agreement.'' And you today actually
announced this new thing where you are going to be having a 50-
percent reduction on Scope 1 and 2, and you are also committed
to a 1 to 2 percent year-end total oil production decline. Is
that right?
Ms. Watkins. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Khanna. Great. And I assume you are doing that that
because you also believe, under the Paris Agreement, that it is
important and that we need to have oil and gas production
declining every year?
Ms. Watkins. Congressman, what we do believe is that
hydrocarbon demand needs to reduce if we are going to get to
net zero by 2050, which is why we are also providing more and
more low-and no-carbon energy----
Mr. Khanna. Right, but you are committed to this 1 to 2
percent reduction every year, right? I mean, that is your
policy, correct?
Ms. Watkins. It is, and----
Mr. Khanna. And let me just turn now to Mr. Wirth. Chevron
announced, unlike BP and Shell, earlier this year that you plan
to increase, by 3.5 percent on a compound basis, your
production. Is that correct, Mr. Wirth?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, our forward guidance would show
that we will grow lower carbon production of traditional----
Mr. Khanna. I am just asking are you going to be increasing
your oil and gas production by 3.5 percent on an annual basis?
Mr. Wirth. Chairman, we will increase our oil and gas
production and reduce the carbon----
Mr. Khanna. OK. So you are going to be increasing the
production. And, Mr. Woods, you have said that you want to keep
the oil and gas production flat. Is that correct?
Mr. Woods. We are focused on meeting the needs of society,
and whatever that need requires----
Mr. Khanna. I don't need the American apple pie speech. It
is just a factual question. You are going to keep it flat,
right?
Mr. Woods. We don't have----
Mr. Khanna. So 40 percent reduction BP, 1 to 2 percent
annual Shell, the Europeans, the American companies. Chevron is
increasing. Exxon is increasing. Mr. Lawler, BP has said it
is----
Voice. Will the gentleman yield for a question?
Mr. Khanna. No, not right now. BP has said that it supports
economy-wide net zero greenhouse gas emissions. BP, clearly you
are only one member, so I assume when you are saying ``economy-
wide,'' you believe other companies need to follow your lead in
decreasing production. Would that be fair, Mr. Lawler?
Mr. Lawler. Yes, sir, I think what we offered up is just a
suggestion. You know, there are many approaches to net zero,
and we certainly wouldn't----
Mr. Khanna. I guess my question is this, Mr. Lawler. Do you
believe that the science says that companies should go down
every year?
Mr. Lawler. Well, I think what we would agree with is the
IPC report, the scientific consensus that action needs to be
taken to lower emissions is real, it is significant, and BP is
in action on that. And one example----
Mr. Khanna. Let me just ask a ``yes'' or ``no'' question on
this, Mr. Wirth. Are you embarrassed as an American company
that your production is going up while the European
counterparts are going down?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, as we have already heard, demand
for energy is going up in the world.
Mr. Khanna. OK. You are not embarrassed. I am just asking
an open question. It is not a ``gotcha'' question. Do you
commit to do anything to matching your European counterparts to
try to bring the actual demand of oil production down?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, with all due respect, I am very
proud of our company and what we do. I am proud of the
companies in this----
Mr. Khanna. No, you won't reduce----
Mr. Wirth [continuing]. Pollution.
Mr. Khanna. You won't. And, Mr. Woods, would you commit to
matching your European counterparts to reducing the production
of oil, like both Shell and BP are doing?
Mr. Woods. We are committed to lowering our emissions,
which----
Mr. Khanna. No. Are you committed to lowering the
production as the Paris Accords say or no? It is----
Mr. Woods. The issue, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Khanna. It is a ``yes'' or ``no.'' You could explain
why you are not, but are you committing? Could you commit to
lowering production or not?
Mr. Woods. We are going to lower emissions, which is the
source of the issue that we are trying to address.
Mr. Khanna. I will take that as a ``no.'' Let me move to a
new point. Ms. Watkins, you know, so far you seem like the star
here. Do you agree that electric vehicles are vital to
decarbonization? I assume you do because you said the rise of
electric vehicles is vital to decarbonizing road transport.
Ms. Watkins. Yes, we believe that to be the case.
Mr. Khanna. Great. Mr. Lawler, I assume you agree with this
because you say energy use in road transport is key. It needs
to be dominated by electrification.
Mr. Lawler. Yes, sir. We believe that EVs are significant.
Mr. Khanna. Great. Both of your companies, along with Exxon
and Shell, support the American Petroleum Institute, and, Mr.
Sommers, you are here. You are the head of API, and you said,
``The government efforts to promote electric vehicles would
leave everyday drivers high and dry, unfairly burden non-EV
drivers, and be costly for taxpayers and consumers.'' In fact,
you have been participating in ``state-by-state multimillion-
dollar battles to squelch utilities' plans to build charging
stations across the country.'' Ms. Watkins, on this panel, with
you is Mr. Sommers, the head of API. Will you take the
opportunity today to tell him that his opposition to electric
vehicles is wrong, and that instead of opposing tax credits for
electric vehicles, he should support them?
Ms. Watkins. Chairman Khanna, we are a member of the API
for a number of reasons, and----
Mr. Khanna. Yes, I know, and I respect that, but can you
just tell him to stop the electric vehicle advertising? If you
say that today, he will stop. You give them $10 million a year.
Ms. Watkins. We have a number of ongoing conversations----
Mr. Khanna. Would you just tell him that today? Just tell
him please stop the electric vehicle advertising. It will help
us in Congress. Just tell him to stop.
Ms. Watkins. So I would like to speak on behalf of Shell,
and here at Shell, we very much believe electric vehicles are
part of the future, which is why we work with----
Mr. Khanna. If you would tell him to stop, it would be
really helpful, you know. It would help the President. He is
really trying to do what you are asking the President to do.
The other thing is I saw your positive statement today. I was
really happy for a well-crafted methane fee. You know, who has
been advertising against the methane fee? API. API. Half a
million dollars in the last three months of Facebook
advertising alone against the President's agenda on the methane
fee that you supported this morning in your great statement.
You added it. Your staff crafted the statement, and you said,
no, we want to have a well-crafted methane fee. Can you please,
please tell API to stop the advertising on the methane fee,
against the methane fee?
Ms. Watkins. There are several places where we are not
fully aligned with the API. We have been----
Mr. Khanna. Just tell him to stop. Mr. Lawler, anyone, will
you tell them to stop? Mr. Lawler, will you tell him to stop
the advertising?
Mr. Lawler. Mr. Khanna, we have been in active
communications with API now from the time I joined, and
whenever there is a----
Mr. Khanna. He is sitting right next to you on the virtual
screen. Just say stop, you know. Just speak plainly. Say stop
the advertising against electric vehicles. Stop the advertising
against methane.
Mr. Lawler. Well, I speak for BP, Mr. Khanna, and we have
been supportive of the green climate portions of the----
Mr. Khanna. Let ask you this. Mr. Woods, Mr. Wirth, this is
your chance to redeem yourselves. Will you tell them to stop,
API? If you are not doing the production stuff, can you tell
API to stop that advertising, either of you?
Mr. Wirth. Chairman Khanna, we engage in discussions on
many policy issues at API. There is a diverse set of members,
as Mr. Sommers said, over 600 members in this association.
Mr. Khanna. You won't tell him to stop?
Mr. Wirth. The members don't always agree on everything.
Mr. Khanna. Let me ask you this. Total, as you know, they
pulled their commitment to API because they said they can't be
part of an organization that is engaged against the fight for
climate change. Will each of you commit to leaving API if they
continue to lobby against electric vehicles? Will any of you
commit to leaving them if they are lobbying against electric
vehicles?
[No response.]
Mr. Khanna. Here is what is so frustrating because I really
don't think you are as bad as the CEOs of the past. I don't. I
think you have tough jobs. You got there. You got a horrible
record on stuff. You are figuring out how you don't get into
litigation trouble while really trying to tell the truth, and
it is a tough act. I mean, I don't envy you, and I don't
believe you purposely want to be out there spreading climate
disinformation. But you are funding these groups, and they are
really having an impact. You know, they are they are spending
millions of dollars in Congress to kill electric vehicles, and
they are spending millions of dollars against the methane gas,
and you could do something here. You could tell them to knock
it off for the sake of the planet. You could end it. You could
end that lobby. Would any of you take the opportunity to look
at API and say stop it? Any of you?
[No response.]
Mr. Khanna. Could you commit, any of you? Ms. Watkins, come
on. I mean, will you do something here? Would you commit to
saying you are not going to fund any group that is going to
engage in climate disinformation at least?
Ms. Watkins. Chairman Khanna, what I will commit to is
continuing to be an active member of the API. And we discuss
many issues in API, some of which have to do with climate
policy, and I am really pleased that----
Mr. Khanna. Let me ask this. Would any of you commit to
having an independent audit to verify that none of your funds
are going for climate denial?
[No response.]
Mr. Khanna. Let me ask this. Raise your hand if you think
the climate crisis is one of the most important crises that
humanity faces? Just raise your hand. I think all of you do.
[Hands raised.]
Mr. Khanna. It is important? Yes. That is right. And, you
know, I understand you fund things for a lot of reasons. You
are the CEOs. You can't track all the details. But if your
money is going to organizations that are against the
fundamental values that you claim you stand for, don't you
think you have some obligation to monitor where the money is
going and to make some commitment today to the American people?
Right now, your position to the American people, this is not
``gotcha.'' This is like actually trying to understand what you
said. You are saying we are just going to spend. We will have
conversation. If they want to do false advertising, fine. We
will talk to them behind the scenes. Are any of you today
prepared to make any statement saying we are going to take
accountability on something so important and stop funding
groups that are actively engaged in any form of climate
disinformation? I will give all of you the last word, so my
time is up. Any form of commitment in any way, even with a
bunch of weasel words, would be great. Please go. Everyone will
have a chance to answer.
Ms. Watkins. Chairman Khanna, I will start by saying that
we have been issuing for the last several years trade
association reports where we very clearly lay out with a great
deal of transparency where we are aligned and where we are
somewhat misaligned with trade associations. In fact, we left a
trade association because we were so misaligned that we didn't
see a way of getting back in alignment. We have been
transparent about that, and I will commit to you today that we
will continue to drive increased scrutiny on a number of areas
around climate policy in that arena.
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Lawler?
Mr. Lawler. Yes, sir. So BP has 7,000 Chargemaster stations
in the U.K. on their way to 70,000 charging stations by the end
of the decade. We are very much for EV use. We advocate that
within API and other organizations, and we will continue to do
that, sir.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, his time----
Mr. Khanna. I just would ask that Mr. Wirth and Mr. Woods
could just answer. I am not going to ask anything more. They
went over a couple minutes.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK.
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Wirth and Mr. Woods, do you have anything?
Mr. Wirth. Chairman Khanna----
Chairwoman Maloney. Very quickly.
Mr. Wirth. We engage with a number of organizations, and we
don't control and may not always agree with the positions taken
or statements made by industry groups and other organizations.
We engage in constructive dialog. What I can tell you is our
position is that climate change is real, the use of fossil
fuels contributes to it, and we are committed to helping
advance a lower carbon future.
Mr. Woods. We make our positions very clear going into the
trade associations and then we work with them to try to advance
those positions, consistent with the broader view of the
membership that each of the organization serves. And I would
point out that API has evolved the climate position and
supports carbon tax along with a number of other constructive
climate policies.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back, and I now
recognize for an equivalent amount of time, Mr. Norman, who is
the ranking member of the Subcommittee on the Environment, for
an equivalent amount of time.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney. For my
questions, I would like to yield to Jim Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. Oh, I thank the gentleman for yielding. The
previous speaker used the word ``frustrating.'' I will tell you
what is frustrating is a Member of Congress telling American
oil and gas companies to reduce production at the same time the
President United States is begging OPEC to increase production.
That may be the dumbest thing I have ever heard, but that is
the scenario we are in. God bless Chevron for saying they are
going to increase production. What does the gentleman want, $8
gasoline, $10 gasoline for the very families that we all
represent? This is craziness what they are talking about. I
yield back to the gentleman. Thank you for yielding me 30
seconds.
Mr. Norman. Thank you so much. Mr. Sommers, did you realize
back several months ago at an Oversight hearing that I asked
Ms. Greta Thunberg, who is a spokesman, you know, for the Green
New Deal and other issues--she has 17.9 million followers. I
asked her with China and India, how are we going to get them to
cut their emissions when they are the leaders in the world and
America has come down on emissions. Do you realize she said
they were going to ask them to? Is this a proper response, in
your opinion?
Mr. Sommers. Thank you, Congressman, for your question. As
you know, the United States accounts for about 12.6 percent of
world emissions, and our emissions continue to go down year on
year. China's emissions account for about 32.6 percent of world
emissions, and their emissions continue to go up. The key point
is that, yes, climate change is real and that we need to step
up to the plate and do what we can to address the climate
challenge, but at the same time, this is a global challenge.
This isn't a challenge that can be taken on just by one company
or by one country. We need a global solution to the climate
challenge.
But this industry has not waited for others to step up to
the plate to deal with that challenge. In fact, earlier this
year, the American Petroleum Institute put forward a very
forward-looking position on climate change in API's Climate
Action Framework. The interesting thing about that framework,
Congressman, is that it is not just about what we are asking
the government to do, but what the industry is committing to do
to reduce climate change over time. And we are proud of that
forward-looking agenda.
But as you point out, this is a global challenge, and the
world is going to continue to demand oil and gas for the
future. The question I think lawmakers have to answer is
whether the world is going to get that oil gas from the United
States where it is produced cleaner, better, and safer, or
whether they are going to get that oil and gas from countries
that are hostile to American interests. I think the answer is
clear, from our perspective.
Mr. Norman. And the Administration is content to get our
natural gas and oil, as Mr. Jordan said, and paying ungodly
amounts in the future, if we can get gas from countries that
don't like us. Does that make sense to you?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank you again for your
question.
Mr. Norman. Does that make sense?
Mr. Sommers. No, sir.
Mr. Norman. No, and nor does Greta Thunberg's answer, which
was a Pollyannish answer saying, yes, we will ask them to be
nice does not make sense. Mr. Sommers, isn't it true that most
of the raw materials and manufacturing capacity for renewables
necessary to execute Biden's zero-emissions goal comes from
China?
Mr. Sommers. That is the case, Congressman.
Mr. Norman. And does China's ability to manufacture
renewables cheaply have anything to do with the fact that their
factories are powered by oil and gas or that their economy runs
on 84-percent fossil fuels?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, the Chinese economy continues to
expand not just oil and gas infrastructure, but, in fact, based
on the data that we have seen, China is adding a coal plant a
week. Their emissions continue to go up while American
emissions continue to go down mainly because the United States
has made a fuel switch from coal as the primary source of power
to natural gas. And that is because natural gas prices have
gotten lower as a consequence of the technological and
innovative revolution that occurred in this country over the
course of the last decade. We are able to find more of this
energy here at home, and as a consequence of that, we have been
actually able to reduce emissions while our production is going
up. In fact, no country--no country--in the world has reduced
emissions more than the United States, and it is because of the
American oil and gas industry.
Mr. Norman. And China is not being held to the same
emission standards that we are, yet the Biden Administration
and the questions you have had don't even address this. They
are content to buy from countries that don't like us and let
Americans suffer as they pay for not just gas, but every other
commodity that they are trying to buy now.
I now yield to Congresswoman Foxx.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much for yielding. The title of
this hearing suggests that ``Big Oil'' is running a
disinformation campaign designed to prevent action on the
climate. However, it is clear that this hearing is part of a
Democrat-led disinformation campaign to distract from the Biden
Administration's failed policies that are hurting average
Americans.
The Biden Administration has injected instability into the
energy sector by canceling the Keystone XL pipeline and
discouraging domestic exploration and new development. And once
gas prices predictably started rising, President Biden even
turned to our competitors, as has already been noted, in OPEC
and asked them to bail him out. As of this morning, $3.39-per-
gallon gas is the average price of gas in America, which is the
highest since the Obama-Biden Administration. Do we see a
pattern here? This hurts families in my district and across the
Nation who now have to decide which items on their grocery list
they cannot buy and what trips they can no longer afford to
take.
Today's hearing is meant to distract from this harsh
reality facing families and shift blame from the Biden
Administration's failed policies to the private sector. And
since the Democrats aren't interested in asking about this, I
want to take a moment to ask Mr. Woods, Ms. Watkins, Mr. Wirth,
Mr. Lawler to tell us what your companies are doing to
transition to lower carbon energy.
Mr. Woods. Well, thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
It is an important one and one that we have been focused on for
quite some time is striking the balance of continuing to meet
the growing demand for energy while reducing emissions. Natural
gas has been pointed out as one step toward replacing higher
emission fuel systems. We are also working on reducing our own
emissions at our plant, and from 2016 to 2020, as I have
mentioned, we have reduced it by 11 percent and have plans for
more aggressive reductions going forward.
Ms. Foxx. OK. I am going to have to ask you to cut it real
short because I only have about two minutes left. So the
others, can you give me real short answers?
Ms. Watkins. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. At
Shell, we believe climate change is a real challenge that is
facing the world. We plan to continue to play a role in that
both by continuing to produce low greenhouse gas hydrocarbons
here in the U.S., but over time, those will go down and
increasing, hopefully, the demand from our customers in
collaboration with governments for low-and no-carbon fuels,
like electricity generated by solar or wind or like hydrogen.
And so we are very much in action on both setting targets for
ourselves, but also working with our customers, working with
society in order to accelerate----
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Wirth?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, our strategy is simple: be a
leader in low-carbon production of traditional energy that the
world needs today while growing lower-carbon businesses, and we
are doing this in three ways. First, we are taking steps toward
net zero by 2050 for upstream Scope 1 and 2 emissions. Second,
we are taking steps to address Scope 3 emissions by growing
lower-carbon business lines and establishing a new metric for
the full value chain of our business. And third, we have
committed to invest more than $10 billion on lower-carbon and
carbon reduction projects.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Unfortunately, Mr. Lawler, I have
almost run out of time, and I need to ask a question of Mr.
Sommers. So I wonder if you could submit your answer in
writing.
Mr. Lawler. I would be happy to do so.
Ms. Foxx. Mr. Sommers, despite some of the rhetoric from
your critics, it is clear from the things you said and others
have said that meaningful steps to reduce emissions from
operations have already been done. Could you describe any other
effort, in about 30 seconds, that are under way and some of the
planned industry initiatives that haven't been mentioned?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, thank you and great to be with
you today. First of all, the API Climate Action Framework,
which can be found at API.org/climate, is our forward-leaning
agenda to address the challenge of climate change. In addition
to that, since 2017, the American Petroleum Institute has had a
program called the Environmental Partnership, which is all
about how we reduce methane emissions within our own
operations. This program has had measurable success, and we are
continuing to reduce methane operations within the oil and gas
industry. We are proud of all that work, and we look forward to
expanding that work over time.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Sommers. I yield back to the
gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Ms. Foxx. I now yield five minutes
to Congressman Hice.
Mr. Hice. I appreciate the gentleman for yielding, and I
want to thank Chairwoman Maloney for giving this committee yet
another opportunity, another platform to highlight the
horrible, miserable, failed policies of the Biden
Administration and the Democratic Party as a whole, and for
also allowing this time yet again to exhibit the dereliction of
duty of this committee to perform real oversight on pressing
issues like the southern border, like global supply chain
issues, and like the horrible withdrawal in Afghanistan, and
yet to this day, the hundreds of who right now are left in
Afghanistan while we are having hearings like this to
supposedly investigate a misinformation campaign by the oil and
gas companies.
But let's talk about real misinformation. As it relates to
climate change, Democrats and their friends in the media have
morphed what is considered a worst-case climate scenario into
what today is considered a most likely and sure to happen
tomorrow kind of scenario. And it is all about the purposes of
justifying an array of liberal socialist wish list priorities,
such as the Green New Deal. Unfortunately, Democrats have
shamelessly scared and frightened an entire generation of
children in the fearing that the entire end of the world is
just upon us. One of our colleagues said we only have 11 years
left to save the planet--are you kidding me--shamelessly
creating fear in society in a whole new generation. And yet the
Green New Deal, which our colleague from New York, her own
chief of staff admitted that the Green New Deal was not even
about the environment, that it was more of a how do you change
the entire economy kind of thing. It promises family
sustainable wages. It promises medical and family leave, paid
vacation, retirement security. It says nothing about the
environment as a whole.
Democrats have become masters of accusing others of the
very thing they themselves are guilty of, and in this case,
misinformation. It is misinformation meant to scare the public
and ignore realities, realities like the truth that the United
States has been reducing carbon emissions while China's
emissions have been going through the roof. China now produces
twice the carbon emissions as the United States and a quarter
of all greenhouse gas emissions globally. China. Here is a
country who detests freedom, detests democracy, detests human
rights. They would love nothing more than for the United States
to be crippled in our economy through these rosy sounding,
nevertheless horrible policies being presented and crammed down
the throats of the American people by the Democratic Party.
And what has the Biden Administration done about it all?
Well, ask Mr. Crabtree today and 11,000 others who have lost
their jobs because of the horrible policy decisions of this
Administration, and by the way, union jobs. Good-paying union
jobs, which our Democrats love to crow about, and yet now these
individuals have lost their jobs. The Biden Administration had
no problem killing the Keystone pipeline, but, at the same
time, no problem willing to establish Nord Stream 2. So here we
go. Let's give Putin and the Russians everything they need,
including economic and political leverage over Europe. What
kind of Russian collusion was involved in that kind of deal I
wonder.
Yet the Biden Administration cannot escape the fact that
the U.S. economy still relies on oil and gas for basic
necessities, and yet their plan is let's decrease our own
energy independence while increasing reliance upon some of the
world's most unstable countries. And yet now, these companies
that we are talking to today who are being villainized, are at
the same time being begged by the Biden Administration to help
reduce energy prices. The hypocrisy is insane.
My time has expired, and with that, I will yield back to
the gentleman from South Carolina. Thank you.
Mr. Norman. Madam Chair, my time has expired.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlewoman from the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton,
is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, for this
important hearing with fossil fuel companies. There is ample
evidence that the fossil fuel industry has worked to deceive
the public and sow doubt about climate science, and that has
been going on for decades, but the tactics they are employing
are not new. They are a mirror image of tactics used by tobacco
companies decades ago. In 2019, Sharon Eubanks, a former
Justice Department prosecutor, testified before this
committee's Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Subcommittee that,
similar to Big Tobacco, oil companies have--here I am quoting--
``denied that there was a consensus,'' and at the same time,
their internal documents show they knew there was a consensus.
Mr. Woods, are you familiar with a scientist by the name of
Frederick Seitz? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. No.
Mr. Norton. All right. Dr. Seitz was a prominent scientist,
even heading the National Academy of Science in the 1960's.
According to the Union of Concerned Scientists, in the 1990's
and 2000's Dr. Seitz advised a number of ExxonMobil-funded
groups on scientific research. At the same time, he published
several articles questioning climate science, including a 1995
Wall Street Journal piece arguing against a report issued by
the U.N.'s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In 1998,
he led a petition calling for the United States to leave the
Kyoto Protocol. Dr. Seitz claimed in a letter with the petition
that, and here again I am quoting, ``increased atmospheric
carbon dioxide is environmentally helpful.'' Mr. Woods, were
you aware that before he began publicly questioning climate
science, Dr. Seitz had a role advising tobacco companies on
their medical research?
Mr. Woods. No. I am not familiar with Dr. Seitz, so I don't
have any of that context.
Mr. Norton. In the 1970's and 80's, Dr. Seitz advised the
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, helping oversee millions of
dollars in research funding. He later explained that the
tobacco companies ``didn't want us looking at the health
effects of cigarette smoking.'' Big Oil tries to distinguish
itself from Big Tobacco, but the fact is the disinformation
campaign used for decades by the fossil fuel industry mirrors
Big Tobacco itself and its playbook, injects uncertainty into
the public discourse, undermines the science, all while
continuing to rake in economic benefits. Ultimately, the
tobacco industry was held accountable for its deception, but
Big Oil has so far escaped accountability for its longstanding
climate denial. And I hope that tide will begin to turn today
just as it did with Big Tobacco executives.
I thank you, and I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Donalds, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Madam Chair. First of all, to the
witnesses, the leaders of Exxon, Chevron, BP, Shell, I know
that the climate activists in Twitter world which Dave
Chappelle says doesn't exist, and he is right because it is
just people who have nothing better to do but type on their
keyboards, and we do it, too, here in Congress. But let's be
very clear. You need an apology because what I witnessed today
was just rank intimidation by the chair of this committee.
Trying to get you to pledge on what you are going to spend your
money on is a gross violation of the First Amendment. And just
because we are Members of Congress, and we got microphones, and
we pass laws does not mean that we also have the ability to
infringe on your ability to organize, whether it is API or
anybody else, or what you choose to spend your money on. It is
disgusting. It is absolutely disgusting.
Somebody needs to go call Merrick Garland and tell him to
get in here and watch the intimidation that came from this very
panel today because this is not about defending Big Oil or
defending big anything. It is about defending the ability of
people in our country to be free, say what they want, think
what they want, spend their money how they choose. And if we
are not going to be any better than the Chinese, how do we ever
expect to beat them on the world stage when we are cutting our
neck when it comes to energy production while they are burning
more coal, they are increasing their emissions, and they are
not showing up in Scotland? You know why they are not showing
up in Scotland? Because they are interested in building an
economy. They are interested in becoming the dominant economic
player across the globe. They are interested in becoming the
dominant military player across the globe while we joke around
and mess around intimidating you guys, who, frankly, heat our
homes, you cool our fridges, you keep our cars going. This is
insane. So I am sorry for you, and I am sorry for the people in
our country who have to witness shenanigans like this and
witness circuses like this. That is why they call that one show
on HBO, whatever it is, The Circus, because that is exactly
what this is.
Madam Chair, I am requesting that a letter be entered into
the record. This is a letter written by Ranking Member Comer
and the other ranking members on this committee that actually
speaks to the chilling effect that has come from you, Madam
Chair, asking you to stop intimidating companies, requesting
information that is their First Amendment right to have that
information. I ask that that be admitted into the record under
unanimous consent.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a question for
Mr. Sommers now that we are done with that. Mr. Sommers, it was
asked earlier of a lot of the executives if they believe in
electronic vehicles, and it is a noble goal to have. But, Mr.
Sommers, where does electricity production actually come from?
Mr. Sommers. Thank you, Congressman. Before I address that
question, I do want to clear one thing up, that a difference of
views on electric vehicles is not climate disinformation. We as
an organization support all forms of energy. We support the
rapid advancement of electronic vehicles as well, but at the
same time, what we don't agree with is that the Federal
Government should be the ones that are funding that buildout of
infrastructure. The concern is that as we build out service
stations across the country, those service stations have been
developed not by the Federal Government, but by private
industry. And members on this panel themselves are investing in
building out that infrastructure as is appropriate for the
private sector. Second of all, I think your question is very,
very important, which is, where does that energy come from.
Most of the energy in the United States comes from natural gas.
It has replaced coal as the primary source of energy in this
country.
Mr. Donalds. Let me ask you this question as a followup. So
if we don't have natural gas, and obviously the Democrats are
against coal, where would we actually get the electricity to
power all of these electric cars? Where would it come from?
Mr. Sommers. Well, Congressman, for most countries and for
certainly the United States, there would be likely a fuel
switch back from natural gas to coal. And because----
Mr. Donalds. So real quick, and I don't mean to cut you off
because you make a great point, but I got 30 seconds. It is
important for the American people to understand that if you
follow the idiocy that is in the bipartisan infrastructure
agreement, which is going to make natural gas harder to
procure, we are actually not going to have lower emissions. We
are going to have higher because you are going to have to
switch back to coal-fired plants. And just for the record,
let's also say the world will always demand energy. If you are
not getting it from us, where we actually do it more safely and
more cleanly, you will get it from Russia, you will get it from
China, and they don't care what the climate activists have to
say on Twitter. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Cooper, is now
recognized. Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I would like to
thank all the witnesses for being here today.
I think the question before us is how do we transition the
world to a zero-carbon economy as cheaply and as easily as
possible. And most all the witnesses seem to be in favor of
market-based solutions to this problem, including a price on
carbon. So I would like each of the witnesses to answer, what
is the right price of carbon? Mr. Lawler? Mr. Woods? Mr. Wirth?
Mr. Lawler. Yes, sir. So, you know, BP has been an advocate
of an economy-wide, market-based price on carbon for many, many
years.
Mr. Cooper. I would like the specific number, please, and I
don't have much time, so please tell me the price for carbon
that you would support.
Mr. Lawler. So I don't have a specific price today to
answer your question, but we do think it is the most efficient
way to----
Mr. Cooper. Mr. Woods?
Mr. Woods. Congressman, it is a very important question. It
depends on where you are trying to decarbonize at. We have
proposed a very large-scale carbon reduction project in the
Houston Ship Channel. That would require $100 a ton and
depending on where you are and how close you are to different
sequestration, that price will change.
Mr. Cooper. Mr. Wirth?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, there are different circumstances
and economies around the world. There are different carbon
prices in economies around the world.
Mr. Cooper. In the U.S.
Mr. Wirth. A broad-based and transparent price is very
important, and then a price that gradually moves into the
economy----
Mr. Cooper. What price? What price?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, there are different opinions on the
number. I am talking about the----
Mr. Cooper. I want your opinion.
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, the cost of mitigating emissions is
very different in different sectors of our economy, and
eventually----
Mr. Cooper. Ms. Watkins? Ms. Watkins?
Mr. Wirth [continuing]. To get to the kinds of reductions
that we aspire to, it will be a very high price over time.
Mr. Cooper. Ms. Watkins, the price of carbon. What should
it be?
Ms. Watkins. Yes. We can't say a specific price right now.
Mr. Cooper. OK.
Ms. Watkins. We need to put this in place. It is a market-
based carbon price. It would need to be a very even playing
field, and depending on what we are trying to decarbonize, the
price will float with the market.
Mr. Cooper. Well, the sooner we can reach a fair price on
carbon, and I know it would fluctuate, the sooner we can
achieve that market-based reform that you say that you are for.
Another part of market-based reforms is whether you are truly a
market-based entity or not, and I was wondering if we could
agree on the amount of government subsidies that you receive
every year. I think at the low estimate it is about $20 billion
a year, but the IMF estimates that U.S. oil companies receive
some $650 billion in direct and indirect subsidies every year.
So can the four key oil executives agree on the amount by which
they are subsidized, at least in the United States by the U.S.
taxpayer? Is it $20 billion or is it $650 billion?
[No response.]
Mr. Cooper. Crickets. None of you have any idea how much
you are being subsidized by the U.S. taxpayer?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, our products are taxed, not
subsidized, and I can tell you that a number of the policies
that get described as subsidies are very similar to those
available to other industries and other companies, and they are
important for American energy security, American energy
investments, and American energy supply.
Mr. Cooper. Well, when the tobacco companies were on the
hot seat years ago, the first step that Congress took was to
remove the subsidies for tobacco growing. That was the first
step, and I think it is very important that we arrive at the
degree of subsidies that are involved. I know that you are
taxed, but you also have special provisions that only apply to
oil and gas companies and don't apply to other firms. In
aggregate, how much are those subsidies because those, by
definition, would not be market based. Those are government
policies that benefit your companies instead of other types of
activities. How much are those subsidies?
[No response.]
Mr. Cooper. Crickets.
Mr. Lawler. Congressman, I can't answer your question
directly, but I would say, though, that a healthy oil and gas
industry is very important to the transition for----
Mr. Cooper. I agree. I agree.
Mr. Lawler. And so----
Mr. Cooper. I am wanting to find answers to market-based
solutions which you say that you are for. Final point,
shareholder activism, these upstart hedge funds. The front page
of The Wall Street Journal today has advocates of Shell being
broken up because apparently, they believe that more money
could be made for investors by having a better-run company, and
that shareholder activists have taken seats on ExxonMobil's
board. I think that could be the market reform that might be
faster than congressional action.
I see that my time has expired. I thank the chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from New Mexico, Ms. Herrell, is recognized
for five minutes.
Ms. Herrell. Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me start off by
saying that I am so glad to have this hearing because I don't
think you can truly understand the hypocrisy that happens in
this Capitol and in this building unless you are watching it
like we are today, or hearing it, or participating in it. And
the saddest thing of all is we have a President who has tweeted
about the million jobs he is going to create or the 4 million
jobs he is going to create. And you know what is sad? He is
creating jobs overseas, because the very people that heat our
homes, that put us to work every day, that has a profound
effect on our entire country in terms of national security and
job creation that is under attack.
And while this committee may not like you because your
executives, because your companies have been successful, I just
want to apologize for the decorum because thank you for what
you have done. Thank you, every one of you, for creating the
jobs and for bringing it home, for teaching us that we can be
energy independent and that we can also have a very reliable
and longstanding relationship with each and every one of you
and the communities and the people that rely on you. And who we
don't talk about, you know, are the seniors or the lower
middle-class income people that cannot afford to heat their
homes or will have to make decisions this year whether to buy
food, or to heat their homes, or to buy gas. And this is just
the tip of the iceberg because later today or sometime this
week, or maybe this year, we are going to pass the most
ridiculous bill in American history, the infrastructure
reconciliation bill, that does nothing for the American people.
So while you are getting beat down today, there are people here
that believe in what you are doing, and we thank you for all of
the innovation.
But what I want to do is ask a couple of questions to Mr.
Sommers. And this is really a no-brainer, but I am thinking if
you get to answer the question maybe somebody will actually
listen to you. What would happen to global emissions if my
Democrat colleagues got their way and the United States stopped
completely producing oil and gas?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, thank you for your question,
and you represent one of the most prolific oil and gas
districts in the country, representing the New Mexico side of
the prolific Permian Basin. And as you know, oil and gas has
led to a significant increase in jobs in your congressional
district, and because of that, we have been able to reduce
emissions because we have been able to find that oil and gas in
more environmentally responsible ways. And for that matter, the
state of New Mexico receives about 40 percent of its budget
from the oil and gas industry.
To answer your specific question, if the United States
stopped using oil and gas, it is likely that there would be a
reverse switch from the use of natural gas in our electricity
generation to the use of coal. You know, in this industry, we
need to remember what we at API call the energy trilemma. The
energy trilemma is that for every energy source, it needs to be
provided affordably, reliably, and cleaner, and so every source
has to meet that same challenge. Within the oil and gas
industry, we are working toward meeting that challenge every
single day. There is a reason why U.S. emissions have continued
to go down. Sixty-five percent of the decline in emissions in
the last decade is a consequence of that fuel switch from coal
to natural gas. We do not want to reverse that progress.
Ms. Herrell. Right, but we are doing everything we can in
this committee and on Capitol Hill to do just that, which I
don't think people understand this isn't about just starting
the car every day. This is about so many of our day-to-day
projects touched by petroleum. In fact, I would just submit to
saying anybody who has gotten a vaccination or is going to get
one, thank you to the oil and gas industry because I would bet
that almost every single one of these syringes has been touched
by a petroleum product. But we don't want to give a heads up or
pat on the back to the industry because we would rather sit you
down in here and tear you down and make the public think that
you are all bad, you are rich, and you don't care about
anybody. We know better than that.
And this is truly personal for me because you just said it.
You know, 40 percent of my state budget comes from this
industry. Communities in my state, in my district are
completely made up of the men and women that serve, whether
directly or indirectly, in jobs related to the industry. And
while we sit here and think that we have got a better way, if
it is all green and it is all good, then why are we subsidizing
green new everything? Why are we pushing out the only industry
that is reliable, affordable, and that we desperately need in
our Nation to remain a global standing when it comes to energy
dominance, when it comes to national security?
I just want to thank all of you for being here today. I
hope that what you are saying will resonate, and I hope you
will get a chance to finish your sentences because it has been
hard listening to you try to get your point made when you are
being cutoff. And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Krishnamoorthi, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Wirth, you
believe that ``climate change is one of the biggest challenges
of our time.'' Correct, sir?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, I tried to be very clear on that
earlier. We do believe that climate change is real. We accept
the consensus and----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Yes, sir. And on page three of your
witness statement, you said you support the ``global net zero
ambitions of the Paris Agreement,'' correct?
Mr. Wirth. That is on page three of my statement,
Congressman.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. In fact, on your October 11 press
release, Chevron announced that it has targeted 2050 for having
net zero emissions associated with the upstream operations of
the company, correct?
Mr. Wirth. We have announced a net zero aspiration for
Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions for our equity upstream
production worldwide.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. I am glad you mentioned that because
you mentioned a couple of concepts in your documents. You talk
about Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 emissions as well as
something called portfolio carbon intensity. And emissions are
the total or absolute amount of carbon or greenhouse gases
created by Chevron, while carbon intensity has to do with the
amount of carbon released per unit of oil and gas that you are
drilling for. And I was looking at pages 2 through 4 of your
sustainability report, sir, and you call them Scope 1, Scope 2,
and Scope 3 emissions. Those are the overall or absolute
emissions associated with your operations, right?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, there is a taxonomy for how
emissions are classified that we apply as do companies across
the economy, and Scope 1 emissions are defined as those
directly associated with the operations of a company. Scope 2
emissions are those associated with purchased electricity or
steam. And Scope 3, there are actually 15 different categories
of Scope 3 emissions. In the case of our company and our
industry, Type 11 of Scope 3 has to do with the use of products
and----
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Use of products, correct. Now, Mr.
Wirth, according to page 42 of Chevron's proxy statement, you
received $29 million in compensation for 2020, correct?
Mr. Wirth. That is what is reported in our proxy.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And it appears that you received $33
million in compensation in 2019 as well. I am looking at your
compensation calculation on page 49 of the proxy statement, and
it talks about how your comp relied on oil/gas flaring and
methane intensity reductions, but none of your compensation
whatsoever relied on a reduction in Scope 1, Scope 2, or Scope
3 emissions, correct? It is not there. Nowhere on that page.
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, it is in the fourth category which
relates to health safety and environment, and there is a line
in there that relates to achieving our greenhouse gas targets.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. No, there is something called
greenhouse gas management, but it is related to intensity. I
have the page right here. And so the main point is the case
that you could have high overall or absolute emissions
associated with your operations, or low or no overall emissions
associated with your operations, but you would be receiving the
same tens of millions of dollars as you do now. And that is a
fundamental problem with your compensation system at Chevron,
that you are not incentivized to reduce your carbon footprint,
and that is a big reason why Chevron's pollutions continue to
go up.
Now, let's contrast that with that with Royal Dutch Shell
which made an important announcement today. Ms. Watkins, you
announced today a reduction of absolute emissions by 50 percent
by 2030, correct?
Ms. Watkins. That is correct.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. And you also, interestingly, announced
that those emissions would apply to Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope
3, so total emissions of the company, right?
Ms. Watkins. So our 2030 target we announced today is for
Scope 1 and 2. Our net zero emissions by 2050 include Scope 3.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. So by 2050, net zero across all three
scopes, whereas as we know with Chevron, it is only Scope 1 and
Scope 2, so not all the emissions. Now, Ms. Watkins, in a time
of rising energy demand, why is it that you would say you are
going to decline your oil production? Why would you give up the
opportunity to supply that additional demand?
Ms. Watkins. We believe that there is an opportunity. It is
part of our powering and progress strategy to accelerate the
demand for clean energy, which is why we are working very
closely with our customers, and, in fact, we are working with
industrial segments, sectors like the aviation industry, like
heavy transport, like the marine industry, in order to
accelerate the demand for clean energy products, because this
isn't something we can do on our own. This is going to take a
full collaborative effort between us, between society, and
between the government.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, is recognized.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Crabtree, when did
you lose your job?
Mr. Crabtree. Thank you, Congressman. About three hours
after the Presidential inauguration this year.
Mr. Jordan. January 20, 2021, you lost your job. That is
right?
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. You know what has happened to the price of
gasoline since that day?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, I think everybody knows the answer to
that question, Congressman. It has gone nowhere but up, just
like we tried to warn.
Mr. Jordan. It has increased dramatically, hasn't it? Over
a dollar a gallon.
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Do you know what has happened to the company
that was overseeing the Russian Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline? Do
you know what happened to them?
Mr. Crabtree. I believe they were allowed to finish
construction. I know that for a fact.
Mr. Jordan. Yes, the sanctions against them were waived.
They were allowed to complete construction of that pipeline at
the same time yours was closed down and you lost your job. Do
you know what has happened to American energy independence
since the day you were fired?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, the word ``OPEC'' seems to be coming
back in the media more these days, and I didn't hear that for a
lot of years. So we have lost it. That is what has happened.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. Mr. Sommers, are CO2 emissions in the
United States lower today than they were 20 years ago?
Mr. Sommers. They are, Congressman.
Mr. Jordan. Significantly lower. Is that right?
Mr. Sommers. They are significantly lower. In fact, CO2
emissions from the power sector, in particular, are at the
lowest level since 1978.
Mr. Jordan. And that is because, you know, things like cap-
and-trade passed and regulations from the government caused you
to lower them. Isn't that true?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, actually that is because of the
innovation that has occurred----
Mr. Jordan. Exactly.
Mr. Sommers [continuing]. in the American oil and gas
industry.
Mr. Jordan. Exactly. Cap-and-trade didn't pass. It is not
because of regulations from government. You guys did that on
your own because it is just the right thing to do and it is
good business, right?
Mr. Sommers. That is right, Congressman. As I mentioned
before, every energy source has to meet that energy trilemma--
affordable, reliable, and cleaner--and that is what this
industry has delivered.
Mr. Jordan. Ten months ago, was the United States of
America energy independent, Mr. Sommers?
Mr. Sommers. What I would say, Congressman, is that the
United States was North American energy independent and well on
our way to American energy independence.
Mr. Jordan. We were exporting a lot, too, weren't we?
Mr. Sommers. We were. Unfortunately, over the course of the
last few months, we are actually getting oil into United States
for the first time in a while.
Mr. Jordan. Yes, that was my next question. So in 10
months' time, we went from being energy independent to now we
are importing oil, and we had the spectacle of the President of
the United States begging OPEC to increase production. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Sommers. Well, Congressman, the U.S. was a net
petroleum exporter for the first time since 1958 in the year
2020. And, you know, we were very proud of being the world's
largest producer of oil and natural gas as a consequence of the
innovation and the technological revolution that has occurred
in the American oil and gas industry.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. I mean, I can't say it better than our
colleague from Florida who spoke a few minutes ago, but in 10
months' time, we have literally went from energy independence
to the President of the United States begging OPEC to increase
production, to now we are having to import some of our energy
needs. We have went from $2 gas to $3, $4, $5. I was in
California week-and-a-half ago, $5 gas. I saw it there, which
costs families hundreds of dollars a month in transportation
costs. I mean, Mr. Crabtree, I think in his testimony, said he
still hasn't found a job, so not only did he lose his job
because of the crazy energy policies of this government. His
family is paying more for their transportation costs and other
energy needs.
And what do Democrats do today? They come in and badger
companies, tell them to further reduce, in some cases,
production of oil and gas, which is only going to exacerbate
the problem. I mean, it literally may be the craziest thing I
have ever heard, but that is where they are at. I don't think
the American people are with them, though, and that is the good
news. So I want to thank those companies who are actually
increasing production. Mr. Sommers, I want to thank you for
your testimony today. Mr. Crabtree, you deserve better, and
hopefully with some changes that I think are coming, because I
don't think the American people are going to tolerate this,
hopefully you will be employed real soon, and we will get these
energy prices back where the families of this great country
deserve to have them.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Raskin, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, Donald
Trump's party of denialism is engaged in campaigns of
propaganda and disinformation about climate change, which he
said was a Chinese hoax; COVID-19, which he said would
disappear by Easter of last year; the 2020 Presidential
election, which he continues to claim that he won despite the
fact that Joe Biden beat him by more than 7 million votes, 306
to 232 in the Electoral College; and, of course, the violent
January 6 insurrection, which he says really took place on
November 3, and adding for good measure that the pro-Trump
rioters greeted our police officers with hugs and kisses, which
is presumably how more than 140 of them ended up injured with
broken noses, necks, vertebrae, arms, legs, and so on.
Trump's party has turned the denial of facts, science, and
history into standard operating procedure, and we see the
ideological machinery of lies working overtime today. But as
astronomer Neil deGrasse Tyson has observed, ``The great thing
about science is that it is true whether or not you believe in
it.'' So they don't believe in science, facts, or the U.S.
Constitution. They don't believe in our elections anymore. They
have positioned themselves outside of the constitutional order,
attacking our constitutional order, but we believe in science
and facts and the Constitution.
Now, The Lancet report on the health effects of climate
change told us last week that this is a civilizational
emergency right now. Not in the future. Today. Rising
temperatures, says The Washington Post, have led to higher
rates of heat illness, causing farm workers to collapse in the
fields and elderly people to die in their apartments. Insects
carrying tropical diseases have multiplied and spread toward
the Poles. The amount of plant pollen in the air is increasing,
worsening asthma and other respiratory conditions, and on and
on. Record drought, record flooding, record forest fires,
record hurricanes of increasing frequency and velocity. We
cannot afford any more propaganda campaigns by corporations
subsidized by the government against public policies designed
to save humanity.
The First Amendment does not protect fraudulent commercial
speech, despite everything you heard today. You can go back and
check out McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission, stating
clearly that the government may and does punish fraud directly.
Check out the Central Hudson case declaring that if commercial
speech is fraudulent, it is no longer protected by the First
Amendment and it may be regulated by the government. Mr.
Lawler, do you accept that the First Amendment does not accept
fraudulent commercial speech?
Mr. Lawler. I wouldn't say that I am an expert on that
particular topic.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Wirth, do you accept that the First
Amendment does not protect fraudulent commercial speech?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, I am not a constitutional scholar,
and I would trust those who are.
Mr. Raskin. Ms. Watkins, do you accept that the First
Amendment does not protect fraudulent commercial speech?
Ms. Watkins. Congressman, I am not an expert on the legal
aspects of this. I am sorry.
Mr. Raskin. Well, Mr. Woods, your company has filed several
briefs about this trying to use the First Amendment as a sword
in litigation against Massachusetts Attorney General Healey. Do
you accept that the First Amendment does not protect fraudulent
speech?
Mr. Woods. I am not a lawyer, sir.
Mr. Raskin. Are you aware of the litigation that Exxon
brought against Healey in Federal District Court in Texas?
Mr. Woods. I am aware that we have had several suits filed
against us, and we have hired lawyers to defend our rights.
Mr. Raskin. Well, use your common sense, and I appreciate
the fact you are not a lawyer. But using your common sense, do
you think that a company has the right to lie, for example,
about climate change, and then use the First Amendment as a
camouflage and a shield against litigation?
Mr. Woods. I don't believe companies should lie, and I
would tell you that we do not do that.
Mr. Raskin. But leaving that aside, because there might be
a factual dispute on that particular contention, but do you
believe if a company were to lie in commercial speech about
something like climate change, it should not be protected by
the First Amendment?
Mr. Woods. I don't think companies should lie.
Mr. Raskin. OK. And what if a company were to lie? Is that
protected by the First Amendment?
Mr. Woods. I think the legal system and our court systems
are designed to deal with those types of issues.
Mr. Raskin. Well, yes, indeed. In fact, you filed a brief
in San Francisco v. Exxon, filed it in Texas District Court,
and I would like to submit for the record the opinion by New
York District Court Judge Valerie Caproni, dismissing Exxon's
First Amendment claims.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Madam Chair. I would hope as we move
forward, every person in America and every person on earth has
an interest in us defeating this climate nightmare. And I would
hope that the corporations which have received a lot of
beneficence, a lot of bounty from the U.S. taxpayers, at the
very least would not lie about climate change and would not try
to drape themselves in the First Amendment in order to protect
their lives.
I yield back to you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Well, first we are going to hear from the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman. He is recognized for five minutes. And
following that, we will have a 10-minute break at the request
of our panelists today.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. That was kind of a scary last
couple minutes there.
I will ask Mr. Sommers. You know, when you Google this
stuff, at least I remember, you know, being a child growing up
in the Milwaukee area, and it seems to me both the water and
even more the air is just so much cleaner today than they were
at the time. Could you give us some general comments about the
amount of pollutants from cars, the amount of pollutants from
energy plants, even coal plants replaced with coal plant, as
far as the cleanliness of the air today compared to maybe 15
years ago?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman Grothman, thank you for your
question, and it is great to be with you here today. You know,
first of all, I think it is important to acknowledge that the
United States leads the world in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, and, again, that is because of what this industry
has done to produce more here in the United States. As I also
said, the United States accounts for about 12.6 percent of
world emissions, and that number continues to go down, while
China's number is 32.5 percent of world emissions, and that
number continues to go up, which is one of the reasons why we
need global solutions as it relates to climate change.
Additionally, the emissions that have come from the electricity
sector are at their lowest level since 1978, and that is
because of the fuel switch that has gone on from coal to
natural gas.
Mr. Grothman. Holy cow. Just a second here. You mean
despite the fact the population of this country has gone
through the roof and the amount of economic activity has gone
through the roof, we have less pollutants coming from the
energy sector than 40-plus years ago?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, in fact, obviously the United
States population has continued to increase, and world
population is expected to grow significantly over the next many
years. And even the International Energy Agency expects that if
every country were to meet its Paris climate goals, the world
would still get 46 percent of its energy from oil and gas. So
we need to make sure that we are making proper investments in
the United States for that oil and gas because I believe, and I
think most Americans believe, that it is important that we are
getting our energy here at home rather than being dependent on
foreign sources of energy where they are not produced nearly in
the environmentally responsible way that they are produced here
in the United States.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I am sure we got a bunch of world
travelers up there today. I am looking here on my phone, and it
shows that Los Angeles, which I always thought was, you know,
kind of a polluting city, has just a fraction of the amount of
pollutants that we find in Shanghai, for example. As you guys
get around the world, and we can start with you, Mr. Sommers,
but other people, do you notice that pollution is more or less
as you get around the globe compared to the United States?
Mr. Sommers. Well, Congressman, as you know, we live in an
environment where what happens in China affects the United
States. In fact, the air in China today will be in California
two days from now, which is why it is important that we address
this issue from a global perspective while focusing on what we
can do as a country to lower our emissions over time.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I am told in other cities, China, maybe
even Mexico City, India, pollutants in their major metropolitan
areas are a lot higher than the United States. Is that true?
Mr. Sommers. That is the case, Congressman, mainly because
they have not been afforded the same fuel switch that has
occurred in the United States from coal to natural gas. So what
we need to do in the United----
Mr. Grothman. Somebody told me they are building over 100
coal plants in China right now. Is that true?
Mr. Sommers. That is my understanding as well, Congressman,
but what we want to do here in the United States is we have
abundant supplies of natural gas, and we want to make sure that
we are exporting American environmental progress to the rest of
the world. We can do that through liquefied natural gas. We
have the resources. We want to share that environmental
progress with the rest of the world.
Mr. Grothman. Well, some people like to slow down economic
progress here and kind of push that economic progress to other
countries. Is that going to result in worldwide pollutants
going up or down as we kind of push manufacturing to other
countries.
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, as you know, for most of the
world, the choice is not between coal and renewables. It is a
choice between coal and natural gas, which is why we think it
is important that the United States continues to produce so
that----
Mr. Grothman. OK. Just one more thing from our panelists.
Mr. Sommers [continuing]. Across the world.
Mr. Grothman. You guys all have a good story to tell. Don't
be afraid to tell people how much cleaner things are than the
past. It doesn't do any good to get all woke on us. Thanks.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
At the request of our witnesses, we will take a brief 10-
minute break.
The committee stands in recess for 10 minutes.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will come to order.
The gentleman from Illinois, Representative Quigley, is
recognized for five minutes.
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Quigley?
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. We are going to hold for a few seconds
for the witnesses to return. When the witnesses return, we will
recognize Mr. Quigley.
[Pause.]
Chairwoman Maloney. All the witnesses have returned.
The gentleman from Illinois, Representative Quigley, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you for those
who are involved today. I guess at this point, perhaps it is
helpful to put some of this in perspective and ask a question
on the overall issue of safety. I serve on the House Select
Committee on Intelligence, and we are often briefed on climate
change as a threat to our national security. The Pentagon
refers to climate change as ``threat multiplier,'' and recent
reports from the Department of Homeland Security, the
intelligence community, the National Security Council, and the
armed services outline the emerging threat of climate change
and its ability to wreak economic havoc and destabilization in
regions, initiate and fuel conflicts, and help foment violence.
The hearing today has helped document a longstanding and
concerted effort to muddy the scientific waters on the threat
of climate change and pointed work to prevent any substantive
action to prevent it, not the least of which was Exxon's
internal reports confirming human-caused global warming.
Publicly it took the opposite view in a 2017 study of Exxon's
communications, concluding that the company systematically
misled nine scientific audiences about climate change.
But I think the person who put that all best, Dr. Rod
Schoonover, he served a decade for the U.S. intelligence
community as senior analyst and senior scientist in the Bureau
of Intelligence and Research at the U.S. Department of State,
as a director of environment and natural resources. He said and
I quote, ``If climate change poses a risk to national security,
as the Pentagon and intelligence community again reminded us
last week, shouldn't we view climate disinformation through the
same lens as well?'' I think those before us today have to ask
themselves that, and as this investigation moves forward, we
need to put it under that prism.
Let me make a second point, and that is to remind ourselves
of the risk and danger involved in these operations. I guess I
would be remiss not talking about a location literally in my
backyard, the Whiting Refinery, one of the largest refineries
in the U.S., and its operator, BP. In 1991, the residents of
East Chicago noticed oil oozing into their basements. A
subterranean spill of 400,000 barrels of oil was discovered in
the water tables soon thereafter. In 2012, BP had to pay an $8
million penalty and spent $400 million on pollution controls
due to the emissions from the Whiting BP. In 2014, Whiting
discharged a slug of crude oil into Lake Michigan close to
where children swim and wildlife live. This occurred nearly
three weeks after BP announced it would double its processing
of crude at the Whiting facility.
Earlier this year, a District Court judge ruled that BP
repeatedly violated limits on emissions, specifically
particulate air emission. Between 2015 and 2018, they conducted
nine emission tests and failed all nine, demonstrating that
Whiting was spewing soot into the Chicagoland area. Mr. Lawler,
what are BP's plans for addressing the health effects of its
presence in communities like where the Whiting Refinery is
located?
Mr. Lawler. Thank you for the question, Congressman. So,
you know, I am aware of the incidents that have occurred at
Whiting over time, and what I can share with you is that we
think the safety of the community and the safety of our
employees is very important, and that includes the safety of
the water and the air that is in the area. What I can say is
that we are dedicating resources to correct any deficiencies at
the Whiting Refinery that we find. As you know, the industry is
focused on this. We are focused on it, and it is one of our
largest refineries in the United States. And the commitment
that we have is to lower emissions at the refinery over time
and to protect all the individuals that work in and around the
refinery.
Mr. Quigley. You know, I think given the limited time we
have, what makes sense is if you could submit to the committee
the improvements that you deem necessary, where you are in the
timeline to make those improvements, and when you expect those
to be completed, if you would commit to that, please.
Mr. Lawler. Yes, we will followup with the actions that we
are taking.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chairwoman. Before my five minutes, I
ask unanimous consent to submit a few articles for the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Cloud. These articles: ``With a Pen Stroke, President
Joe Biden Cancels the Keystone XL Pipeline Project;'' ``Biden
Lifts U.S. Sanctions on Major Russian Pipeline;'' ``While
Western Nations Kill Energy, China Builds Coal Plants by the
Dozen;'' ``China is Planning to Build 43 New Coal-Fired Power
Plants;'' ``Russia Projects Oil Output Near Post-Soviet Highs
in 2022;'' ``Europe Has Become a Hostage to Russia Over Energy,
Analysts Warn;'' ``Europe Warns Its Gas Prices Surge Will Drive
Up Food Costs;'' ``Biden Asks OPEC to Up Oil Production While
Limiting U.S. Energy Production;'' ``Qatar Petroleum Signs a
15-Year LNG Supply Deal with China;'' ``Qatar Petroleum Boosts
LNG Production;'' ``Qatar Places a $760 Million Order with
China for Liquid Gas Ships;'' ``Energy Costs are Stoking
Inflation. Just Look at U.S. Gas Prices;'' ``Home Heating
Sticker Shock: The Cost of Natural Gas is Up by 180 Percent;''
``Food Prices Poised to Surge with Fertilizer Prices at the
Highest in Years.'' Thank you.
Mr. Cloud. It has been said, of course, many times in this
committee in a number of hearings that we are facing a national
climate emergency. And I think it is important to put this
conversation in context because, of course, any discussion on
any climate solution must be a global one. We know the
environment doesn't stop at our borders, and we have to be
thoughtful of that when we are enacting policies and certainly
discussing potential solutions. I think it is also important
that we be able to have this conversation without the hysteria
from the extreme left. Often there is a sad effort to get
Americans to be fearful in order to get Americans to buy into
increased government control in their lives in virtually every
single aspect.
And I would submit one more article, ``Climate-Related
Deaths Have Plunged 99.9 Percent Since 1932.''
Mr. Cloud. The world is not going to end in 10 years.
People are not dying in record numbers because of climate
change. Yes, we do want clean air and water, and, yes, we
should continue to make technological improvements to meet
those goals. But, Mr. Crabtree, you are not a policy wonk, and
therefore, not breathing the D.C. air. And so I think you can
give us kind of just the boots on the ground of an American
perspective. We have a number of crises right now. We can talk
about inflation, the price of food, the price of gas. We can
talk about the supply chain breakdown. We can talk about the
crime epidemic in our communities as a result of the defund the
police movement and open borders. We can talk about China's
nuclear capable hypersonic missile. These things are also
threats to the Nation. You mentioned you are concerned about
pricing, being able to meet the mortgage payment next month. I
imagine, like most Americans, and you can tell me if this is
true or not, you rate climate change probably somewhere in
between the new national emergency appearance at school board
meetings and somewhere with being able to meet your mortgage.
Is that correct?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, being able to make my mortgage and take
care of my family is my No. 1 priority. I do have concerns
about the climate, but I think it is important that we realize
we are talking about the negative effect of fossil fuels. But
we have got to realize the benefits they have provided this
country over the years. If you look at life expectancy in this
country and the use of fossil fuels, they go along hand-in-
hand.
Mr. Cloud. I appreciate that thought. I only have a couple
more minutes, so I am going to continue if I can. A U.S.
National Intelligence Council report said this. It was put out
in 2005. It said, ``In terms of size, speed, and directional
flow, the transfer of global wealth and economic power is now
under way. Roughly from West to East, it is without precedent
in modern history, and the shift arises from two sources.
First, increases in oil and commodity prices have generated
windfall profits for Gulf States and Russia. Second, lower
costs combined with government policies have shifted the locus
of manufacturing and service industries overseas.'' And so
basically, it said that there is a massive shift going from the
American people to nations overseas, and it was because of two
reasons. One was oil and gas profits going overseas, and two,
manufacturing going overseas. That report actually went on to
say that this transfer was inevitable. It cannot be stopped.
Yet the last Administration, the Trump Administration, showed
us indeed that those two things could actually be reversed and
give a great windfall for the American people.
Now, the world's demand on energy growing. That is a good
thing. That is people coming out of poverty. That is people
finding mobility. That is people having fuel to heat their
homes many times for the first time. Mr. Sommers, generally
speaking, does the U.S. produce energy cleaner or more
responsibility than, let's say, here are some of the other
nations, top producers of energy: Russia, Saudi Arabia, Iraq,
Iran, Qatar, China. Where does the U.S. rank among those as far
as producing energy responsibly?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the gentlemen may answer the question.
Mr. Cloud. Madam Chair, the first two minutes was
submitting reports, articles for record.
Chairwoman Maloney. That is still your time. The
gentleman----
Mr. Cloud. I believe the rule----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman may answer your question.
Let him answer your question.
Mr. Cloud. Madam Chair, that is not supposed to count
against my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, point of order. I didn't think that
submitting letters for the record counted against your
questioning time.
Chairwoman Maloney. It does, but I will grant the gentleman
a little more time. The gentleman may answer your question.
Mr. Sommers. Congressman----
Mr. Cloud. Where does the U.S. rank among some of the
world's leaders in producing energy responsibly?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank you for your question.
Based on the data that we have seen, the United States
continues to produce these products in a way that is safer,
better, and more responsibly produced from an environmental
perspective than any other country on earth.
Mr. Cloud. Real quick. Has the U.S. reduction in oil and
gas production and exports led to a surge in other nations,
say, in the Middle East for Asia adopting green technologies?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, as an organization, we, of
course, are focused on continuing to produce in an
environmentally safe way these products that are demanded by
world consumers.
Mr. Cloud. Right. But I think what we see in some of the
articles that I mentioned before, what we see is as we reduce
production, actually the world finds other sources that are
less clean than United States production to meet the demand. I
would suggest that the greater the demand that U.S. production
is on the world market, the better it is for our green
objectives. One more question, and, Ms. Clark, if you could
answer this. Any discussion about----
Chairwoman Maloney. Very quickly.
Mr. Cloud. In any discussion about green energy solutions,
it is very important that we recognize that they also require
natural resources, and that is rare earth minerals. Could you
speak to how reliant is the U.S. on other nations for rare
earth minerals, and what nation controls most of the rare earth
minerals? I think it is 80 to 90 percent.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Congressman. I know I don't have much
time, but I believe that China controls too much of the supply
of these critical minerals, and it is why we have to balance
national security and economic security while we are combatting
climate change together.
Mr. Cloud. And the U.S. is what percent reliant on rare
earth minerals for other nations?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. You
may ask your question. She may answer it, but you are three
minutes over right now.
Mr. Cloud. It is 100 percent. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. The fossil
fuel executives that are appearing before us today claim that
their companies support reaching the goals of the Paris
Agreement, a watershed international environmental treaty, as
we know. But the committee looked into the lobbying disclosures
filed by your companies and found that your rhetoric of support
for the Paris Agreement doesn't match reality when it comes to
your lobbying. We know what it looks like when your industry
really cares about a Federal initiative and your companies want
to see it succeed.
So let me start with you, Mr. Wirth. Your company claims
that the Paris Agreement is among your highest priorities. The
first sentence of Chevron's climate policy page says, ``Chevron
supports the Paris Agreement.'' I notice that you also touted
Chevron's support for the Paris Agreement in your written
testimony to this committee. Since the start of negotiations on
the Paris Agreement in 2015, Chevron has reported 986 total
instances of Federal lobbying. Mr. Wirth, do you know how many
times Chevron reported lobbying on the Paris Agreement?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, that is information that I don't
have in front of me, but it is----
Mr. Sarbanes. OK. Well, let me tell you what it is. Not
once, not a single time, not one of those 986 instances of
lobbying mentions the Paris Agreement. Now I want to compare
that to an issue that we know your company really cares about:
corporate tax breaks. Mr. Wirth, do you know how many lobbying
reports your company filed that included lobbying on tax
issues?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, I don't have that information in
front of me.
Mr. Sarbanes. A hundred and forty-four. That is the answer.
You didn't lobby once on the 28 bills and resolutions
introduced on the Paris Agreement. When former President Trump
was debating withdrawing from the agreement in 2017, you never
lobbied the White House. Chevron has spent more than $54
million on lobbying on a lot of other things since 2015, so
clearly when your company cares about an issue, you lobby on it
and we can see that in the reports.
Let me move on to Mr. Lawler. BP's 2020 shareholder report
pledged to, and I quote, ``advocate for fundamental and rapid
progress toward the Paris climate goals.'' Since 2015, the
company has reported 488 total instances of legislative
lobbying. Mr. Lawler, how many of those reports mentioned BP
lobbying on the Paris Agreement?
Mr. Lawler. I don't have that specific number, but what I--
--
Mr. Sarbanes. The answer is one. That amounts to 0.2
percent of your Federal lobbying during that time. By
comparison, you lobbied 21 times on the 2017 tax cut bill. And
I am running out of time, so I just want to list for the record
some information about the other organizations represented here
today. Since 2015, API has filed 153 lobbying reports aimed at
cutting taxes for oil and gas companies, but just one lobbying
report on the Paris Agreement. Exxon has spent $60 million on
lobbying since 2015. These are astronomical sums by the way,
just as an aside. Of the 1,543 instances of legislative
lobbying that Exxon reported, only one mentioned the Paris
Agreement, but Exxon lobbied on tax legislation 344 times. So
once on the Paris Agreement which you claim is a priority and
something you are focused on as a company, 344 times on tax
legislation. And Shell, responsible for 470 instances of
legislative lobbying, addressed the Paris Agreement only 5
times. I mean, that is better than the rest of the crowd, but
that is not so great in itself, but on the tax cut bill, Shell
lobbied 31 times.
So there is no strong public record reflected here in terms
of support for the Paris Agreement, regardless of the claims
you make and regardless of the rhetoric that we hear day in and
day out. We know that we follow the money to determine what
your priorities are, and they are headed in a different
direction. It is time we start judging these companies, your
companies by your actions, not by the rhetoric.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Gibbs, you are now recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. First of all, I think it has been
shameful how the other side wants to demonize this oil and gas
industry. I am very proud of our oil and gas industry. They are
innovators. They adopt new technologies. They provide a higher
standard of living and lots of jobs and economic activity
throughout our country.
I want to go back a little bit in history just for a quick
review, you know, how this all started. Go back to the late
1800's, the Industrial Revolution, and we had Andrew Carnegie,
steel, we had John D. Rockefeller, kerosene and the refinery.
We had J.P. Morgan, Thomas Edison, electricity. And they began
the Industrial Revolution, and their innovation and their
entrepreneurship put us on a path to become a global power in
this world that has given us the ability to do lots of good
things. We stopped tyranny in the 1940's. We have helped
countries around the world improve their standard of living and
quality of life. And just recently we brought the world COVID
vaccines. So this is an exceptional country, and part of it
that has had a big play in that is our great companies.
And I would just revert back to John D. Rockefeller. He
started with kerosene, and one of the byproducts that was
interesting is gasoline and the invention of the internal
combustion engine. They figured out what they could do with
Henry Ford and all that took off, but then they had to break up
those monopolies, and that probably was a good thing. And the
companies that are represented here today, Madam Chair, are a
spinoff of the Standard Oil Company, which began in my great
state of Ohio. So I am proud of that, and I am proud of all the
stuff that they have done to help us and what they are going to
do in this century to help us transition, environmentally
friendly, but supply affordable energy available to our
consumers and provide the power to move our country forward
into new technologies, maybe hydrogen renewables or
technologies we don't even know about yet.
I think it is amazing the chair of the subcommittee trying
to hold these CEOs to account to essentially make a pledge to
lower production, and I am glad to see at least one of them,
Mr. Woods from ExxonMobil, said we are going to increase
production because the demand is out there. We have a President
of the United States out there asking OPEC to increase
production, the biggest hypocrisy probably in this century, but
he did say they are going to work to lower emissions. And I am
just disappointed that the chair failed to recognize that and
tried to demonize them on that.
A couple other things here. I always hear, and it came up
earlier in the hearing today, about how the oil and gas
industry get tax subsidies. It is just not fair. I looked into
this a little bit ago, and I can't really find it. The answer
was they get anything that all other businesses get, and I will
give you an example. I know some of the ANI oil and gas people
are out there saying that if you go out and drill a hole, you
know, drill a well, those legitimate expenses for the drilling
costs and to pay the employees shouldn't be taxed deductible.
They call that a subsidy. I don't think that is any different
than when I go out in business and do things and I have
business expenses, you expense that. And I believe that is the
case and that there are no real subsidies that go to the oil
and gas industry. At least nobody's told me a real legitimate
one.
Mr. Sommers, like I just said, the oil and gas industry,
you know, we have gone from $60 oil just last year to $85 oil,
and you see the price of gas. What is the status right now with
our oil rigs, our exploration in this country? What has
happened in the last 10 months? Mr. Sommers.
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank you very much for your
question. And as you know, the state of Ohio, our home state,
has a very robust oil and natural gas industry and an
incredible history of development. And, in fact, it is because
of that development in our state that we have got to the point
where we are producing natural gas that we can share with the
rest of the world to meet environmental challenges, not just
here at home, but in the rest of the world. U.S. petroleum
demand in the United States reached a record high in the month
of September. Unfortunately, supply has not been able to keep
pace. Domestic oil production in September was down by 1.9
million barrels a day from its level for the same month of the
pre-pandemic year of 2019.
Mr. Cloud. OK. I am almost out of time. Is that because
there has been more pressure put on and our innovators aren't
going out and doing what they were doing a year ago because of
the fear of more burdensome regulations, the canceling of
Federal permits on lands and waters?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank you for your question.
There are a number of different reasons for that, including
the, you know, worker shortage that is occurring in the United
States, but, of course, Federal regulations and announcements
have played a significant role as well. When the first
announcement out of the Administration was canceling the
Keystone XL pipeline and the second announcement was canceling
development on Federal lands, and leases on those Federal
lands, and permitting on those Federal lands, I do think it is
sent chilling effect across the industry about where this
Administration was headed in terms of the development of
resources here in the United States.
Mr. Cloud. So I am out of time, but I guess just to close,
what the future looks like--higher prices, demands increasing
and the supply is not--so we are going to be more dependent on
OPEC, and Russia, and everybody else. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Mr. Woods, did
Exxon help fund One Alaska? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. I am not familiar with that.
Ms. Tlaib. Well, One Alaska was a front group created
specifically to oppose Alaska's ballot initiative that would
require oil companies to pay their fair share. It actually
received nearly $21 million in contributions. Ninety-four
percent of One Alaska's contributions came from five oil and
gas companies, including Exxon and BP.
So I would like to submit for the record, Madam Chair, an
article, ``Oil Companies Spend Big to Try to Defeat Alaska's
Tax Proposal.''
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Ms. Tlaib. Same thing in Colorado in 2018 where a measure--
this is a resident lead ballot measure--to ban oil and gas
extraction within a half a mile of homes, schools, and
waterways on the ballot. That front group was called Colorado
Rising and, again, resident led. That one, Mr. Wirth--Mike
Wirth--I am not even going to bother to ask if you are familiar
with it because I know the answer. Many of you, all of you,
helped fund some of these. I guess Chevron specifically funded
$33 million behind its subsidiary, Noble Energy. Contributed to
that front group. Mr. Sommers, are you familiar with Energy
Citizens?
Mr. Sommers. I am familiar with Energy Citizens,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Tlaib. I am glad you are. It is a front group for
American Petroleum Institute, which uses it to flood Facebook
with hundreds of ads opposing climate provisions in the Build
Back Better Act. There you all spent about, what, nearly half a
million dollars in misleading ads since August. Of course when
you look at these ads, you all, the public, when you look at
these ads, they don't say the name ``Exxon,'' ``BP,''
``Chevron'' anywhere. You all hide and you deceive the public
so oil and gas companies can go on claiming that they are pro-
environment while opposing sensible pro-environment measures in
secret. Lies plain and simple.
Madam Chair, I would like to submit for the record as well
a Michigan utility's front group's misleading campaign ahead of
a vote on energy legislation.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Ms. Tlaib. There DTE Energy and Consumers Energy used front
groups called Alliance for Michigan Power and Citizens for
Energizing Michigan's Economy, respectively, to target my
residents and their amazing work. Amazing work. They are the
ones fundraising for this, Madam Chair, to support increased
rooftop solar energy. That is how they wanted to cut the energy
costs so they can make a living, so they can provide a quality
life for their families by reducing their reliance on corporate
polluters. Mike Wirth, when are you going to cut the check?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I am not sure I understand the
context of your question, but I would like to correct the----
Ms. Tlaib. That is OK.
Mr. Wirth. Excuse me. I would like to correct something
that you----
Ms. Tlaib. Sure.
Mr. Wirth. You have been provided with some inaccurate
information.
Ms. Tlaib. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Wirth. Noble Energy was not a subsidiary of Chevron in
2018----
Ms. Tlaib. OK. You can submit it for the record, sir.
Mr. Wirth. It was----
Ms. Tlaib. You can submit it to the committee.
Ms. Tlaib. Chevron has about 70 serious cases of
environmental and community abuses in 31 countries worldwide,
owing over $50 billion in judgments and settlements. Checks.
Literally settlement debts that you all have. So, Mike, when
are you going to cut the check?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I am not familiar with the number
you cite.
Ms. Tlaib. When are you going to cut the $50 billion check
that you owe? It went through the courts. You owe $50 billion
to communities in 31 countries.
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I would be happy to take a look
at the source for your information on this----
Ms. Tlaib. All right.
Mr. Wirth [continuing]. And get back to you on it because I
have no understanding of what you are----
Ms. Tlaib. I have a message for you as Chevron CEO. I mean,
you made, what, $29 million last year in poisoning the planet?
Mr. Wirth, you can't arrest us all. You can't arrest the truth.
Do you understand what I am trying to say to you?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I am not exactly following.
Ms. Tlaib. So you are targeting actions against human
rights lawyer Gottsinger. I mean, what you did there, your
company, maybe through subsidiaries, I don't know. I just want
to remind you, there are more of us than there are of you. You
can poison the planet to make money, but we are going to defend
the planet so we can live, and we will win. So, you know, I
need Chevron to cut the check. You owe $50 billion to
indigenous communities and people that you harmed for profit.
This is not about vilifying these companies. This is about
accountability. You all know we are all paying the cost, from
our public health to our environment, the actions that you
take, and you are hiding behind subsidiaries, and it is wrong.
These are residents putting ballot initiatives on their local
ballot to make a difference to save our planet. Get out of the
way so they can do the work for the people in the community
they live in.
Thank you, and I yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, is recognized
five minutes.
Mr. Comer. Point of order. Point of order. Point of order.
Chairwoman Maloney. Point of order. What is your point of
order?
Mr. Comer. I just wanted to state a point of fact with what
Representative Tlaib said about Colorado, Proposition 112.
Opposition to that measure was deep, which included John
Hickenlooper, the senator, and as well as our former colleague,
Governor Jared Polis.
Ms. Tlaib. Madam Chair, point of order.
Chairwoman Maloney. The point is not a valid----
Ms. Tlaib. That is not a point of order.
Chairwoman Maloney. Excuse me.
Mr. Comer [continuing]. Submit to the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. It is not a valid point of order. OK.
Now the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, is now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Higgins. My, my, my. Good Lord, help us to be protected
from this threat from within. American patriots are so done
with career politicians and Democrat Party Socialist insanity.
We are nauseated by the continuous attacks on working Americans
and American industry. This entire debacle of a hearing today
has been reflective of the exact reasons why my colleagues
across the aisle will lose their majority status very soon.
We have a smashed economy. We have witnessed a disgraceful
retreat from Taliban terrorists overseas, abandoning Americans.
We have a disintegrated southern border. We have unbelievable
inflation. We have medical oppression. We have parents,
American parents, being threatened by our own DOJ for having
the audacity to exercise their First Amendment rights to
assemble and redress grievance. We have companies brought
before us today, American men and women, for a public beating
by the Democrats on this committee. They have done incredible
work to actually lower emissions. These companies have worked
with scientists and engineers, not politicians, to reduce
methane by 70 percent between 2011 and 2019. They have used
innovation to clean up their industry on their own. Their
facilities and plants are incredibly clean and safe.
It is abhorrent that my colleagues across the aisle have
called a so-called hearing today to demonize American industry
whose products make modern life possible. Petroleum products
are in everything: the clothes on our back, the wiring in our
computers, our computers, our cellphones, all of the equipment
used by our military, all medical supplies and equipment,
paint, curtains, fabrics, and appliances in our homes, fishing
rods, lures, tennis shoes by sportsman, everything, all sports
products. It is insane what my colleagues across the aisle are
putting these good American men and women through and attacking
American workers as our country dissolves around us. You push
patriots too far. You have gone a bridge too far. We won't take
it anymore.
Mr. Woods, Ms. Watkins, Mr. Wirth, and Mr. Lawler, I am
about to ask you about a pledge. Our chairwoman asked you for a
pledge. I think it was an absurd request, but I am going to ask
you about a pledge. Mr. Woods, do you pledge today to endeavor
to continue leading the world in emissions reductions and
provide an abundant affordable energy through innovations? I
will say it again so you can think about it. Do you pledge
today to endeavor to continue leading the world in emissions
reductions and provide an abundant, affordable energy through
innovations?
Mr. Woods. We try to do that today, and we will continue to
try to do that going into----
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Woods. Ms. Watkins, same
question. Do you pledge today for Shell to endeavor to continue
leading the world in emissions reductions and providing
abundant affordable energy through innovations?
Ms. Watkins. Congressman, yes, and I would add clean energy
to that.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, ma'am. Mr. Wirth, for Chevron, do
you pledge today to continue to endeavor leading the world old
in emissions reductions through providing abundant affordable
energy and with innovation?
Mr. Wirth. Yes, I do.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir. Mr. Lawler, for BP America, do
you pledge today to endeavor to continue leading the world in
emissions reductions and providing abundant, affordable energy
for the world through innovations?
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Congressman. We will continue and I
pledge to lower emissions over time. We are trying to help the
world reach net zero, and we will continue to provide the
energy that the world needs, and increasingly green. And we
have a number of projects in motion today that will support
those objectives.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, good sir, for your answer. Madam
Chair, I happily yield the balance of my time so that we can
get through this horrendous display, a partisan attack upon
American workers and American industry. I yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from California, Ms. Porter--Ms. Katie
Porter--is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you, Madam Chair. We have heard a lot
about future plans for investment in renewable energy today.
Ms. Watkins, Shell's 2020 annual report called for between $19
and $22 billion in near-term spending. I am representing that
with this container of M&Ms. Each M&M represents about $50
million in spending. Ms. Watkins, how much has Shell said it
will spend in the near-term on oil, gas, and chemical
operations?
Ms. Watkins. I think you just said we are going to be
spending between $18 and $20 billion this year.
Ms. Porter. That is near term on total spending. How much
on oil, gas, and chemical operations?
Ms. Watkins. We are going to be spending----
Ms. Porter. Well, according to your annual report, you said
you are going to spend $16 to $17 billion for oil, gas, and
chemical, with another $3 billion for marketing. How much is
Shell going to spend on renewable energy?
Ms. Watkins. This year we will be spending between $2 and
$3 billion.
Ms. Porter. Two and $3 billion on renewables and energy
solutions. In your testimony, you said, ``Meeting the demand
for reliable energy while simultaneously addressing climate
change is a huge undertaking and one of the defining challenges
of our time.'' Shell has made these promises before. Shell
pledged to spend $6 billion between 2017 and 2020 on renewable
energy. How much of that did Shell actually spend? The answer
is about half. Ms. Watkins, does this look like a huge
undertaking to you?
Ms. Watkins. Congresswoman, what I can tell you is that
there needs to be both a demand and a supply of clean energy,
which is why we are working very closely with our customers so
that that demand increases over time, and we are ready to
supply----
Ms. Porter. Ms. Watkins, to me, this does not like an
adequate response to one of the defining challenges of our
time. This is greenwashing. Shell is trying to fool people into
thinking that it is addressing the climate crisis when what it
is actually doing is to continue to put money into fossil
fuels. Mr. Sommers, do you recognize the following statement:
``Banning Federal leasing and development on Federal lands and
waters would derail decades of U.S. energy progress?''
Mr. Sommers. I do, Congresswoman.
Ms. Porter. That is your statement. How many of the
Department of Interior's approved and ready-to-drill permits
are currently unused?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, it takes a long time to develop
these leases that oil and gas companies----
Ms. Porter. I appreciate that, Mr. Sommers. I am just
asking how many permits are unused.
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, I think there is a fundamental
misunderstanding as to how these acres----
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time. Mr. Sommers, there are
7,700 permits unused. How many acres of public land are already
leased by fossil fuel companies and not even used yet just
available for drilling whenever you decide?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, again, I think you have a
fundamental misunderstanding as to how this process works and
the time and resources it takes----
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time. The
answer is 13.9 million acres. To visualize how much land that
is, if each grain of rice were 1 acre, that would be 479 pounds
of rice. The American Petroleum Institute even opposed pausing
more leasing on our lands. They even sued to stop it because
apparently this acreage wasn't enough. Mr. Wirth, you serve on
the American Petroleum Institute's Executive Committee. Do you
support a pause a new oil and gas leases on Federal land?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, access to resource in this
country is essential to ensure the energy security of our
country and development----
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time. Mr. Lawler, do you support
a pause on new oil and gas leases?
Mr. Lawler [continuing]. The Administration, and it is our
hope that the pause ends soon. We think it is important to go
forward.
Ms. Porter. Reclaiming my time. Thank you for your answer.
The answer there was ``no.'' Mr. Woods, do you support a pause
on new Federal and gas leases?
Mr. Woods. No.
Ms. Porter. Ms. Watkins, do you support a pause on new
Federal and gas leases?
Ms. Watkins. No, I do not because I think it is important--
--
Ms. Porter. You already have 13.9 million acres. This is
equivalent to Maryland and New Jersey combined. How much more
do you need? How much more acreage? You have two of our 50
states at a price that makes the Louisiana Purchase look like a
rip off, and you are not even using it. What more do you need?
Iowa? Colorado? Virginia? Our public land belongs to the
American people, not to Big Oil. When you lobby and you sue so
that you can take more of our public land, you are saying too
much is never enough. The American people are tired of this
charade.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairman, thank you very much. And I
apologize to our witnesses that were called and asked to take
part in this today. As chairman of the Rules Committee for six
years, I never witnessed nor would have allowed this kind of
intimidation that is taking place on people who we invited to
come and provide open answers. On top of that, they raise their
hand to tell the truth, and they were repeatedly stopped rather
than allowing them to offer their explanations of things they
do. I apologize to our witnesses and want to thank them as
energy company executives to make sure that America has a sound
supply of energy that is available and reliable to where we can
avoid the things that happened under President Jimmy Carter,
where that same attack took place and we had long lines of
people in the middle of the winter attempting to get what they
needed. Each of you represent an industry that helps to provide
a solid, cost-effective supply. Republicans have had issues
with energy, and that is why just a few years ago we opened up
the American market. We opened up the American market to the
world, and I believe that this helped not just consumers, but I
believe it helped other people in the world.
Mr. Sommers, have you ever heard of a term called LIHEAP?
Mr. Sommers. Yes, sir. I have heard of LIHEAP.
Mr. Sessions. Do you know what LIHEAP is and what it is
used for as a Federal program?
Mr. Sommers. I do. LIHEAP is a well-established program
that helps low-income individuals afford heat in their homes
during the winter.
Mr. Sessions. And it is primarily used in the Northeast.
Mr. Sommers. That is correct.
Mr. Sessions. Can you tell me what the product is that is
dumped in to ensure this energy would be available in the
Northeast?
Mr. Sommers. Well, Congressman, as you know, most of the,
you know, power in this country, particularly for heat and air
conditioning, you know, or 40 percent of it now, comes from
natural gas.
Mr. Sessions. And LIHEAP, is that natural gas in the
Northeast?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, in the Northeast, in all home
heating, a lot of it is from actually oil.
Mr. Sessions. Diesel, is that correct, or what kind of home
heating fuel is it?
Mr. Sommers. It is home heating oil.
Mr. Sessions. Home heating oil. So what has the rest of the
country done that would be of benefit and responsibility for
heating their homes?
Mr. Sommers. Well, Congressman, as an industry, we have
worked hard to develop these resources here at home so that we
don't have to get them from volatile regimes overseas. And that
includes, of course, the home heating oil that is used to heat
homes in the Northeast.
Mr. Sessions. Primarily what I am looking for--you are the
one giving the answer--is natural gas is an abundant supply in
the United States. Is that correct?
Mr. Sommers. That is correct. In fact, it is 40 percent of
the heat and air conditioning and power that Americans get in
their homes comes from natural gas. And there has been a
significant fuel switch that has occurred over the course of
the last many years as a consequence of the natural gas and oil
revolution here in the United States where we have been able to
produce more here in the United States, and we have not had to
import those products from overseas.
Mr. Sessions. Using the term ``clean energy,'' how clean is
natural gas compared to home heating fuel?
Mr. Sommers. Natural gas is, well, 50 percent more clean
than what it has replaced--coal--and that has been, you know, a
real boon to the American environment and has allowed us to cut
emissions over time to generational lows.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Sommers, have you ever heard of this
committee or another committee holding a hearing about LIHEAP
and how dirty that is as compared to clean natural gas?
Mr. Sommers. I am not familiar with such a hearing, sir.
Mr. Sessions. You would think that that would be part of
the agenda is to make their own territory cleaner in the
winter. Madam Chairman, I have used my time. I think I made my
point. I would like to yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. DeSaulnier, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks for having
this hearing. My comments I put in the context of it has been
my privilege for 32 years to serve in public office in a region
in Northern California that is home to five oil refineries, a
significant part of our economy, significant part of our
revenue stream for state and local government, for our school
districts. Mr. Wirth, I don't know if you are a constituent,
but I know some of your predecessors have been. Your
headquarters is in the county I represent. I put that in
context.
And I have also served in the Bay Area Air Quality
Management District and was appointed by Pete Wilson, a
Republican, to the California Air Resources Board, and served
under three Governors, two Republicans and one Democrat. So I
remind folks that it was a California Republican who signed the
Clean Air Act, Richard Nixon. Ronald Reagan amended it, another
Republican, and George Deukmejian, a conservative Republican
Governor of California, started the ZEV Program, Zero Emission
Vehicles Program, which I have been intimately involved with
auto manufacturers, and also, to a degree, under other
regulations with the heavy-duty manufacturers.
I have been to funerals of constituents of mine who have
died while working in these refineries. I don't know if any of
you have ever been on one of those. Five of them died. One of
them died because the company--not yours, but some company that
competes with you--was appealing a citation from Cal/OSHA to
replace walkie-talkies that cost less than $1,000. Michael
Glanzman, who was trying to use that to tell the folks back in
the command unit that they should shut down the hydrocracker,
they couldn't hear him in time, so he was eviscerated. So that
is a long way of saying I have got a long history in this
field. You provide value, but it is time to change. And we
don't have time, from an economic standpoint or environmental
standpoint, to haggle over this, but we have got to remember
history and we have got to rebuild trust.
Mr. Sommers, the viewpoint that all of this innovation and
our reductions have happened because of private industry is
just misleading at best. Mr. Jordan's comments. Mr. Grothman's
comments. Our regulations, the California waiver, has propelled
this innovation environmentally and from a worker safety
standpoint, and it has been my pleasure in very difficult
negotiations to be able to work with the private sector to get
those. So I wish we could really focus on what is in front of
us, an energy industry that is important to us, but whose time
is passing. Mr. Grothman's comments and the idea that we are
going back to coal in China, I would just remind folks that
China is adding 100,000 charging stations and hydrogen fuel
stations a month, and it is going up exponentially. The future
is not in fossil fuels and in climate carbon intensive
industries. It is in renewables and alternatives. And even if
we didn't have the existential threat to the climate, that
would be an economic reality. It is more efficient.
Mr. Woods, I would like to read a quote, and I would like
to ask unanimous to consent to enter these into the record, a
series of articles from the L.A. Times, Climate Action News,
and correspondence that myself, and Congressman Lieu, and Mr.
Welch have all been part of with ExxonMobil.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. We will provide that
information.
Mr. DeSaulnier. So the quote from the L.A. Times article
dated October 23, 2015, the headline is, ``How Exxon Went From
Leader to Skeptic on Climate Change Research.'' ``Throughout
much of the 1980's, Exxon earned a public reputation as a
pioneer in climate change research. It sponsored workshops,
funded academic research, and conducted its own high-tech
experiments exploring the science behind global warming, but by
1990, the company in public took a different posture,'' Mr.
Woods. ``While still funding select research, it poured
millions into a campaign that questioned climate change over
the next 15 years. It took out prominent ads in The Washington
Post, The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, contending
that climate change science was murky and uncertain, and then
argued regulations aimed at curbing global warming were ill-
considered and premature. How did one of the world's largest
oil companies, a leader in climate research, become one of its
biggest skeptics?'' One of your employees, the manager of
Science and Technology Department, actually told the board in
1989 of the consequences of denial.
Mr. Woods, in 2015, Mr. Welch, Mr. Lieu, and I met in Mr.
Lieu's office with your representative, and we asked for
timeline and a response from you on these allegations. It is
now 2021. We have asked repeatedly for this information from
you to hear your side of the story while the litigation has
gone on. We haven't gotten a response. Would you commit to me
personally today to follow through and give us what your
representative promised us six years ago?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the gentleman may answer the question.
Mr. Woods. Congressman, I am not aware of the request that
you reference, but we will followup with you. I will commit to
followup with you.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Well, it is real common that you are
unaware of it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Keller. Thank you to the many witnesses for being here
today. The U.S. Energy Information Administration published the
Winter Fuels Outlook for the upcoming months, and their
forecast is grim. Half of Americans use natural gas to heat
their homes, and they are projected to pay about 30 percent
higher energy prices this winter compared to last. Depending on
weather and demand, Americans could be paying almost, some
estimates, 55 to 60 percent more to heat their homes and
businesses than they were last year. Those that will be most
affected by these outrageous energy prices will be low-income
wage earners and those on fixed incomes, like our senior
citizens.
I would ask unanimous consent to include the report into
the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Keller. Mr. Crabtree, as a welder, what was your
experience when the Keystone pipeline was shut down, and do you
know how many of your fellow employees, workers lost their
jobs?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, at the time when the pipeline was shut
down, it was in the early stages the construction, so it wasn't
a lot. It is the fact that would have been 11,000 union members
working had that project been completed. But I know since the
new Administration has taken, about 80 percent of our members
were without work during peak construction season this year.
Mr. Keller. Well, how does that make you feel that the
President of United States said that you can't build a pipeline
here in America but allows the Russians to operate their Nord
Stream 2 pipeline?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, it was definitely frustrating to say
the least. That is about all I can say about that.
Mr. Keller. Yes, I can't imagine. And, you know, you have
worked on pipelines, you know, welding and so forth. You know,
looking at the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, do you believe that
those foreign pipelines like that are better protecting our
environment or better constructed than ones that we would build
here in America, like the Keystone XL?
Mr. Crabtree. Absolutely not. You know, I am a member of a
union, and we take the utmost pride in the construction and the
quality of work we put out. There are plenty of projects here
in the United States that could have been providing that same
natural gas and putting Americans to work, but instead we are
letting Russia take that.
Mr. Keller. And I would think that you and our fellow
Americans with the skill that you have can construct a much
safer and a much better pipeline anybody else in the world.
Mr. Crabtree. That is that is the absolute truth. Like I
said, we take a lot of pride in the work we do.
Mr. Keller. Absolutely. There is no question that vital
conservation efforts should be an American priority. It should
also not be controversial to say that an all-of-the-above
domestic energy approach is good for our country. We cannot
turn a blind eye to the realities of energy demand and
inability of renewables alone to heat our homes or fuel our
vehicles and power our lives. The United States is already
producing energy more cleanly and more efficiently than nations
like Russia or China. Would any of the witnesses like to speak
on the ways in which American-made energy is already innovating
without far-fetched government mandates?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, I will speak to that. You know, one
of the greatest breakthroughs in technology in the last two
decades in energy has been the ability to marry up two
technologies which the industry had already used, which is
directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing, which has
allowed this country to become the leader in oil and gas
production in the world once again after decades of decline.
And so that is what has enabled the reductions in emissions
that have been cited earlier today, greater than a dozen
countries combined around the world. It is what has reduced
criteria pollutants in our economy and in our cities, and it is
just one of many examples of the innovation that goes on by the
incredibly talented women and men in this industry across all
the companies represented here today, and many, many others who
are also part of the great American treasure which is our
energy economy.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I appreciate that. The other thing I
would like to say is, you know, looking at what are great
workers do here in America and so on, China has pledged to
achieve net zero emissions by 2060. I mean, is there anybody
here that really believes that is a serious proposal? I mean,
they are building more coal-fired plants now as we speak, you
know. They are increasing energy in coal and so on. I would
really think that if we think that is a serious proposal, we
take a second look at it.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. And, you
know, it is not lost on me that we are having a hearing today
surrounding fossil fuel misinformation and disinformation
campaigns on the same day that we are scheduled to vote on
legislation that has been deeply influenced by the lobbying
efforts of the fossil fuel industry. It is a wonderful
opportunity for us to be speaking with the CEOs of BP, Chevron,
Exxon, Shell, and the American Petroleum Institute.
Speaking of which, Mr. Sommers, as the President of the
American Petroleum Institute, part of your job is to help
lobby, and advocate, and champion the fossil fuel industry, and
that includes, particularly, legislation before the U.S.
Congress. You told CNN on television, ``We are leaving
everything on the field here in terms of our opposition to
reconciliation. We are using every tool at our disposal to work
against these energy proposals.'' And, frankly, Mr. Sommers, I
appreciate your candor because most lobbying organization heads
aren't as forthright and transparent about their efforts to
manipulate U.S. legislation. So what did that all-out approach
look like? Am I correct, Mr. Sommers, that the oil and gas
industry overall, including the companies that you represent
and members you represent today, have spent about $55.6 million
in lobbying within the last 10 months, this year alone? That
figure sounds right to you, correct?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, thank you for your question,
but let me clarify something, first of all, about who the
American Petroleum Institute is. Our mission, first of all, is
that we are a standard setting organization for the global oil
and gas industry. We maintain over 700 standards in the areas
of health, environment, and safety. In addition to that, we
advocate for the oil and gas industry here----
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Mr. Sommers, is that figure $55.6
million in lobbying funds correct or not? I have limited time.
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, I don't have those numbers at
my disposal.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Well, according to our disclosures, that
seems to be the figure, but I will move on. I would like to
turn my attention to, and I apologize. We just simply don't
have much time allocated here. Mr. Woods, as the CEO of
ExxonMobil, are you familiar with an individual by the name of
Keith McCoy?
Mr. Woods. I am.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. He was one of your top lobbyists,
correct?
Mr. Woods. He was a senior advisor in our Washington
office.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. I see. Now, earlier this year, McCoy was
recorded in a private session as saying, ``I liken lobbying to
fishing. You have to bait. You throw that bait out there just
to kind of reel Members of Congress in because they are a
captive audience. They know that they need you and I need
them.'' And he also alluded to having weekly calls with certain
Members of Congress as debates around reconciliation were being
formed. Are you aware of these calls?
Mr. Woods. I am not aware of the calls.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. You are not aware of the calls. Have you
participated in any calls with Members of Congress throughout
this process of reconciliation and infrastructure?
Mr. Woods. I have.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. You have. Are political donations ever
discussed during your calls with Members of Congress?
Mr. Woods. No, they are not.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. They are not. Does the value of your
compensation increase as a result of increased production from
Exxon's refineries?
Mr. Woods. No, volumes from our refineries are not part of
my compensation.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Is your compensation tied to Exxon stock
price?
Mr. Woods. Yes, it is.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. It is, and so I would assume with
increased value in Exxon stock price and oil production, that
would have a boost in the value of your compensation, correct?
Mr. Woods. My compensation is based on a number of metrics
and parameters, from environmental safety and value creation to
technology development. It is a portfolio of responsibilities
that the compensation committee judges me on.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you very much. You know, I think
one thing that often gets lost in these conversations is that
some of us have to actually live in the future that you all are
setting on fire for us. By 2028, crop yields are already
projected to begin to fail with famine beginning to hit the
world's most vulnerable populations. By 2038, current U.S.
drought fire and extreme heat trends could potentially make
whole regions of the United States unlivable if we continue the
trends that lobbyists are trying to have us pursue, and we have
a tipping point by 2036. We do not have the privilege or the
luxury of lobbyist spin, and it is incredibly important that we
don't reach net zero in some imaginary future, but that we
actually cut through to carbon emissions reductions here in the
United States and globally.
I submit back to the chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Fallon,
is now recognized for five minutes.
[No response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Yes. Madam Chair, thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK.
Mr. Fallon. Can you hear me?
Chairwoman Maloney. We can hear you.
Mr. Fallon. Oh wonderful. Thank you so much. I can remember
being a child in the late 70's early 80's, and I was fascinated
with global and geopolitical events. There was a dream back
then that someday the United States could achieve energy
independence. But see, at the time there were gas lines, there
was an oil embargo, and I remember people were worried, and
they were concerned, and they were scared. This dream, it was
more like a pipe dream. We are on the cusp of achieving it now
of American energy independence, and it is remarkable to me
that this Administration and our friends across the aisle seem
to be intent on us fumbling that ball. And unfortunately and
unwittingly, their efforts are emboldening our enemies by
hamstringing our own energy industry.
Canceling the Keystone pipeline was a horrible idea, and
the fact of the matter is, since 2000, the United States has
been not only a leader in energy production in the world, but
also in reducing CO2 emissions. And these are both remarkable
achievements, and we should do everything in our power to
continue to facilitate this kind of success. And the energy
industry, let us not forget, is responsible for 10 million
high-paying jobs in this country, and it is also a national
security issue.
We had a few months back former Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo in Washington, and he talked to us about how he felt
empowered as America's top diplomat on the world stage with
foreign leaders because they wanted to engage with the United
States. One of the primary specific reasons was because of our
abundance of fossil fuels. But some of the folks in Congress
seem to be intent on us letting Venezuela, and Iran, and China,
and Russia, countries that aren't as committed to safety, they
don't have the protocols, and the precautions, and the
procedures, and the commitment to safety that we do in this
country. That is why we should be exploring offshore, and
drilling in Alaska, and the Keystone pipeline, because this
country, when we produce energy, it is safer for the
environment. It is better for everyone on the planet, and there
is a definite moral case to be made for the fossil fuel
industry and fossil fuels as a whole.
In 1900, the life expectancy in this country was under 50
years of age, about 46. Now, before COVID, it was 79 years.
That is a 72 percent increase, and that is all races and creeds
are living longer today primarily because of this industry. And
our goal for everyone should be that human beings, not only in
our country, but on the planet are allowed to live productive
and meaningful lives. And if we want cleaner energy, we should
at least use the expertise of the energy industry because they
have shown and they have proven themselves to be innovators.
And we had a committee hearing demonizing the oil industry
a few months back, and one of the witnesses then was saying
about we are going to be judged in history. In fact, one of our
colleagues just said and made some very rather hyperbolic
comments about how the future is being set on fire, of course,
you know, crying that the sky is going to fall. By 2028, these
dire predictions won't come true, and in 2038, they won't come
true just like so many in 2000 that said that Florida would be
underwater by 2020. They are not. But we will be judged by our
actions today, and we will be judged in history just like so
many of our folks in the Democratic majority that are going on
wild multi-trillion-dollar deficit spending binges, that they
are saddling our future generations, our children, my children,
my sons with a crushing debt and forcing them into an
inevitable and untenable financial crisis. So if we want more
abundant, and inexpensive, and cleaner energy, which we all
should do, these witnesses here should be the ones that we are
supporting and applauding and not demonizing.
Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. [Presiding.] Thank you. The gentleman from
Vermont, Mr. Welch, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. You know, the issue here is
credibility. The oil companies, when they began producing oil,
discovering oil, did not know about climate change, but they
were the first to learn about it, and then learning about it,
concealed it and denied it. Mr. Woods, on June 6 of 1978, one
of your excellent scientists, James Black, in the Product
Research Division, circulated a presentation he had given to
the management committee on the greenhouse effect: ``There is
scientific agreement that the most likely manner in which
mankind is influencing the global climate is through carbon
dioxide release from the burning of fossil fuels.'' That is a
quote. In your leadership of Exxon, are you aware of what
action was taken by the board after that report to it about the
greenhouse effect was presented?
Mr. Woods. My understanding, Congressman, is that report
summarizes the work of the broader scientific community, and a
full reading of that report is consistent with the broader
community, and the report----
Mr. Welch. Well, let me go on. There are others here. You
know, I don't have that much time. In December 18 of 1980,
Exxon employee, Henry Shaw, sent an internal memo saying, ``an
increase in the global average temperature of three degrees
centigrade and uneven global distribution of increased
rainfall, in addition to some particularly dramatic questions
that might cause a series of global problems, such as melting
of ice caps.'' Did Exxon, to your knowledge, share that
information, really crucial information, with the public at
that time?
Mr. Woods. I wasn't working for the company at that time,
several decades----
Mr. Welch. You are not aware that that information was made
available.
Mr. Woods. My understanding is----
Mr. Welch. On November 12----
Mr. Woods [continuing]. We had no unique knowledge. We were
basically----
Mr. Welch. Well, let me just go through this because these
are records from your own company, all right? These are not
fake news. This is internal documents. On November 12, 1982,
M.B. Glaser, manager of environmental affairs program, sent a
memo to the Exxon management on the CO2 greenhouse effect
saying, ``CO2 release is the most likely source of inadvertent
climate modification, and the prevailing opinion attributes CO2
increase to fossil fuel combustion.'' And finally it said that
``Mitigation to the greenhouse effect would require major
reductions in fossil fuel combustion.'' Did you disclose that
to your shareholders, something that would be relevant to the
value of your assets?
Mr. Woods. My understanding is those reports were a
synthesis of publicly available information.
Mr. Welch. No, I didn't ask that.
Mr. Woods [continuing]. The understanding.
Mr. Welch. Did you disclose that to your shareholders in
your report? That is my question.
Mr. Woods. My understanding is it is a summarized----
Mr. Welch. No, no, seriously. I am not asking what it is. I
am asking whether that information was disclosed in your
shareholder reports.
Mr. Woods. I am not familiar with my reports from 30 years
ago.
Mr. Welch. All right. On February 22, 1989, Duane Levine
presented a report to the board of directors. He stated, ``Data
that greenhouse gases are increasing in the atmosphere and
fossil fuels contribute to most of the CO2.'' To your
knowledge, did Exxon disclose that to its shareholders?
Mr. Woods. We made all of our research publicly available,
Congressman. It is my understanding----
Mr. Welch. OK. I don't mean to be difficult because it is a
simple question. Did you disclose it to shareholders? ``Yes,''
``no,'' or ``I don't know.
Mr. Woods. We made that research publicly available.
Mr. Welch. Well----
Mr. Woods. Consistent with the broader----
Mr. Welch. On May 6 of 1996, nearly 20 years----
Mr. Woods. We have----
Mr. Welch. Let me go on, please. Exxon's Lee Raymond stated
in a speech to the Economic Club of Detroit, ``The scientific
evidence is inconclusive as to whether human activities are
having a significant effect on the global climate.'' Do you
agree with that?
Mr. Woods. Congressman, our position taken back in that
time, it is my understanding, was consistent with the general
state of the scientific discussion and knowledge.
Mr. Welch. So you don't agree with Mr. Tillerson.
Mr. Woods. Well, I agree with----
Mr. Welch. Finally, on June 30, 2021, Keith McCoy, who Ms.
Ocasio-Cortez asked you about, acknowledged that Exxon has
``aggressively fought climate science,'' that they have joined
``shadow groups to work against some of the early efforts,''
and that Exxon's support of a carbon tax is purely ``a talking
point.'' He said that Exxon is looking out for its investments.
How is this knowledge that ExxonMobil had about the dramatic
impact of fossil fuels and climate change any different than
Big Tobacco knowing about smoking causing cancer, but denying
it and continuing to peddle its product? Explain to me the
difference.
Mr. Woods. Well, as I said, at the time, Mr. McCoy's
statements did not represent our policy or our approach with
respect to our positions in this space.
Mr. Welch. And the distinction between what Exxon knew and
what Big Tobacco knew but didn't reveal? The difference is?
Mr. Woods. All of our work was made publicly available. Our
research was publicly available, and it was consistent and
relied largely on outside work. We were part of the broader
scientific community working in this space, and we had no
unique views.
Mr. Welch. Well, thank you. My time is up, and I yield
back.
Chairwoman Maloney. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Clyde, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have noticed a trend
going on here of holding hearings on legislation that has
already passed the House, such as you did with H.R. 3755, the
abortion on demand bill, and the Equal Rights Amendment. As
with that trend, I have begun to pick up on another trend that
we are setting, and, unfortunately, this one is more
disturbing. The new trend is that this committee continues to
use or, rather, should I say, continues to abuse its power to
conduct oversight into the private activities of private
citizens and private companies, which ultimately results in
nothing more than one big public shaming campaign. In my 10
months here in this committee, I have been made aware that my
Democrat colleagues have leveraged both letters and subpoena
threats to either compel private entities to appear before the
committee or to hand over privileged and, mind you, protected
materials for the committee staff to ransack.
In this congressional session alone, we have seen this
committee engage in this manner with Cyber Ninjas, the National
Football League, the Sackler family, and now we are seeing them
do it to the companies before us today. This committee used to
be called the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. It
is now just called the Committee on Oversight and Reform. The
day the majority chose to remove ``government'' from this
committee's title was a big red flag to all that House
Democrats might truly believe their authorities go beyond four
corners of the United States Constitution. This committee
should focus its oversight activities and investigation on
government operations, not inject itself into private
operations.
To our witnesses, I want all of you to know that I support
an all-in approach to ensure our Nation is energy independent.
History is no stranger to the energy crisis we are experiencing
today as once thriving towns and cities shuddered when the main
driving force of the economy, the coal mines, closed. We are
now seeing this chilling effect, particularly in the oil and
gas realm, happen on a macro scale ever since President Biden
enacted, by executive fiat, his green policies, such as evident
when President Biden chose to shut down the Keystone XL
pipeline on his first day in office, a decision that resulted
in hundreds of people losing out on good-paying jobs and that
seriously undercut our Nation's ability to be energy
independent and a net energy exporter. And to add salt to an
open wound, President Biden immediately greenlighted Russia's
Nord Stream 2 pipeline when he chose to withdraw sanctions in
May.
The President's energy policy simply does not make sense.
He demands we decrease domestic production, yet he pleads for
OPEC to increase their production. OPEC refused, and this
disparity in supply became the cause of skyrocketing gas prices
Americans are seeing at the pump. Hardworking people and
families are paying the price for these terrible energy
policies, and seniors and families on fixed incomes especially
are at risk of losing their homes and are being forced to
choose between heating their homes or putting food on the
table. And that is even before President Biden's proposed
heating tax found in his absurd big government socialism
spending bill called budget reconciliation. It is shameful,
but, again, you all have not been called here today to help us
conduct oversight of the Biden Administration's policies. No,
you have been called here so my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle can drag you through the mud.
My first question is for Mr. Sommers of the Petroleum
Institute. Given the energy crisis, Mr. Sommers, of countries
in the EU and Asia, what they are currently experiencing, many
may argue that that is a direct result of pressures to
prematurely divest from reliable fossil fuel development. How
can the United States avoid a similar fate as the EU and Asia
is experiencing, sir?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank you for your question. I do
think that the there is a flashing warning sign in Europe right
now as energy prices continue to go up. It is mainly a
consequence of a lack of supply, and they are going to continue
to need more energy as their economy grows. Another major
concern that Europe should have is that one of the reasons why
natural gas prices, in particular, have gone up is because
Russia has decided not to export natural gas to the EU during
this critical time. It is, I think, a real warning for American
consumers and the world that if you don't create your own
supply at home, you are dependent on supplies from regimes that
don't necessarily have your interests at heart. And I think the
Europeans and other parts of the world are finding out the
importance of creating a supply to ensure that we have access
to affordable and reliable energy for decades and decades to
come here in this country.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. I appreciate that, and I will note
that our adversaries are very capable of using energy as a
weapon--Russia--and we have done nothing but help them when we
have greenlighted the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. And with that, I
yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you for being here today. Your companies
all claim to have net zero ambitions, and since you all claim
to support the Paris Agreement, then you should have net zero
greenhouse gas emissions by mid-century. But the record seems
to suggest that the companies represented here have a long way
to go to get there. Ms. Watkins, in its February 2021 Energy
Transition Strategy, Shell said, and I quote, ``aligned with
the more ambitious goals of the Paris Agreement to limit the
average global temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-
industrial levels.'' Is that correct?
Ms. Watkins. That is the ambition of the Paris Agreement.
Yes, that is correct.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. Shell said it aims to become a net
zero energy business by 2050 and have set goals to cut the
carbon content of its products by 20 percent by 2030 to
phaseout carbon emissions by 2050. Is that correct?
Ms. Watkins. Net zero by 2050 is correct, yes, and we just
announced today a goal to cut our Scope 1 and 2 emissions by
half by 2030.
Ms. Kelly. And why does independent analysis find that
Shell's net zero pledge fails to meet the Paris Agreement
goals?
Ms. Watkins. I am sorry, Congresswoman, I am not familiar
with the independent analysis that you are talking about. But
what I can say is that the company I work for is absolutely
committed to these goals that we put out there. My compensation
is directly linked to that, and we look forward to continuing
to accelerate the energy transition in collaboration with folks
like yourself, the government, with our customers, with
segments of the industry. This is something that we can't do
alone as one company. It really needs to be done in
collaboration with society and with the government.
Ms. Kelly. OK. Yes, from what I was reading, it says,
``Shell's strategy only decreases oil production by 1 to 2
percent annually through 2030 while it increases gas production
four percent over the same time period.'' And according to the
2021 United Nations Production Gap Report, the world must
decrease oil production by four percent and gas production by 3
percent annually between 2020 and 2030 to limit warming to 1.5
degrees Celsius. And over a 10-year period, this would equate
to a 50-percent increase in gas production for Shell compared
to the nearly 30 percent decline we need to reach the goals
scientists say are necessary to limit the most dangerous
impacts of climate change. And then earlier this year, Shell
appealed an order by a Dutch court to cut emissions by 45
percent by 2030. So can you tell me, does Shell plan to comply
with the court order to cut emissions by 45 percent by 2030?
You can just say ``yes'' or ``no.''
Ms. Watkins. Congresswoman, one of the reasons we put out
the goal we put out today is because we see an opportunity to
accelerate our Powering Progress Strategy. And so cutting our
Scope 1 and 2 emissions by half by 2030 is a new target. I am
very proud of my company for being aggressive.
Ms. Kelly. So was that a ``yes'' or ``no?''
Ms. Watkins. We are in the----
Ms. Kelly. I am just asking you ``yes'' or ``no'' because I
don't have a lot of time. That is all.
Ms. Watkins. We are in the process of appealing the Dutch
court order, and so while we are in action to get to net zero
by 2050, and we have many targets between now and then to hit,
we are appealing the court order because we don't think the
courts is the right place to decide this.
Ms. Kelly. So it sounds like even though Shell's transition
strategy calls for cutting emissions by 2030, the company is
resisting efforts to get there. And is that because Shell's
transition strategy to reduce the intensity of its carbon
output from oil production relies in part on Shell increasing
its gas productions? Is that correct?
Ms. Watkins. Congresswoman, I would say that I have a
different way of putting that. We are not resisting. In fact,
we are embracing the opportunity to transition faster, which is
why we are working to increase the demand for low and no carbon
fuels. So that that is actually how I would characterize it, as
embracing the energy transition.
Ms. Kelly. So you can't characterize it as a ``yes'' or
``no'' then because experts warn this plan will backslide
further to mere operational efficiency rather than reducing the
overall climate burden of your product. So again, ``yes'' or
``no,'' will Shell commit to reducing gas production as part of
its emissions reduction plans, Ms. Watkins?
Ms. Watkins. Congresswoman, we have committed to a number
of things, and we believe natural gas plays a key role as a
transition fuel in order to continue to lower emissions for the
country. And so we are committed to providing that cleaner
burning fuel to the world. So we are committed to natural gas
over time, but we are also very much committed to continuing to
work with our customers to look at no carbon fuels, such as
wind and solar. We are building wind turbines off the coast of
New Jersey and Massachusetts, and we will continue to look for
opportunities to do that, but the demand needs to be there.
Ms. Kelly. That is good to hear that you are looking, but a
lot of things you are saying are not supported by evidence. So
it shows that it is time for Congress to act, and we can begin
by passing the Build Back Better Act to combat climate change
and spur the development of renewables. And I yield back. I
know my time is up. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from Arizona,
Mr. Biggs, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have been in and out
of this hearing, but I heard the opening statements and
listened to a good deal of the questioning of this morning. And
I will tell you that if there is one thing that I hope those
leading these very important energy companies and the Petroleum
Institute understand is that you have kind of got yourself
here. You have seen the attitude. You have heard the attitude
from the folks from the left on this committee. It is because
of your appeasement. That is what it is. So when you get asked
this morning about aren't you embarrassed, that is really kind
of an irrational question to ask CEOs about their company
policy, to ask and to vilify you and basically say will you
repudiate your membership in a manufacturing institute, to then
say and repeatedly ask the question and to badger you. That is
because you have been appeasing. I am not saying that you
shouldn't do your best to reduce carbon emissions and run a
clean company. I am saying that you have been brought here so
they could beat the crap out of you. That is what this is all
about. And they are doing it for political reason, and that is
the shame of it all.
This is a hearing where the Democrats attack American
workers and the private sector. The President and his allies in
Congress has consistently advocated for policies that have led
to higher energy prices and increased inflation. In fact, you
have got Ron Klain retweeting this--he is the chief of staff at
the White House--saying, ``Most of the economic problems we are
facing''--inflation, et cetera--are high-class problems.''
Well, even The New York Times has said this year's Thanksgiving
feast will wallop the wallet, and that is a result of Biden's
policies, and part of those policies are to put two screws on
the energy industry.
Some of the inflation is systemic, but some of it is driven
by scarcity, just economic market-driven principles. So I hope
you get the lesson because if nothing else I say matters, I
think you need to know something. These folks would regulate
you right out of business tomorrow if they could--don't pretend
otherwise--no matter how good corporate citizens you are or how
sincere you are in trying to reduce carbon emissions. That is
the purpose of this hearing today is to lay the foundation to
get rid of you.
And at the same time, you see the hypocrisy or
inconsistency of this Administration. Here is one dated today,
this very morning. You have got Amos Hochstein, the U.S. State
Department senior adviser for energy security, saying, ``Energy
producers, particularly OPEC, should be increasing its
output.'' Here is one from two weeks ago: ``U.S. Worried Energy
Supply is Not Meeting Demand.'' That is where we are headed in
the future. What you do is important. Never forget it is
important.
At the same time, you got the Biden Administration stopping
issuing new oil and gas leases for drilling on Federal land,
canceling the Keystone pipeline within hours of taking office,
and then removing sanctions on Russia's Nord Stream 2 pipeline,
increasing Europe's dependence on Russian oil. We hear this
from Mikhail Krutikhin, an energy analyst at the Consultancy of
Russ Energy, saying, ``We decided we will let them freeze a
good bit this winter, and then they will become more talkative
and won't insist on quickly abandoning gas. The stakes are very
high.'' This is a high-stakes game. The Russians get it. You
get it. My colleagues across the aisle don't get it.
congressional Democrats' proposals for fixing the problem they
caused are worse than President Biden's. Their tax and spend
budget reconciliation bill will increase energy prices and
cripple the American economy. With gas prices at a seven-year
high, Democrats in Congress are considering enacting a carbon
tax to pay for their socialist policies. They love, they love
to tout their support of the Green New Deal claiming that it is
the only way to fight climate change. However, it excludes
nuclear energy, despite the fact that nuclear energy is carbon
free, low cost, and is a reliable energy source. A Democrat
member's former chief of staff, Saikat Chakrabarti, stated,
``The interesting thing about the Green New Deal is it wasn't
originally a climate change thing at all because we really
think of it as a how do you change the entire economy thing.''
He told the truth. Occasionally you are going to get that out.
I urge you continue being good corporate citizens but
understand appeasement will lead to the demise of your industry
and your company, which will result in thousands and hundreds
of thousands of people losing work and living in poverty and
impoverished state.
And, Madam Chair, I have a number of articles I would like
to submit for the record.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Mr. Biggs. I have one called, ``Oil Leases with U.S. Urging
Producers to Ramp Up Supplies,'' dated today's date. I have one
from Reuters, dated October 7, ``U.S. Worried Energy Supply Not
Meeting Demand, Top Biden Adviser Says.'' And I have additional
ones. Let's see here. We got ``As Europe Faces a Cold Winter,
Putin Seizes on Leverage from Russia's Gas Output,'' from The
New York Times dated yesterday.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. We
will submit all the articles you would like into the record.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis,
is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and let me thank all of our witnesses for being here
and being with us today.
Mr. Woods, I would like to ask you a few questions about
your company's position on carbon pricing. Exxon's lobbying
website states, and I quote, ``Without exception, the company's
lobbying efforts are aligned with its publicly available
positions.'' Is that correct?
Mr. Woods. Yes, it is.
Mr. Davis. This reflects and refers to carbon pricing or
carbon taxes. Is that correct?
Mr. Woods. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question,
please?
Mr. Davis. It relates to carbon pricing or carbon taxes. Is
that correct?
Mr. Woods. We do advocate for a carbon tax or a price on
carbon, yes.
Mr. Davis. So is it fair to say that Exxon has taken a
public position in support of a price on carbon?
Mr. Woods. Yes.
Mr. Davis. I ask because committee staff reviewed Exxon's
lobbying reports along with those of other companies, and the
committee's analysis found that since 2011, Exxon and its
lobbyists have filed 344 reports involved in lobbying on tax
legislation or tax policy. Does this figure sound about right
to you?
Mr. Woods. I don't have those numbers available to me.
Mr. Davis. All right. Well, according to your company's
filing, these lobbying efforts focused on a variety of
legislative and policy issues, including protecting oil and gas
tax breaks and preserving the corporate tax benefits in
President Trump's signature tax spending bill. Since 2011, 46
bills have been introduced in the House and the Senate to deal
with carbon pricing. Mr. Woods, would you take a guess at the
number of Exxon's lobbing reports during this time that
referenced attacks or price on carbon?
Mr. Woods. I haven't seen the report, so I don't know what
that number would be.
Mr. Davis. Well, thank you. Our information says 12, that
Exxon reported only 12 instances of lobbying on Federal
legislation that would tax or price carbon. Mr. Woods, your
company's lack of action on an issue it says it supports sends
a rather interesting signal, and this goes for all the
organizations represented here today. Over the last decade,
Exxon, Chevron, BP, Shell, API, and their outside lobbyists
filed nearly 6,000 lobbying reports. The committee identified
only 34 times that these companies and API reported lobbying on
any of bills that address carbon pricing. Meanwhile, they
lobbied 77 times just on President Trump's tax cuts. If you do
the math, it pretty much means that Exxon, Chevron, BP, Shell,
and API reported lobbying 150 times more frequently to carve
out corporate giveaways in President Trump's tax cuts and job
action than on all carbon pricing legislation. So if it wasn't
for the analysis that the committee released today, none of us
sitting here would know what their pledges are and that their
pledges don't hold up under scrutiny.
So I thank you for your answers and appreciate your being
here. And, Madam Chairman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Kansas, Mr. LaTurner, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Climate change
is an issue that we need to be serious about addressing
properly. The concern of this committee today, however, is
climate misinformation. As it turns out, there is a lot of
misinformation surrounding the energy crisis facing our Nation.
The truth is Americans are experiencing the highest gas prices
since the Obama Administration, record high inflation, and
spiking natural gas prices as we approach the coldest months of
the year. It is no secret that as energy prices skyrocket, the
cost to ship goods and keep the lights on for manufacturers
goes up, and that increased cost is then passed down to the
consumer.
According to The Wall Street Journal's ``Market Watch,''
the latest monthly numbers indicate a 5.3 percent increase in
the Consumer Price Index. In my home state of Kansas, farmers
have to pay for this Administration's shortsighted and
counterproductive policies in the form of record-high
fertilizer prices which have surpassed even the previous peaks
of the 2008 global financial crisis. Instead of combating this
crisis, the White House has doubled down on progressive
policies that created this perfect storm of inflation in the
first place and forced hardworking Americans to dig deeper into
their pockets to pick up the tab.
It is misinformation to suggest that these rising prices
and taxes are a necessary evil in achieving our long-term
environmental goals, especially when the U.S. is forced to
outsource our crude oil and raw materials from countries with
less stringent emission standards than us. The Administration's
policies also undermine our energy independence. The White
House could have made it easier for American companies to
increase domestic production and hire more U.S. workers, but,
instead, the President begged OPEC and Russia to increase
global output to combat the spiking fuel prices. Dependence on
Russia and China to fuel our country's baseload and power our
electric grid is a national security threat and does nothing to
mitigate carbon emissions globally.
Some of my colleagues seem to think it is impossible to
have both affordable, bountiful, and innovative energy while
also having clean air and water. That is simply not true. Oil
and gas produced here in America is among the cleanest and
safest in the world. The United States has been a world leader
in reducing carbon emissions over the past two decades without
socialist policies or complete reliance on inconsistent sources
like wind and solar. The data proves that the private sector is
tackling climate change without burdensome Federal regulation,
and Congress should continue to allow them to do so.
Mr. Sommers, can you describe some of the ways that the
Green New Deal policies, particularly included in the
reconciliation proposal, would affect your industry?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank for your question. We as an
industry have taken on the climate challenge, and, in fact, API
released earlier this year our Climate Action Framework, which
is a five-step plan to address the climate challenge as an
industry. Three of those actions are actually things that we
are going to do even if Congress doesn't act on climate change
in this Congress or in the future because we know it is a
challenge and we know it has to be addressed. And we know that
this industry has the technological know-how and the engineers
in place and the scientists and geologists in place who can
tackle this challenge from the private sector.
Notwithstanding that, we do believe that Congress should
also act on climate change. And because we disagree with some
of the provisions in the reconciliation package doesn't mean
that we don't take climate change seriously. We do have some
concerns about what is currently in the package, and we have
worked to educate lawmakers on those concerns. One of the
concerns that we have is the proposal of a natural gas tax that
would potentially increase costs on consumers during a time
when energy prices are already spiking. One of the original
proposals also included a clean energy performance payment plan
that did not include natural gas. As we have talked about
earlier in this hearing, one of the real reasons that we have
been able to cut emissions over time is because of natural gas.
We need to continue to incentivize that fuel switch from coal
to natural gas so that we can continue on that road to progress
of cutting U.S. emissions.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Madam Chair. As we all
know, Congress and President Biden are hard at work to pass the
Build Back Better Act to take bold, aggressive, and long
overdue action on climate change. But many of the witnesses
today vigorously opposed key climate provisions in the Build
Back Better Act. I find that offensive being from ground zero
in the state of Florida where climate change and its impact is
not a someday thing. It is a right now thing. And according to
InfluenceMap, for example, BP, Shell, ExxonMobil, and Chevron
collectively spend more than $150 million every year on
lobbying and policy influence activities, but they do this to
protect their trillions of dollars in revenues.
Ms. Clark, my first question is for you. How much has the
Chamber of Commerce spent to defeat the Build Back Better Act?
Ms. Clark. Sorry. I don't have that number off the top of
my head.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Well, give me a ballpark.
Ms. Clark. I really couldn't.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. You have no idea how much the
Chamber of Commerce has spent on lobbying targeted at the Build
Back Better Act?
Ms. Clark. No, I don't.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. You are not doing your job very well
if you don't know that answer, but I will just give you an
idea. Just in September, the Chamber launched a six-figure ad
campaign just to pressure House Democrats to try to vote down
the reconciliation package. And, you know, for a while, the
Chamber actually participated in House GOP leadership strategy
calls to defeat the reconciliation package. Perhaps you weren't
aware of that either, but that is that is something that
actually happened. The Chamber released a statement earlier
this month that said, ``The Chamber is continuing and expanding
its efforts to defeat the reconciliation bill and opposes
efforts to link the infrastructure bill to the reconciliation
bill.'' That is just grossly irresponsible, and what you should
be doing is working toward trying to find compromise, not just
spending millions of dollars to defeat something and work
against our progress on addressing the climate change issue.
Mr. Sommers, what about the American Petroleum Institute?
What did API spend to defeat the Build Back Better Act?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, we have worked to influence the
process, particularly on issues that will affect oil and gas.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Right. Reclaiming my time. My
question is to the tune of how much money.
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, I don't have those numbers at
my fingertips.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Yes, I assumed you would answer that
way, but let me just illuminate things for folks listening to
this. API used its front group, Energy Citizens, to flood
Facebook with hundreds of ads in 140 congressional districts
aimed in opposition to the reconciliation package. Here is a
bewildering example of hypocrisy. The Build Back Better Act
contains provisions to tackle, for example, methane pollution
from oil and natural gas production which API claims to support
the reduction of methane emissions. Yet API and its front
group, Energy Citizens, have carried out a seven-figure TV and
internet ad campaign to defeat the Build Back Better methane
emissions fee. Mr. Sommers, how do you reconcile your group's
claims to support reducing methane emissions with your
opposition to Build Back Better provisions that address methane
emissions?
Mr. Sommers. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman. In
fact, the American Petroleum Institute supports the Federal
regulation of methane for both new and existing sources. We
expect the new regulation to come out soon from the Biden
Administration, and we have been working with them on making
sure that that regulation makes sense and that it is reducing
methane emissions over time. Furthermore----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. All right. Reclaiming my time----
Mr. Sommers [continuing]. This industry----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I am sorry. Reclaiming my time.
Except you are opposing the reduction policies on methane
emissions in the Build Back Better Act, which is the proposal
of the Biden Administration. So you are either lying about your
support for reducing methane emissions or you are working
against yourself, which makes no sense and certainly isn't
money well spent by your institution.
Mr. Sommers. Respectfully, Congresswoman----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. No, the time is mine. Thank you. Mr.
Woods, your company is a member of API, for example, and API
actively lobbies to crush good climate policies as I have just
illuminated. Your own former senior director of Federal
relations admitted using groups like API to take the tough
questions and be a ``whipping boy'' during congressional
hearings. How can you tell us with a straight face that you are
part of the solution to climate change when you are part of the
lobbying effort to stifle policies to fight climate change?
Mr. Woods. Well, as I said shortly after the interview was
released, that characterization offered up was incorrect and
did not reflect the position that our company has taken or the
philosophy that we take.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Mr. Woods, you can say what you want
about climate change, but words matter. Actions matter more,
and this hearing illustrates the problems we face. Industry
players talk out of both sides of their mouths. Big Oil may
talk about climate change and emission reductions and put
shiny, polished green colored ads on TV telling Americans they
are part of the solution. But when President Biden and
congressional Democrats try to advance solutions to actually
fight the climate crisis, the fossil fuel industry reaches into
its deep pockets to kill these commonsense solutions. You are
no better than Big Tobacco in the 90's.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing.
Mr. Woods, ExxonMobil Corporation now publicly acknowledges
the climate crisis while privately funding organizations that
promote climate denial or misinformation. Isn't it true that
between 1998 and 2017, ExxonMobil Corporation spent $36 million
with think tanks promoting climate denial?
Mr. Woods. I can't comment on the figure that you have
offered up. I would tell you that our position that we have
taken and what we worked----
Mr. Johnson. Well, you would not disagree with that amount,
would you?
Mr. Woods. I don't have the number, so I can't confirm or
deny the amount. But I would tell you the position that we take
with the groups we work with is consistent with the position
that we take publicly. We don't have to----
Mr. Johnson. You deny climate change as being connected
with CO2 emissions, correct?
Mr. Woods. Pardon? I am sorry. I missed your question.
Mr. Johnson. You spend a lot of money to get across the
false point that CO2 emissions do not impact climate.
Mr. Woods. No, I don't agree with that characterization. We
do not spend money. We have long acknowledged the linkage
between CO2 emissions and the risk of climate change.
Mr. Johnson. Well, let me ask you this question. Back in
1979, ExxonMobil commissioned a groundbreaking study that
discovered that fossil fuels released carbon emissions that
would ``endanger humanity.'' However, isn't it true, Mr. Woods,
that no operational changes were made to respond to the
horrifying findings that the company's business operations and
products were endangering humanity?
Mr. Woods. Congress, I am not aware of any unique
understanding that we had in the science. We engaged with the
broader community and worked with them to advance our own
understanding, and as time passed and scientific understanding
evolved, so did our position and the approach that we took to
addressing emissions.
Mr. Johnson. Well, let me ask you this question, sir. The
American Petroleum Institute has known since as early as 1957
that carbon emissions were dangerously warming the atmosphere,
and multiple studies published by ExxonMobil and BP found
similar results in subsequent years, only to be publicized the
first time in 2015 and 2018, respectively. Mr. Woods, when did
you first learn that CO2 emissions cause climate change?
Mr. Woods. Our company from the very early days has worked
with the outside scientific group, and our understanding our
and our public position has been consistent with that
understanding.
Mr. Johnson. Well, let me ask Mr. Lawler the question. Mr.
Lawler, when did you first learn that CO2 emissions cause
climate change?
Mr. Lawler. Thank you for the question. So BP was aware
early on, very early on, that there was----
Mr. Johnson. Was it before 2018?
Mr. Lawler. I would say before, even in the 90's and 80's,
we were aware of reports that were out. There was a lot of
science. There was a lot of debate that was published during
that time period. But I would say that BP focused on the
landmark IPCC study in 1996, and in 1997, our then CEO, John
Browne, acknowledged that the scientific community----
Mr. Johnson. Well, I want to break in right here. Research
shows that between 2010 and 2018, only 2.3 percent of your
investments per capita expenditures went to low carbon
energies. Is that true?
Mr. Lawler. Yes, sir, it is true, but what I would say is
that----
Mr. Johnson. And isn't it also true, Mr. Lawler, that BP
earned $183.5 billion in 2020?
Mr. Lawler. I would have to check that figure. I know in--
--
Mr. Johnson. That means you could not tell me how much of
that $183.5 billion was reinvested in clean energy production?
Mr. Lawler. Are you speaking to revenue or profit? That
number seems high. We----
Mr. Johnson. Well, you would know better than I.
Mr. Lawler. Well, we had----
Mr. Johnson. You actually profited $183.5 billion in 2020.
Mr. Lawler. Well, we had something called a replacement
cost profit of around $4 to $5 billion in 2020.
Mr. Johnson. Well, my question is, how much of that was
reinvested in clean energy production?
Mr. Lawler. So in the last two years, we have spent $2
billion on clean energy projects.
Mr. Johnson. Two billion out of $183.5 billion. For the
people suffering from the impacts of wildfires, floods, and
hurricanes right now, 30 years is too long to wait for your
company to change. How do you square the reality of facts on
the ground with your 2050 date to decrease carbon emissions?
Mr. Lawler. Congressman, I have a project that I can share
with you right now that is amazing. We have installed a 300-
megawatt solar facility that is powering the only steel mill in
the world with green energy. We are in action. We spent $1.1
billion to join an offshore wind farm just offshore New York.
We will spend billions behind that and we are in action. We
have very clear targets. And, again, we have stepped forward
that we would be reducing our overall production, our absolute
production, on a worldwide basis by 40 percent by the year
2030. So we are in action.
Mr. Johnson. The world can't wait.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, and
the gentleman may continue answering the question, but his time
has expired.
Mr. Lawler. I would just add, Congressman, that we do have
near-term targets that are significant to cut methane, to cut
emissions. Fifteen percent of our executive compensation pay is
linked to sustainable emissions reductions. But I can just
assure you that we are sincere, we are in motion, and we are
taking action on a number of projects. And again, by 2025, we
will be spending $3 to $4 billion, $5 billion in 2030, so we
are sincere.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney. We must treat
this climate crisis like lives depend on it because they quite
literally do. In my district, the Massachusetts 7th, the sea
level rise caused by an increase in global temperatures, which
is a direct result of the continued operations of the oil and
gas companies before this committee, will destabilize families
and sink entire communities. From Cambridge and Chelsea to
Fenway and East Boston, my constituents are living in regions
that will be completely under water if we do not take bold
action to transition to 100 percent renewable, zero emission
energy sources as outlined in the Green New Deal.
And as I fight for the livelihoods of my neighbors, I am
clear eyed that my opposition is the massive lobbying campaign
by the billion-dollar corporations appearing before this
committee today. Your companies invest hundreds of millions of
dollars in lobbying efforts each year, some of which is
disclosed and reported. But the truth is these amounts
represent only a fraction of what is actually spent against our
efforts to save lives and our planet. We know a key part of Big
Oil's disinformation campaign is funding and backing so-called
shadow groups to fight against our climate justice efforts.
Shadow groups are think tanks, pressure organizations, and
other groups who receive funding from industry to engage in
advocacy the industry doesn't want its fingerprints on.
Mr. Woods, after your former lobbyist admitted joining
shadow groups to undermine efforts on climate, Exxon stated
that his comments were ``entirely inconsistent'' with your
company's work. Mr. Woods, do you stand by that statement?
``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. Yes, I do.
Ms. Pressley. Mr. Woods, is it your testimony that Exxon
has not at any point funded any think tanks, advocacy
organizations, or other shadow groups against climate change
efforts? ``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. The position we take is transparent, and we
publish the groups that we support on our website.
Ms. Pressley. Well, whatever your statements are now, I
think, you know, the truth is clear here that for years Exxon
has funded dozens of these shadow groups, like the Heartland
Institute, for example, a leading climate science denial group,
which has stated that global warming is actually good for the
planet. Mr. Woods, do you commit right here to stop funding
organizations that reject the science of climate change?
``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. We do not support the Heartland Group, so.
Ms. Pressley. ``Yes'' or ``no,'' do you commit right here
to not fund organizations that reject the science of climate
change?
Mr. Woods. We do not support climate denial. We do not ask
people to lobby anything different than what our publicly
supported positions or expressed positions are.
Ms. Pressley. With millions of dollars that are going to
lobbyist, super PACs, and shadow groups, these corporations
refuse to invest in their own workers to ensure they have a
future in a renewable energy economy. A just transition from
pollution-based profits to healthy green living means that no
worker will be left behind. Mr. Woods, what percentage of
ExxonMobil's annual revenue is being used to train your workers
for jobs in the renewable energy sectors? What percentage?
Mr. Woods. We are focused on making sure that our work
force is capable of operating our current operations, and we
are investing time and resources----
Ms. Pressley. I am sorry----
Mr. Woods [continuing]. In developing new solutions.
Ms. Pressley. I am going to reclaim my time since you
weren't providing a percentage. So will you commit to providing
this committee with the documentation to this answer?
Mr. Woods. We will work with you to give you what you need.
Ms. Pressley. All right. Mr. Wirth, what percentage of
Chevron's annual revenue is being used to train your workers
for jobs in renewable energy sectors?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I don't have a number on that. I
can tell you we are committed to meeting the needs of the world
today and the future in regard to our work force, and we are
prepared to do that.
Ms. Pressley. Sorry. I am going to run out of time. Will
you commit to providing this committee with the documentation
on this answer?
Mr. Wirth. We will work with the committee to provide
responses.
Ms. Pressley. All right. Ms. Watkins, what percentage of
Shell's annual revenue is being used to train your workers for
jobs in renewable energy sectors?
Ms. Watkins. Congresswoman, I don't have a number, but I
will be happy to work with you to get one. What I can say is
that what we are finding is that we have engineers that have
built offshore oil and gas platforms in the Gulf.
Ms. Pressley. I am sorry.
Ms. Watkins. We are now able to----
Ms. Pressley. I am going to run out of time but thank you
for that commitment to work with the committee.
Ms. Pressley. Mr. Lawler, what percentage of BP America's
annual revenue is being used to train your workers for jobs in
renewable energy sectors?
Mr. Lawler. I will need to review what that number is, but
what I can say is we are creating entire business units for the
renewable sector. Entire business units, spending up to $5
billion a year by 2030.
Ms. Pressley. Would you work with the committee to provide
us with those actual percentages?
Mr. Lawler. Yes, we will.
Ms. Pressley. OK. So I think the point here is that putting
profits before people like those in my district and the workers
in their very own companies is the reason this crisis is so
dire. One climate scientist said, ``What we do in the next 10
years will matter for 10,000 years.'' I believe that what we do
in the next 10 days on infrastructure investments will be the
true predictor of our planet's future. The Build Back Better
Act is a climate justice bill and a workers justice bill. We
can and we must act with urgency.
Thank you and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Comer, is recognized.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Sommers, what do you
predict the global demand for oil will be as the United States
in the world recover from the coronavirus pandemic?
Mr. Sommers. Thank you, Congressman, for your question.
What we are already starting to see, as I mentioned in a
previous answer, is that world oil demand has already risen
significantly. Pre-pandemic, so in 2019, the world was
consuming 100 million barrels of oil every single day. During
the worst part of the pandemic in April 2020, the world
consumed about 81 million barrels of oil every single day. We
are close now back to the 100 million barrels of oil use every
single day, and as the economy continues to grow, we expect
that to expand as well.
Mr. Comer. So if the industry does, as some of my
Democratic colleagues have suggested and asked you to pledge to
cut production, what would that do to the price of oil for
everyday working Americans----
Mr. Sommers. Well, Congressman----
Mr. Comer [continuing]. If the demand is going up?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, we are already starting to see
that, you know, because of worker shortages, because of
concerns about future and current government regulations----
Mr. Comer. Because the Biden policies. Because of the Biden
energy policy is why we are seeing energy prices go up, and
what my colleagues on the left are proposing is only going to
make it worse. Sir, despite some of the rhetoric from your
critics, the oil and gas industry has taken meaningful steps to
reduce emissions from operations. Can you describe briefly some
of the efforts under way and some of the planned industry
initiatives to address this challenge head on?
Mr. Sommers. Absolutely. Absolutely. Thank you,
Congressman, for that question. The American Petroleum
Institute since 2017 has had a program called the Environmental
Partnership. This is a program that is all about how do you
reduce methane emissions within our own operations. This
program has seen tremendous success. It is a program that
primarily works with our member companies and non-member API
companies to replace products within the oil and gas industry
that are leading to methane emissions. And as a consequence of
this, we have big operators and small operators working
together to ensure that our methane emissions continue to go
down. In fact, as a consequence of this program and other
programs like it, we have been able to reduce methane emissions
by 70 percent in five of the largest oil and gas producing
regions, like the Permian Basin.
Mr. Comer. Yes.
Mr. Sommers. We are proud of the work that we have done,
and we know that we have to continue that work to respond to
consumers that want to make sure that their energy continues to
come affordably, reliably, but also cleaner.
Mr. Comer. Absolutely, and that gets lost in translation.
The industry has made significant investment already. You plan
on making significant investment in the future. We are seeing a
reduction in emissions, and I think that that has been lost in
translation with the rhetoric on the other side. Now, briefly,
I am going to shift gears. Mr. Crabtree, you are a member of
the union, right?
Mr. Crabtree. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Comer. You know, a few years ago when I started out in
the Kentucky State House of Representatives, the union was
pretty Democrat, but I have seen in Kentucky, the union,
especially United Mine Workers and so many other unions that
have been just devastated and put out of work by Democrat
policies, starting with the Obama Administration. And now we
see your union put out of work because of the Keystone
pipeline. I mean, what is the general thinking now with the
policy from the Democrat Party with respect to energy
production in the United States?
Mr. Crabtree. Well, I mean, it has always been my opinion
that I don't care if you are a Democrat or Republican or
Independent. I am going to vote for who is going to put me to
work, and right now the President has decided to put us out of
work, so of course I am not going to support him. I wish that
President Trump could have won reelection, though. That is an
honest statement.
Mr. Comer. Well, I think a lot of people share your
sentiment. My last question to you, sir. If the United States
went totally green tomorrow, as some of my colleagues on the
left dream about, and eliminated all oil and gas jobs, would
Americans be able to power their homes or get their families to
work or school?
Mr. Crabtree. I think you know the answer to that question,
Congressman.
Mr. Comer. I know it, but I don't think my friends on the
left here know it.
Mr. Crabtree. I mean, there are so many things that are
made from petroleum products. I just can't conceive living in a
world where we are going to be carbon neutral or free.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, sir. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from Missouri, Ms. Bush, is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Chairs Maloney and
Khanna, for convening this timely hearing. Thanks in large part
to those testifying today and the corporations they represent,
St. Louis has 11 more 90-degree days per year than when I was
born. Mr. Lawler, are the overwhelming majority of fossil fuel
CEOs black or white?
Mr. Lawler. I don't have the exact numbers, but I would
assume they are white.
Ms. Bush. Yes. Ms. Watkins, is an oil refinery more likely
to be situated in a black community or white community?
Ms. Watkins. I am not sure how to answer that honestly. We
have got oil refineries along the U.S. Gulf Coast, and we are
very proud to be community members there.
Ms. Bush. It is black, yes. It is black. Mr. Wirth, are the
impacts of climate change more likely to hit a black
neighborhood or a white neighborhood first?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I have not seen studies that
would allow me to give you a----
Ms. Bush. The answer is black. The facts are clear. A 2017
NAACP and Clean Air Task Force report found that black
Americans are 75 percent more likely to live next to company,
industrial, and service facilities that directly harm us. For
years, you all have continued to promote fossil fuels despite
knowing that promoting them means promoting environmental
racism and violence in black and brown communities. You all are
still promoting and selling fossil fuels that are killing
millions of people. This is a striking example of white
supremacy. Your profit-driven choices threaten my life, the
lives of my family, my neighbors, and our communities every
single day. I sit before you as a black Congresswoman with
asthma caused by fossil fuels and the tear gas you fund. I have
a lot of questions, let me say.
Mr. Woods, as CEO, are you responsible for what Exxon does?
``Yes'' or ``no.'' It is just a ``yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. For what ExxonMobil does? Yes, I am.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Thank you for that answer. It is not a
coincidence that toxic waste is frequently dumped in black
communities like mine. When toxic waste combines with fossil
fuels flooding, the impact is unspeakable. My old basement in
St. Louis County in a predominantly black neighborhood used to
regularly fill with potentially radioactive waste next to my
son's bedroom due to floods made more frequent and intense by
your production and burning of fossil fuels. Public school
playgrounds in St. Louis regularly flood with the radioactive
water. Mr. Woods, would you send your children to one of these
schools? ``Yes'' or ``no?''
Mr. Woods. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question,
please?
Ms. Bush. Would you send your children to one of the
schools with radioactive waste where we have this flooding----
Mr. Woods. No.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Mr. Woods. I would not.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Thank you. And I don't want to either
and neither does my community. It is not a coincidence that our
communities are more likely to flood. You have known this
flooding was coming for years. Ms. Watkins has, too. Ms.
Watkins, in a 1988 Shell report, on page 26, it says, ``Large
low-lying areas, like Bangladesh, may need to be abandoned.''
Ms. Watkins, does that bother you that your company deemed a
country of 98 million brown people expendable in exchange for
soaring profits? ``Yes'' or ``no?'' It is just a ``yes'' or a
``no.''
Ms. Watkins. Actually, Congresswoman, I am glad my company
has been involved in the science research and involved in these
discussions for decades, and we have been open and engaging
with communities. And we are very active in the communities in
which we operate and looking to make ourselves very much
members of the community and invest in communities, especially
where there is risk of climate change hitting harder than in
other places.
Ms. Bush. Thank you very much because it bothers me. Let me
just say that. You didn't say it, but I will say it. It bothers
me.
Ms. Watkins. It bothers me, too.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Ms. Watkins. What bothers me is that----
Ms. Bush. That the end of that question. I have to keep
moving, but I have another question for you. Was Shell aware
that black and indigenous communities in the U.S. will flood
and burn first? ``Yes'' or ``no,'' black and indigenous
communities.
Ms. Watkins. I am sorry, Congresswoman. I am not familiar
with what you are referencing.
Ms. Bush. Let me ask you this. Are black communities like
mine in St. Louis expendable to you?
Ms. Watkins. Of course not. Communities are not expendable.
We work everyday hand in hand with our communities. And, in
fact, climate change is such a pressing issue that, as
companies, we have to work with the communities, and with
societies, and with the government if we are going to be able
to get to net zero by 2050.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. You know, your companies for decades
have been misrepresenting information and redirecting attention
to solutions you know to be false, and that is continuing even
in this hearing, but I thank you for speaking up and saying
what you said. We appreciate that, but we are at a tipping
point. Developing fossil fuels now given the escalation of the
climate crisis and its harm on black and brown communities is
unconscionable. Given each of your roles in these attacks on
our humanity, you all should resign.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from California, the vice chair, Gomez, is
recognized for five minutes. And after his questioning, there
will be a five-minute quick break at the request of the
witnesses. Mr. Gomez.
Mr. Gomez. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to just continue
a little bit on Ms. Bush's line of questioning. I was in the
California State Legislature for about 4.5 years, and during
that time we were able to pass reduction of greenhouse gas
reduction goals. We were able to pass cap-and-trade and we were
able to pass a lot of the bills that oil opposed, and you
opposed it every step of the way. You believed that you were
going to upend and get us to stop, and we were able to win
those fights, and I get it. You guys have your own business
model. That is what you are protecting. But we are fighting
across the board for communities in California but also in the
country, especially when the fact is the climate crisis
disproportionately impacts communities of color. Those are the
ones that are most likely to not get the jobs in the oil fields
or most likely the ones not to see the direct benefits but also
get the dirtier air, the dirtier water. They are ones that are
always in the path of the destruction from the oil industry.
So one of the things I want to really kind of focus in is,
like I said, Cory Bush' questioning. Let's start with Mr.
Wirth. Do you agree the impacts of climate change are worse for
vulnerable communities or communities of color and low-income
communities?
Mr. Wirth. Well, Congressman, this is a very important
issue I think for society, so I appreciate you----
Mr. Gomez. Just a ``yes'' or ``no.'' I mean, do you agree
that climate change is worse for low-income and communities of
color?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, there are many different studies,
opinions, and assertions on where and how climate change will
manifest itself.
Mr. Gomez. Mr. Wirth, I mean, listen, I know people that
work for you and I respect them very well. Just simple. This
was a fight that we fought in California. ``Yes'' or ``no.'' If
you can't answer that, then there is really no reason to ask
you the other questions. Do you believe climate change is worse
for communities of color and low-income communities? ``Yes'' or
``no?''
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, I don't have the ability to answer
that. I think the manifestation of climate change----
Mr. Gomez. So I will take that as you are a ``no.'' OK. Mr.
Wirth, Chevron's business code of conduct includes the
following principle: ``protect people and the environment.'' So
when Chevron states that the company has an ethical obligation
to protect communities, does that include communities of color?
``Yes or ``no.''
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, absolutely. Chevron strives to be a
force for good in the communities in which we operate, and we
are committed to continually improving our environmental and
social performance, especially in communities that are
vulnerable.
Mr. Gomez. Thank you, Mr. Wirth. Thank you. I am glad that
you see that. Low-income communities and communities of color
are on the front lines of coping with climate change and the
legacy of fossil fuels. Mr. Wirth, do you believe Chevron has a
moral obligation to prevent the negative health conditions and
impacts and death caused by your products and the use of your
products?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, I think we have an obligation for
doing our part to respond to this great challenge that we have
spent all day talking about.
Mr. Gomez. Could you answer yes'' or ``no'' on my question?
Mr. Wirth [continuing]. The future. I am sorry?
Mr. Gomez. ``Yes'' or ``no.'' Just ``yes'' or ``no,'' do
you see that also you have a moral obligation to prevent the
negative health conditions and impacts caused on people by the
use of your products?
Mr. Wirth. Congressman, we have an obligation to support
people in their livelihoods with affordable, reliable energy
with good jobs, and doing our part----
Mr. Gomez. Thank you.
Mr. Wirth [continuing]. To reduce the carbon intensity of
the energy system----
Mr. Gomez. Thank you, Mr. Wirth. Ms. Watkins, I want to
kind of go over to you. Shell has said that they have a goal of
offsetting 120 million tons of CO2 by 2030. Is that correct?
Ms. Watkins. We have a goal that we just announced today of
reducing our Scope 1 and 2 emissions that we control by 2030.
Mr. Gomez. OK. If Shell is committed to reducing its
environmental impact, then why do you plan to appeal a recent
court ruling in the Netherlands mandating Shell to reduce its
emissions by 45 percent by 2030?
Ms. Watkins. Yes, we are appealing that court ruling
because we feel that that is not something that should be
decided in the courts and we are actively looking at
accelerating. We are accelerating our powering progress
strategy as evidenced by the new target that we put out today,
and we look forward to continuing to work with governments,
like yourself, with society in order to accelerate the demand
for cleaner----
Mr. Gomez. Let me redirect the question. You mentioned
Scope 1 and 2, but you leave out Scope 3, and Scope 3 emissions
are 90 percent of your emissions. So how do you plan on
reducing it by 120 tons by 2030 if you are not targeting 90
percent of your emissions?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the gentlelady may answer his question.
Ms. Watkins. Yes. So our Scope 1 and 2 emissions by half by
2030. I don't know the exact tonnage of that. That number is
not familiar to me. But what I can say around Scope 3, and you
are right, the vast majority of the emissions are created from
the use of the products that we sell. We will be net zero
including Scope 3 by 2050 in step with society. That is our
target for 2050. It includes Scope 3.
Mr. Gomez. OK. Your press release says----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gomez. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. And I now am calling for a quick five-
minute recess. It is a request from the witnesses.
We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Maloney. The meeting will come to order.
Without objection, Mr. Casten is authorized to participate
in today's hearing.
Mr. Casten, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses. I know it has been a long day. I want to just start
by saying as a chemical engineer by training who spent a while
as an engineer and then running some energy companies, I love
chemical engineering. It is a lot of fun. I am sure you have a
lot of fun with it. I always thought it was cool that you can
look at the temperature and heat exchanger on one side and
predict with amazing accuracy how the yield is going to change
other side of your refinery, or a slight change in inputs
changes the temperature. And I think it is no surprise that,
you know, it is organizations like yours who employ a lot of
smart people like that.
You are actually pretty good at understanding how changes
in chemistry affect temperature. And, in fact, James Black back
in 1978, as you, of course, know, did this presentation to
Exxon where he predicted that we would have a doubling in CO2
based on current growth rates around 2025, and that would lead
to a 1 to 3 degree increase in temperature, which is basically
exactly where we are. So, Mr. Woods, kudos. You hire
exceptionally talented people. You have trained them. That is
one of the talents of a CEO. I commend you. We know that in the
light of that information you denied.
You founded the Global Climate Coalition. You funded Willie
Soon's research that was contrary on climate science, and I
don't want to go into that. You have had those conversations
already. But I do want to talk about something that is in the
news this week, which is that we have got all this information
coming up that Facebook is phenomenally good at sowing
disinformation. Not only can they not stop it, but they are
actually really good at inflaming it. They can convince people
that vaccines are bad. They can convince people to take horse
medicine. They can even convince people that it is patriotic to
attack the United States Capitol. Good people.
So in light of that, in light of this amazing tool to
spread disinformation, in light of the fact that you guys have
actively worked to spread that disinformation, it is intriguing
to me that in 2021, according to InfluenceMap, Exxon has spent
$4 million on Facebook ads. Seventy-five percent of that money
has been since June, and, in fact, your digital advertising
spend was running $50,000 a week in March and got up to
$600,000 a week in October. Mr. Woods, do you dispute those
numbers about your advertising spend?
Mr. Woods. I don't have those numbers available to me.
Mr. Casten. Sound about right, though?
Mr. Woods. I don't have a good view of those numbers today.
Mr. Casten. Could you speculate on what might have been
going on in the last month that would cause you to rapidly
increase your spending on a platform that is designed to
amplify disinformation?
Mr. Woods. Well, Congressman, I would first make the point
that I think differences of opinion are not disinformation. We
have----
Mr. Casten. Respectfully, sir, the laws of thermodynamics
are not negotiable. We are not going there. I just want to
know, do you know why you were amping up your spending on
Facebook in the last few weeks by a factor of 12?
Mr. Woods. I don't know what our spending in Facebook is,
so it is hard for me to comment on what has changed.
Mr. Casten. OK. Well, there is this Build Back Better Act
going on it seems to be getting a lot of attention. It
certainly seems dispositive. Mr. Sommers, that same analysis
analyzed a little over 25,000 ads from the fossil fuel
industry. They found that 20 percent of those were from
American Petroleum Institute that were promoting natural gas as
a climate solution. Now, again, I go back to my friends in the
chemical engineering sector. Methane is about 84 times as
potent a greenhouse gas chemical as carbon dioxide. When it is
initially released, it lasts a little over a decade in the
atmosphere and then breaks down. Over 100 years, it is about 30
times as impactful. Over 20 years, which is kind of the time we
have to get the zero, 84, which means there is somewhere
between a 1 to 3 percent leakage rate in the system, and
methane is actually worse than coal. And you all are out there
promoting this as a part of the climate solution. Let's call it
two percent just to be even.
Mr. Sommers, do you dispute that methane is an 80 times
more potent greenhouse gas than CO2?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, thank you for your question.
Natural gas has led to----
Mr. Casten. Sir, I am just asking for a ``yes'' or ``no.''
Do you dispute that it is 84 times as potent?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, this industry has done everything
that we can do to limit methane emissions over time.
Mr. Casten. I will get to the leaks. Do you dispute the
science is my only question?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, we trust the climate science.
Mr. Casten. OK. Good. Do you believe that the natural gas
system today has less than two percent leaks from wellhead to
burner tip?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, we don't dispute the science in
this space. We are looking----
Mr. Casten. How about the leakage rates? I get that we
don't want to have leaks, but is it your position that there is
less than two percent leaks from wellhead to burner tip?
Mr. Sommers. Congressman, we have programs at the American
Petroleum Institute to work to limit methane emissions.
Mr. Casten. OK. But you are ducking the question, sir. If
you don't have that, you have got to ask why you are calling
something a climate solution that, as we sit today, is warming
up the planet. I will leave you both with an observation. A
former board member of mine, who is an idol of mine, used to
tell us when we got in board disputes that the only thing that
matters in this life is whether our grandchildren are proud of
us. The West is on fire. Floods are coming. Ice is melting
because of analysis you had in 1978. My question for all of
you, which you can submit for the record, is, are your
grandchildren proud of you?
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, Mr. Jones is authorized to participate
in today's hearing.
Mr. Jones, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Madam Chair. You know, if you listen
to our witnesses today or read their companies' climate plans,
you might conclude that carbon capture is nothing short of a
miracle, a technology solution so impactful that it will save
us from the catastrophic effects of climate change. Exxon, for
example, is promoting a proposed carbon capture and storage hub
in Texas designed to capture emissions from industrial
facilities and power plants, a way, at least according to
Exxon's own ads and marketing materials, to have the best of
both worlds: continue to burn fossil fuels with reckless
abandon but pay none of the climate price.
Mr. Woods, at an investor meeting earlier this year, you
were quoted as saying, ``Carbon capture and storage is going to
be needed to reduce emissions,'' and your written testimony
reflects that sentiment as well. Today there are 13 active
commercial carbon capture and storage sites in the U.S.,
according to the Global CCS Institute's 2020 report. One of
those sites belongs to Exxon, correct? A simple yes'' or ``no''
will do.
Mr. Woods. I am not familiar with that report, but we do
have a facility in the U.S., yes.
Mr. Jones. In Shute Creek, Ohio.
Mr. Woods. Yes.
Mr. Jones. Twelve of those sites, including the one Exxon
owns, the captured carbon is used for what is called enhanced
oil recovery, a method to combat hard-to-reach oil by injecting
pressurized CO2. Is that correct? Again, a simple ``yes'' or
``no'' will do, sir.
Mr. Woods. Yes.
Mr. Jones. In fact, 95 percent of the carbon being captured
at these U.S. sites is used for extracting more oil. To be
clear, Exxon and others are using captured CO2 to extract more
oil and calling this a climate mitigation strategy. Mr. Woods,
``yes'' or ``no,'' when Exxon promotes carbon capture as a
climate solution, does this include carbon capture used for
enhanced oil recovery?
Mr. Woods. Congressman, I would say that you are confusing
the technology with its uses. Carbon captures is a proven
technology to concentrate CO2, and then the question is what
you do with that concentration. We can store it. Our Houston
hub is used to capture that CO2 and then store it in aquifers
offshore. It would not be used for enhanced oil recovery. So
there is a difference between the technology and then what you
use the technology for.
Mr. Jones. So, Mr. Woods, I am sorry, I do have other
questions. I just want to get a ``yes'' or ``no'' answer. When
Exxon promotes carbon capture as a climate solution, does this
include carbon capture that is used for enhanced oil recovery?
``Yes'' or ``no.''
Mr. Woods. Our focus has been to capture CO2 and sequester
it, not for EOR.
Mr. Jones. OK. So even though the overwhelming majority of
existing carbon capture technology deployed is ultimately used
to extract even more fossil fuel, Exxon plans to increase
investment in carbon capture as a way to ``be consistent with
the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement.'' But the truth is
carbon capture might help the fossil fuel companies extract
more oil, but it won't do anything to prevent us all from
paying the catastrophic costs of the climate crisis. To make
enhanced oil recovery work from a climate perspective, Exxon,
and to be fair, the rest of the fossil fuel industry as well,
would need to capture and store and ever-increasing amount of
carbon for which there is neither the technological capacity or
infrastructure at scale to meet our 2030 or even 2050
obligations in the Paris Climate Agreement. The U.S., as you
know, is committed to reaching net zero emissions by 2050, but
Exxon's carbon capture facility has only been able to capture
and bury less than 20 percent of the carbon produced by the
single plant on which it operates.
Mr. Woods, how do you expect to capture enough of Exxon's
future emissions from extraction transportation and other
company operations to remain consistent with the country's net
zero obligation?
Mr. Woods. Congressman, that is the big challenge we all
face, moving from one energy source to another. And it has been
widely recognized in order for society to be successful, by the
IPCC and the IEA, that carbon capture will play an important
role in that. And the policy to support implementation of
carbon capture will be important to achieve society's
objectives. So no matter what solution we go to, there is going
to be extensive need for additional investment in
infrastructure as well as the technology to replace today's
energy system. So it is not a question of spending more money.
It is where you spend that money. And I would make the point
that a number of solutions are required and a number of large
investments in those solutions are required across our economy
and across the world as a whole.
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Mr. Woods. I understand that to mean
that you don't know yet how you can capture enough future
emissions from extraction transportation and other company
operations to remain consistent with our country's net zero
obligation.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, Mr. Levin is authorized to participate
in today's hearing.
Mr. Levin, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman, and thanks
to all the witnesses. I want to shift our focus to the oil
refinery workers your companies employ. Mr. Woods, I am going
to ask you a few ``yes'' or ``no'' questions and then get into
the issue in more detail. Does ExxonMobil educate workers on
possible job loss from climate change, and have you advised
workers that you believe addressing the climate crisis may
cause some of them to lose their job?
Mr. Woods. What we have talked about with our organization
is the opportunity to address the risk of climate change
through investments in technologies----
Mr. Levin. Right, but I am asking about people's jobs, sir.
Mr. Woods. Yes, and I will get to that. So----
Mr. Levin. Well, I don't have a lot of time. So do you talk
to them about that they may lose their jobs? ``Yes or ``no.''
Their current jobs.
Mr. Woods. We believe that the transition will involve
capabilities and skill sets that are consistent with our
existing businesses, so there is an opportunity to evolve those
jobs in two different applications, like carbon capture, like
biofuel.
Mr. Levin. Got it. So do you have specific programs in
place to retain and protect the workers that you currently
employ? Is that when you are kind of saying?
Mr. Woods. No. What I am saying is as the world transitions
and has the solutions that are going to be required, like
hydrogen and biofuel and carbon captures, those investments
will require workers to operate those facilities. And the
skills of those workers are very----
Mr. Levin. OK. I understand, sir. So would you say that,
from your perspective, the company considers the well-being of
your workers when you are making new business decisions?
Mr. Woods. We believe that----
Mr. Levin. It is a simple question, sir.
Mr. Woods [continuing]. Our workers are fundamental to the
value proposition of our company, so they are very important to
the equation.
Mr. Levin. OK. Well, I really have to question a lot of
what you consider, how much you really consider them when you
are making these decisions given reports coming out of the
Beaumont Refinery. Can you confirm that on May 1, your company
escorted 650 oil refiners in Beaumont, Texas, in the refinery
there, off the job, replacing experienced members of United
Steel Workers Local 13243 with temporary workers in an effort
to force a vote on your latest contract proposal?
Mr. Woods. At Beaumont, we have had contract negotiations
ongoing for quite some time. We failed----
Mr. Levin. Did you lock the workers out, sir, and replace
them with temporary workers?
Mr. Woods. We failed to reach an agreement, and as part of
that process and a strike notice, we had a lockout. That is
correct.
Mr. Levin. Well, Madam Chairwoman, ExxonMobil states in its
guiding principles for employees, ``We are committed to
maintaining a safe work environment enriched by diversity and
characterized by open communication, trust, and fair
treatment.'' I fail to see how that is true based on today's
hearing. ExxonMobil and other fossil fuel companies have sold
this untrue narrative that they are acting out of concern for
their workers while simultaneously undermining them as in the
case with the lockout in Beaumont, Texas.
We have evidence that their workers aren't their primary
concern in their business decisions regarding climate change.
As many have referenced earlier, former ExxonMobil senior
adviser, Keith McCoy, was caught on camera defending
ExxonMobil's early efforts to fight against climate science,
stating that, ``There is s nothing illegal about doing that,
and we are just looking out for our investments. We are looking
out for our shareholders.'' He didn't mention the workers. And
now when these companies can no longer hide from their climate
denialism and disinformation, they work behind the scenes to
shift climate liability away from profit margins and onto the
backs of their workers by refusing to give them a seat at the
table or to be clear about the long-term impacts that climate
change has on their livelihoods.
I am tired of oil industry-backed groups opposing efforts
to address climate change in the name of protecting good jobs
and workers. Let us remember it was not the CEOs and big bosses
of these companies that made oil refinery jobs good jobs. It
was unions and workers who fought for decades and are still
fighting for these benefits. We can save life on earth as we
know it and support our workers to have good jobs. I implore
all the witnesses testifying today to give oil refinery workers
a seat at the table, and I remain steadfast in my commitment to
ensuring that workers are held harmless and supported in this
transition while corporate polluters pay for the climate
disinformation they have peddled for decades.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, with 10 seconds to spare, I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, Ms. Omar is authorized to participate in
today's hearing.
Ms. Omar, you recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I am glad to join
this discussion. I know there has been a lot of conversations
around the coordinated efforts that the fossil fuel companies
have put together to create and spread disinformation about
climate change.
As we heard earlier, in 1998, the American Petroleum
Institute, or API, assembled a global climate science
communication team comprised of fossil fuel companies and front
groups working to coordinate a misinformation campaign
surrounding climate change. Mr. Wright, the Action Plan says
Sharon Kneiss of Chevron was a member of the Global Climate
Science Communication Team, correct?
Mr. Wirth. Congresswoman, I appreciate the question. I am--
--
Ms. Omar. It is just ``yes'' or ``no,'' sir.
Mr. Wirth. I am not familiar with the instance you are
referring to, so I don't have any knowledge of that.
Ms. Omar. All right. Mr. Woods, the Action Plan also says
Randy Randol of Exxon was a member of the team. Do you agree?
Mr. Woods. I don't know about that. That was several
decades ago and----
Ms. Omar. OK. So on page two of the April 3, 1998, Action
Plan, it says that these employees were listed as members who
contributed to the development of the plan. In 1998, the Global
Climate Science Communication Team produced an action plan
outlining a strategy to conduct a coordinated misinformation
campaign on climate change. Mr. Woods, an Exxon employee was
involved in developing this action plan, right?
Mr. Woods. As I said, I am not familiar with that activity.
That was 20 years ago, and so I can't----
Ms. Omar. OK. And, Mr. Wright, is that the same for you? Do
you know that these employees were involved in creating this
action plan?
Mr. Wirth. I don't have information about the instance that
you are making reference to, Congresswoman.
Ms. Omar. OK. Again, on page two of that Action Plan lists
these employees. The plan explained that, ``Victory'' would be
achieved when ``average citizens understand uncertainties in
climate science'' and recognition of that uncertainty ``becomes
part of the conventional wisdom.'' We have heard today that
Exxon executives were warned about the reality of the climate
change as early as the 1970's. As we know, API shared
information within the industry about the dangers of climate
change. Yet both of your organizations contributed to a plan to
inject an uncertainty into the climate debate. Mr. Sommers,
``yes'' or ``no,'' did the Global Climate Science Communication
Team achieve victory as it was laid out in that Action Plan?
Mr. Sommers. Congresswoman, I am not familiar with what you
are referring to. In 1998, I was 23 years old. I came to API in
2018 and focused on the climate change.
Ms. Omar. I study the history of the institution I
participate in. I am sure you do as well. But it seems very
clear that they did. The fossil fuel industry worked
collectively to prevent action on climate change. They
coordinated their campaigns with groups like the Global Climate
Science Communication Team. Their efforts at disinformation
were conscious and deliberate. Over the past three decades, the
fossil fuel industry has continued their efforts by making $780
million in political donations with 80 percent of those
donations going to Republicans. In 2020 alone, the industry
made $139 million in donations to candidates and committees, of
which 84 percent went to Republicans and mostly climate
deniers. It is yet another reason we need to get the fossil
fuel money out of our politics.
Fossil fuel companies have polluted our air, land, and
water for profit despite knowing the devastating impact it has
on our companies. It seems like you all have achieved that
victory of leading the public with disinformation. And as one
of my colleagues said earlier, I hope that you are ashamed of
the future that you contributed to for your children and for
ours. And I ask all of you to resign.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
I am prepared to close now. All of our witnesses have had
their time to ask their questions and the witnesses have
responded, and I thank them for their time and their
testimoneys. But before we close, I want to offer the ranking
member an opportunity to offer any closing remarks he may have.
Mr. Comer. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and I honestly
sincerely think this was one of the better hearings that we
have had today. The one thing that I think most Americans who
watch this hearing would take from it is that the Biden energy
policies have already had a dramatic impact on the inflationary
prices that we have seen of gas and what we are going to see
this winter with natural gas. So I think that was an important
thing for the American people to see. This was a timely hearing
because gas prices have risen 27 days in a row. Twenty-seven
days in a row with no end in sight.
You know, we have had a lot of interesting antics from my
friends on the other side of the aisle. We have had a request
to make a pledge to, of all things, cut production. When we are
seeing gas prices soaring right now, the last thing in the
world we need to do is cut production. We have seen them make
try to get the CEOs to make a pledge to cut production at the
same time Joe Biden is pleading with OPEC to increase
production. It makes no sense. And we have had questions about
how much lobbying the energy industry spent to lobby on behalf
of the Paris Climate Accord. Of course they spent little to
none on lobbying for that. The only countries that would have
spent money lobbying for the Paris Climate Accords would have
been energy companies in China or Ukraine. Perhaps when we
become the majority and we subpoena Hunter Biden, we can ask
Hunter Biden about that question.
And then, you know, as our colleague, Representative Omar,
just said, attacking the oil and gas industry for donating 80
percent of their contributions to Republicans. The first thing
that crossed my mind, Madam Chair, is I guess they feel like
fools for donating 20 percent to the Democrats. I mean, this is
crazy this policy that is only going to make energy prices
higher, only going to make us more dependent on foreign
countries for our energy and is going to do nothing to reduce
carbon emissions. And finally, we have seen stunts like with
Katie Porter. You know, it looked like she was in California.
Madam Chair, I hope she doesn't get fined by Gavin Newsom for
polluting or whatever she was doing there in the back of her
car in California.
But, you know, the most predictable thing that we have seen
today is the trend with the Democrats attacking private sector
companies for making a profit. And what always confuses me is
why my friends on the left continue to attack companies for
making a profit while at the same time wanting to increase the
corporate tax. If corporations don't make a profit, it doesn't
matter what the corporate tax rate is. So I think there are a
lot of differing opinions that the American people have seen
today from this hearing.
I want to thank our witnesses who came here today. I want
to thank you for the investment that you have made in creating
good-paying jobs and doing your best to see that we are less
dependent on foreign oil. I want to also thank you for your
investments to reduce carbon emissions. The climate is very
important to Republicans as well. We just want to work with the
private sector to reduce our carbon footprint while at the same
time reducing our dependence on foreign countries for energy,
and, at the same time, create and maintain good-paying jobs. So
that is a hallmark of the Republican policy. We care about the
climate, but we also want to work with the private sector to
reduce carbon emissions and continue to create good-paying
jobs.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for appearing today
and thank all of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle for
their participation in this important hearing.
I have been listening carefully to today's testimony. As I
said earlier, I had hoped today would be a turning point for
the oil industry. I was grateful to hear the top fossil fuel
CEOs finally admit that climate change is real, that burning
fossil fuels is causing it, and that we must act urgently to
fix it. But I was disappointed that we also heard much of the
same denial and deflection we have heard before. Today's
witnesses refused to take responsibility for Big Oil's decades-
long disinformation campaign. And even after agreeing that we
are, in fact, in ``Code Red'' crisis, they refuse to stop
funding groups like the American Petroleum Institute that are
still blocking reforms, like expanding the use of electric
vehicles. So I see no choice but to continue our committee's
investigation until we see the truth.
We requested documents from each of these companies six
weeks ago which were due on September 30. We followed up before
the due date to identify categories of documents that were of
particular importance to be produced quickly. After they missed
the deadline, we sent warning letters to all six companies
urging them to complete their productions by October 25 or face
further action. Unfortunately, none of the six entities have
produced a substantial portion of the key documents the
committee requested. Instead they produced reams of other
documents, many of which were publicly available. One entity
sent in 1,500 pages printed from their own website, available
publicly, along with 4,000 pages of newsletters filled with
industry press releases. Others sent us thousands of pages of
publicly available annual reports and the company's postings on
Facebook and LinkedIn.
Now, let me tell you what the fossil fuel companies have
not produced. These organizations have not produced the
detailed funding information that we requested and that we need
to understand their payments to shadow groups and to 150 public
relations companies, and advertisements on social media
payments, payments that today's witnesses seem intent on
continuing. Nearly all the companies have failed to turn over
board materials the committee needs to examine corporate
strategies on climate change. And with only a few limited
exceptions, the fossil fuel companies have not produced any
internal documents or internal communications from senior
executives about their company's role in climate change. I have
tried very hard to obtain this information voluntarily, but the
oil companies employed the same tactics they use for decades on
climate policy: delay and obstruction. Well, that ends today.
I am formally notifying the ranking member and members of
the committee that I intend to issue subpoenas to the fossil
fuel entities represented here today. I have draft subpoenas
here. Please know that I do not take this step lightly. When
Republican Dan Burton was chairman of this committee, he issued
more than 1,000 subpoenas without a single complaint from my
Republican colleagues. I have been much more selective, but we
are at Code Red for climate, and I am committed to doing
everything I can to help rescue this planet and save it for our
children. We need to get to the bottom of the oil industry's
disinformation campaign, and with these subpoenas we will.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, point of order. Point of order.
Chairwoman Maloney. What is the gentleman's point of order?
Mr. Comer. I just want to publicly say I object to the
issuance of subpoenas. The oil and gas executives here today
have provided over 100,000 pages of documents, and we feel like
that is an infringement upon their First Amendment rights.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, Mr. Chairman, they produced
documents, but they were not the documents that we requested.
Most of it was like this, completely publicly available on
their website, their annual reports. And as you know, Chairman
Khanna and I wrote you a letter yesterday highlighting our
serious concerns that the fossil fuel organizations were not
fully compliant with our request and were obstructing and
delaying our investigation. I also noted that we gave these
organizations multiple opportunities to produce them
voluntarily. We requested it in writing and phone calls and
reaching out to their offices. In fact, Chairman Rho Khanna and
I wrote to them just last week and warned them if they did not
comply voluntarily, that the committee would be forced to
consider additional steps to obtain compliance.
So we have been true to our word, and we spent a great deal
of time trying to obtain these documents. We were not able to
obtain them. They are important. We are now requesting them
with a subpoena. I have draft subpoenas here. I am willing to
share them if you would like them.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, we strongly reiterate the fact that
we feel this is an infringement upon their First Amendment
rights. This is the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
We are supposed to focus on waste, fraud, and abuse in the
Federal bureaucracy.
Chairwoman Maloney. Great. The meeting is adjourned.
Before we close, in closing, I want to thank our panelists
once again for their remarks, and I want to commend my
colleagues for participating in this very important
conversation.
With that and without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials
and to submit additional written questions for the witnesses to
the chair, which will be forwarded to the witnesses for their
response. I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
you can. And with that, this meeting is adjourned.
Chairwoman Maloney. And with that, this meeting is
adjourned.

[all]
