- AGENCY COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION REFORM ACT (FITARA)

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AGENCY COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION
REFORM ACT (FITARA)

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 16, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-381 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2021

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

David Rapallo, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee Staff Director
Taylor Jones, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   Jody B. Hice, Georgia Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         Andy Biggs, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachsetts       Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Ro Khanna, California                Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Katie Porter, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 16, 2021...................................     1

Witnesses

Mr. Gundeep Ahluwalia, Chief Information Officer, Department of
Labor
Oral Statement...................................................     5
Mr. Jay Mahanand, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Agency for
International Development
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Mr. Kevin Walsh, Director of Information Technology and
Cybersecurity Issues, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

Documents entered into the record during this hearing and
Questions for the Record (QFR's) are listed below.

* FITARA-Metric Recommendation from MicroFocus; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Granite-EIS testimony; Chairman Connolly.

* QFRs to: Mr. Ahluwalia; submitted by Chairman Connolly.

* QFRs to: Mr. Mahanand; submitted by Chairman Connolly.

* QFRs to: Mr. Walsh; submitted by Chairman Connolly.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

AGENCY COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION
REFORM ACT (FITARA)

----------

Friday, April 16, 2021

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:03 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gerald E.
Connolly (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Davis, Porter,
Hice, Keller, Biggs, and Comer (ex officio).
Mr. Connolly. This subcommittee will come to order.
Some witnesses and persons and others will appear remotely
via Zoom today. Since some members and witnesses are appearing
in person, let me first remind everyone that pursuant to
guidance from the House Attending Physician, all individuals
attending this hearing in person must wear a face mask. Members
who are not wearing a face mask will not be recognized.
Let me also make a few reminders to those members appearing
in person. You will only see members and witnesses appearing
remotely on the screens in this hearing room. On one side of
the room you can see the individual who is speaking in what is
known in Zoom as speaker view. On the other side you'll see the
collection of individuals within the Zoom platform. A timer is
visible in the room directly in front of you.
For members and witnesses
[inaudible].
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Since the enactment of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act in 2014, this subcommittee has
maintained steady and bipartisan oversight of the agency
implementation of the law. FITARA was enacted to establish a
long-term framework through which Federal IT investments could
be tracked, assessed, and managed to significantly reduce
wasteful spending and improve project outcomes. FITARA is a
report card that holds agencies accountable and exhorts them to
improve their IT postures, and in practice, it's a tool for
Congress and the public to ensure better cybersecurity, reduce
wasteful spending, and make government service to the Nation
more effective. The coronavirus pandemic has proven that IT is
integral, not incidental, to the mission. As we have seen both
at the Federal and state, local level of government, if the IT
does not work, the mission does not work.
Today's hearing will discuss the results of Scorecard 11.0,
which was released in December. This hearing will also focus on
how Congress and the administration can work together to
approve services to the Nation with a focus on improving IT
across the government. Today's hearing also comes weeks after
Congress was able to secure a billion dollars in the Technology
Modernization Fund so that agencies have more opportunities to
improve IT and enhance cybersecurity.
We look forward to engaging with the Office of Management
and Budget about the importance of IT modernization and this
funding opportunity at the next FITARA hearing in July.
Last summer marked the tenth FITARA oversight hearing in
the last five years and the first time that all 24 agencies
participating in the FITARA Scorecard received passing grades.
Since the FITARA 10.0 Scorecard, three agency grades increased,
five decreased, and 16 remained unchanged. Further, despite the
removal and addition of metrics, all 24 agencies maintained
passing grades for the second time in 11 Scorecards.
FITARA 11.0 marks the first--a few firsts in the five-year
history of the Scorecard. The Scorecard marks the first time,
for example, in FITARA's history that all 24 agencies included
in the law received at least one A in a single metric. And that
metric was the software licensing metric, the first time that
metric will also be retired because everybody gets an A. When
the subcommittee added this metric to the Scorecard back in
June 2017, only two agencies had such inventories. Agencies
needed a better management software licenses to make cost-
effective decisions and to achieve savings.
As a result of continued oversight using the FITARA
Scorecard, all 24 agencies are now using comprehensive,
regularly updated inventories of the software licenses,
enabling those agencies to identify duplicative licenses and
software costs.
The GAO, the Government Accountability Office, estimates
that agencies have saved or avoided more than $1.4 billion in
software licensing costs from Fiscal Year 2015 through Fiscal
Year 2020 because they are now using comprehensive, regularly
updated inventories. These types of small but significant
adjustments over the vast enterprise of Government can rack up
significant savings pretty quickly.
FITARA 11.0 also marks the addition of a new metric which
evaluates agencies' efforts to transition off the General
Services Administration's expiring telecommunication contracts
before they expire in May 2023. The new measure incentivizes
agencies to progress toward telecom services that deliver
critical services at lower costs to taxpayers.
Since the Scorecard's inception in 2015, agencies have made
substantial positive strides in improving their information
technology practices. Among the FITARA Scorecard categories
with the greatest impact on taxpayer savings, of course, is the
IT portfolio review process known as PortfolioStat.
PortfolioStat went from helping Federal agencies save $3.4
billion in Fiscal Year 2015 to $22.8 billion at the beginning
of Fiscal Year 2021. Let me repeat that. We got savings of $3.4
billion back in 2015. Six years later, the savings are at $22.8
billion.
Federal agencies are closing and consolidating more data
centers which also results and significant cost savings. The 24
graded agencies have reported more than $5 billion in cost
savings in that category from fiscal years 2015 to 2020.
While the FITARA Scorecard has successfully help agencies
move the needle on improving IT practices, work still remains.
According to GAO, 21 of the 24 graded agencies still not have
established policies that fully address the role of their CIO
as required by Federal law and FITARA guidance. Improving the
management of IT acquisitions and operations remains on GAO's
high-risk list. Citing the need for OMB and Federal agencies to
implement all of the statutory provisions of FITARA. Further in
the most recent high-risk list, GAO reported that significant
attention was needed to improve the Federal Government's
management of IT acquisitions and operations and to ensure the
Nation's cybersecurity.
The coronavirus pandemic has highlighted that chief
information officers are more central now than ever before.
Nearly every Federal program service and function relies on IT
in order to work. It's among the duties of the CIO to plan for
agency IT needs, including the resources required to accomplish
the mission. Outdated legacy systems, software and hardware,
however, continually prevent agencies from providing the
services the American public expects and demands and deserves.
To determine the scope and feasibility of IT modernization,
CIOs must be more involved in the agency performance planning.
That's why today I introduce the Performance Enhancement Reform
Act with my ranking member, Mr. Hice. This important piece of
legislation requires agencies' performance goals to meet the
demands of the ever-changing performance management landscape
and includes data evidence and IT in their performance plan.
The bill would also require agencies to publish their
technology modernization estimates, system upgrades, staff
technology skills and expertise, and other resources and
strategies needed and required to meet these performance goals.
The subcommittee will continue to evolve the Scorecard in
ways that facilitate tracking improvement over time, while
adding new metrics as necessary to raise the bar on what is
needed across the Federal enterprise. I look forward to today's
important conversation so that we continue to provide accurate
oversight and to exhort Federal agencies to come into the 21st
century with their IT.
I now call my friend from Georgia, the distinguished
ranging member, Mr. Hice, for his opening remarks.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, and I appreciate
your leadership on this issue and for holding this hearing
today.
I likewise understand that the intent had been to invite
the new Federal Chief Information Officer, Clare Martorana, but
due to a family emergency, she is not able to be here. So, I
certainly extend my sympathies to her and her family and look
forward to working with her in the future as well and I
understand likewise the urgency of holding this hearing but
certainly regret the fact that we're not going to have the
benefit of her views and hope we'll be able to have that at
some point in the future.
That being said, FITARA no doubt has been a bright spot of
bipartisan work for this committee /and I look forward to
continuing those efforts in regards specifically to this
Scorecard and its usefulness as it relates to IT reform in the
future.
But while agencies have certainly progressed over the past
five years, the task, as always, is to ensure that we are
keeping the Scorecard current. We want to make sure that it's
measuring the most relevant facets as it relates to the IT
universe, and I look forward to the perspective of our
witnesses today on how the Scorecard may potentially need to
change as we continue going forward.
Since our last FITARA hearing in August, the Scorecard, as
we all know, has been modified. It's gone--what is gone is the
software licensing inventory required by the MEGABYTE Act and,
as Chairman Connolly has mentioned, the agencies were receiving
an A grade and that has been replaced by new category,
Enterprise Information Systems. This is a new contract vehicle
for agency telecommunications and will finally bring many
benefits, I believe, including enhanced user experience and
cost savings. My hope is that it will, in addition, drive
agencies toward faster implementation, which has been a concern
for many of us for a long time. We need to be able to meet the
goals, not just have goals.
But there have been more important events since our last
hearing than the Scorecard changes itself. Of course, the
biggest has been the solar wind cyber-attack. This certainly
reinforces the urgency to do everything we can as policymakers
to keep Federal networks secure. That obviously is a major
concern to all of us on both sides of the aisle.
In addition, a year has now passed since the COVID pandemic
and the many multiple ways that it stressed agencies' ability
to both operate and serve citizens in a remote digital
environment. So, as we look to the future, gauging how we will
accomplish these tasks, that certainly should be a top priority
as well.
This goes hand-in-hand with the need to modernize aging
legacy systems, also a very deep concern for many of us. These
old systems simply are not able to manage the demands and
expectations of Americans here in the 21st century. We've got
to replace these legacy systems.
So, in closing, I do want to thank our witnesses who are
here today. Thank you for taking your time to be with us. I'm
eager to hear your insights and your suggestions and look
forward to listening to your statements and to working with you
as we move forward.
And so, again, thank you, Chairman Connolly, for your
leadership in this area and this hearing.
And, with that, I'll yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Hice.
I'd like to introduce our witnesses today. We're grateful
to have their expertise. Our first witness is Gundeep Ahluwalia
who is the Chief Information Officer for the Department of
Labor. Then we will hear from Jay Mahanand who is the Chief
Information Officer for the U.S. Agency for International
Development. And last but not least, we have Mr. Walsh
representing the Government Accountability Office, which has
been a great partner for us, and he serves as the Director of
Information Technology and Cybersecurity at GAO.
If the witnesses would be unmuted and raise their right
hand and, Mr. Walsh, if you would stand and raise your right
hand, it is the custom of our committee to swear in all
witnesses.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Mr. Ahluwalia. I do.
Mr. Mahanand. I do.
Mr. Walsh. I do.
Mr. Connolly. Let the record show all three of our
witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
Without objection, your written statements, full written
statements will be entered into the record.
And, with that, Mr. Ahluwalia, you're recognized for your
five-minute summation of testimony. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF GUNDEEP AHLUWALIA, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Mr. Ahluwalia. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Hice, and the members of the subcommittee for the opportunity
to speak here today about IT at the Department of Labor. I want
to thank DOL leadership and all DOL employees for their hard
work and dedication in support of wage earners, job seekers,
and retirees across the country. I also want to thank Congress
for your continued support with FITARA and the resources for IT
modernization as a whole.
As CIO, I have always strived to maximize available
resources and apply them to an IT strategy, enabling data-
driven decisionmaking and digitization aimed at better mission
outcomes. FITARA's Scorecard helps show an agency's IT success,
growth, and areas that may need improvement.
The Department's high marks in implementing FITARA is a
testament to our organization's commitment to IT modernization.
We are the only agency to receive A grades in six of the seven
categories. As a result of our efforts in implementing FITARA
and upgrading our infrastructure, Labor was able to quickly
transition 95 percent of our work force to a remote work
environment when the COVID-19 started, without any
interruptions to mission delivery.
We maintained mission activities for 27 subagencies and
onboarded more than 1,500 staff virtually. We continued to
provide critical services for the American public, including
protecting 401(k)'s, inspecting mines, ensuring workplace
safety, and handling increased website traffic as people
accessed weekly and monthly unemployment numbers.
It is important to note that investing in IT modernization
is not a once-and-done scenario. During my time as CIO of the
Department of Labor, our focus has been on paying down our
technological debt, enabling the IT strategy, and utilizing the
tools Congress has provided with FITARA, Modernizing Government
Technology Act, and the Technology Modernization Fund. In
addition to innovative contracting strategies, we are taking
advantage of the TMF funding opportunities coupled with our
Working Capital Fund authority and appropriations for IT
modernization.
For example, in 2018, we used the TMF funding to streamline
the temporary labor certification program from a paper-based to
a completely digital process, resulting in a $2 million
annual--$2 million annual savings for the department. We are
also centralizing IT, HR, and procurement functions, which has
helped us avoid costs in the past and has positioned us to
drive efficiencies in the future.
We are proud of the digitization successes we have achieved
by modernizing our DOL websites to positively impact workers,
employers, and the American public. For example, we developed
apprenticeship.gov, a one-stop-shop website to bring together
educators, employers, and job seekers to easily search for over
24,000 apprenticeship opportunities across the Nation.
And as referenced earlier, the temp labor certification
process, DOL created a completely digital electronic boarding
pass mechanism. By developing the system, we were able to
reduce processing times and the need for manual printing and
shipping.
The Department of Labor continued to move forward with its
modernization efforts and has been successful in large part due
to the funding mechanisms that Congress has enacted and
supported. In fact, we are grateful to have received TMF
funding for our enterprise data modernization initiative. This
marks the second TMF award for DOL.
Thank you for your time today and your continued support to
FITARA--for FITARA and IT modernization efforts. I look back--I
look forward to answering any of your questions.
I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Ahluwalia, and you're a pro.
You had, like, 49 seconds to go. So, thank you.
Mr. Mahanand, you are now recognized for your five-minute
summation of item.

STATEMENT OF JAY MAHANAND, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Mahanand. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today. I'm grateful for the committee's support, and
I'm pleased to have this opportunity to discuss USAID's
progress in complying with the standards set out in FITARA.
The global pandemic changed how we work, how we live, and
how we interact with each other. For USAID and its people,
responding to these global health crises is at the core of our
mission. We have a longstanding history of dealing with
emerging threats and global health security such as Ebola and
now COVID-19. Because of this rich history, we were able to
rapidly virtualize USAID's work force and leverage our
leadership in cloud technology to lessen the impact on the
agency's most valuable asset: its people.
USAID global IT infrastructure plays a critical role in
enabling and enhancing every aspect of the Agency's mission.
Our 12,000-plus people in more than 120 countries, often under
the most difficult circumstances where communication
capabilities are severely limited, they depend on our cloud-
based architecture to successful perform USAID's critical work.
Because of this, we're an organization that relies on cloud
services and solutions that enable data-driven decisions and
maximize the impact of those efforts.
Now more than ever, reliable and secure and effective
information technology systems and services are essential to
USAID achieving its mission. As a global organization that
works in some of the most challenging locations around the
world and given the business demands of how USAID delivers U.S.
foreign assistance on the ground, our overseas staff have been
heavily reliant on modern and mobile IT solutions, even prior
to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The move to a cloud-based email messaging and collaboration
platform back in 2011 significantly and quickly improved USAID
mission delivery. It provided a mobile, on-demand messaging
platform that meets the needs of the Agency's global work
force, improved cost-efficiency, enhanced cybersecurity and
overall functional operational improvements to our IT
environment. As early adopters, our leadership and staff across
the agency are accustomed to working in a cloud environment,
leveraging the cloud to underpin our communication, security,
data, and development backgrounds.
Today USAID is 100 percent cloud-based with no legacy
systems.
Given all that has transpired this past year, I think about
where USAID was 10-plus years ago, where we are today, and what
has helped us get here. Although our journey to the cloud began
before FITARA and the Scorecards, the impact and benefits we
have realized by its creation and evolution has significantly
aided our journey. FITARA has served as a cornerstone for
establishing, measuring, and helping advance critical IT
programs for CIOs across the government. Our USAID's
legislation has underpinned our success in aligning the people,
processes, and technology needed to balance innovation with
compliance, mission needs, costs, and evolving threats. It has
also provided an opportunity to have a collaborative dialog
with OMB, GAO, the committee, and Congress, working together to
improve how agencies implement FITARA.
Although agencies will continue to face significant IT
challenges and risks, this past year has shown the true
benefits of a modernized, agile, innovative IT organization
particularly during a global crisis. Aside from the technology
challenges and moving thousands of employees to full-time
telework overnight, the pandemic also ushered a new, more
sophisticated way of cyber-attacks. As we have seen recently in
the Solar Winds and Microsoft Exchange breaches, the threats
are growing more pervasive, sophisticated, and damaging to both
government and private sector organizations. As these threats
become more advanced, the need for the Federal Government to
further enhance its cybersecurity posture and better understand
the various supply chains continue to grow.
Over the past year USAID has expanded its effort to
leverage state-of-the-art technology, such as AI and RPA, to
help the Agency realize the full potential within its many data
sources. Each project represents a significant investment USAID
is making in innovation tools and platforms that will continue
to help secure our network and data globally and help us keep
pace with the Agency ever-changing technology and information
needs.
USAID looks forward to the continued benefits the Scorecard
and its measurement provide to Federal CIOs. Having consistent
IT priorities across all agencies enhances mission outcome and
provides a roadmap of technology investment that maximizes
taxpayer dollars.
I would like to thank the Members of Congress, members of
this subcommittee in particular, for your continued leadership,
interest in, and support of our work. USAID looks forward to
collaborating with you to address future challenges and new
opportunities for reform.
Thank you for your time. I welcome your question.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Thank you. And you had 30 seconds
left. So, thank you.
I will say to you, Mr. Mahanand, a little piece of history
you may not know. In 1979, when I got out of the graduate
school, I was a Presidential management intern and I was
offered a job at AID to help translate IT and policy. In that
time cell phones didn't exist. The Internet didn't exist.
Social media didn't exist. PCs didn't exist. It was a very
primitive time. But can you imagine how history might have been
different for you and me and my colleagues in this committee
had I taken that job? Anyway, I'm glad you're there.
Mr. Walsh, welcome again, and you are recognized for five
minutes for summation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN WALSH, DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
AND CYBERSECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Walsh. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting GAO to testify on
this important issue today.
To begin, I'd like to share one of my favorite Scorecard-
related quotes from the chairman who has repeatedly said that
the Scorecard is not intended to be a scarlet letter. Rather it
is intended to start a conversation and to make sure that CIOs
are part of that conversation. Regardless of the letter grades
on the Scorecard itself, I think that elevation of our agency
CIOs may be the most impactful effect of the committee's
oversight. So, thanks to you and to your staff for your
continued contributions to and oversight of Federal IT. Your
persistent, thorough, and bipartisan oversight has changed the
way the government manages its technology.
Here are some key highlights of the progress that we have
seen. Major increases in the authority for the five CIOs that
now directly report to the agency header deputy; minor, but no
less important, increases in the authority and influence of all
CIOs, largely due to the attention the Scorecard has brought to
the role; and better management of agencies' IT portfolios to
the tune of $22.8 billion saved.
As the chairman noted, the most recent 11 Scorecard
introduced two significant changes. First, the committee sunset
the area related to software licenses. When the committee added
this area in 2017, there were just two agencies that were using
comprehensive, regularly updated inventories of software
licenses. Now all 24 agencies do, resulting in a number of easy
A grades for the past several Scorecard cycles.
Second, the committee added a new area related to agencies'
efforts to transition off GSA's expiring telecommunications
contracts. This area needs the committee's oversight because
the last time the government went through a similar transition
onto the network's contracts, the government took 33 months
longer than planned. It resulted in $66 million in added costs
and an estimated $329 million in lost savings.
As you might expect, replacing the easy A of software
licenses and the addition of the area on telecommunications
transition put downward pressure on agencies' grades. Despite
this, every agency passed by either receiving a B or a C. That
may not always be the case. Agencies' past wins are no
guarantee of future success, and the Scorecard reflects that.
The Scorecard's continued growth has kept it relevant, and
it will be an important tool for keeping Federal leaders
accountable going forward. For example, the Scorecard could
measure Federal websites' compliance with industry best
practices in conjunction with the IDEA Act. It could also
reward or give a bonus to the usage of the billion dollars
recently received by the Technology Modernization Fund.
However, the Scorecard is only as good as the data behind
it. In that vein, it would be great to see OMB's IT dashboard
reflect more of the government's IT spending. For example,
right now, the dashboard does not include IT spending related
to weapons systems, satellites, or supercomputers. The
government's budding efforts to implement Technology Business
Management, known as TBM, may help in that regard by closely
linking agencies' accounting systems to IT oversight. However,
half measures or an implementation that mimics true TBM will
perpetuate the underreporting of IT spending.
I should also note that the Scorecard is not a panacea.
There are many critically important topics that are difficult
to implement and grade and address: for example, measures of
how well an agency serves the citizens, an agency's human
capital skills and gaps, or even the IT acquisition cadres and
strategic sourcing required under FITARA. Metrics on softer
topics such as these are incredibly difficult to measure. How
well has USAID's technology served our farmers or the IT and
IRS our taxpayers? Has the DOD protected our citizens enough?
These gaps also stress the significance of the work done by
public servants who, regardless of the Scorecard's grades, do
incredible work. These gaps in coverage also underscore the
importance of having trusted, competent IT leaders and ensuring
that they are a part of conversation.
To that end, I look forward to our continued conversations
and the improvement of IT oversight. This concludes my
comments, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Walsh, also, 30 seconds.
I mean, we've got three stars this morning, Mr. Hice.
The chair now recognizes the distinguished Congresswoman
from the District of Columbia, Eleanor Holmes Norton, for five
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Chairman
Connolly, I very much appreciate these periodic hearings.
My first question is for Mr. Walsh. The Federal Government
currently invests about $90 billion annually in IT. Now what
troubles me is that a third of the funding dedicated is for
maintaining legacy systems. And so, what we're finding is that,
as the amount of dedicated funds to IT operations and
maintenance increases each year, the investments in the
innovative IT projects decline.
So, Mr. Walsh, my question to you is, how do the current
budgeting and appropriations cycles--and we understand that's
done on an annual basis--impede agencies' ability for investing
in critical IT projects, especially ones that concern me, that
seek to replace legacy systems? Is there anything we can do
about it?
Mr. Walsh. So, the annual appropriations process----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Walsh, I am going to--you are soft-
spoken. If you would move that as close to you as possible,
thank you so much.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you, chairman.
So, the annual appropriations process certainly does not
help our efforts to modernize Federal IT. Having to save up
multiple years to address a critical need is not currently
possible. The MGT Act a few years ago attempted to address that
by allowing agencies to save money in a Working Capital Fund
and use the savings to address cybersecurity and modernization
needs. So, I think that's a good step forward. However, the MGT
Act did include a critical flaw that has prevented many
agencies from fully taking advantage of those flexibilities.
Ms. Norton. I can see that the problem's in the Congress.
Mr. Walsh, several of the agencies have said that the
reimbursement model itself is cumbersome, especially for IT
projects that are critical to the mission but might not realize
costs. What other considerations should Congress, and the
administration take into account, other than projects that
realize hard costs?
Mr. Walsh. So, as you correctly note, there are many, many,
many things that we should consider when modernizing legacy
systems. In particular, the functionality is very important.
But there are also very, very old systems that cannot be
modernized. For example, we wouldn't want to modernize the
Voyager space probe's ground systems. We can't modernize the
Voyager. It's out past the edge of the solar system at this
point.
But the cost and the functionality are crucial, and in many
cases, modernizing systems cannot result in cost savings. The
new systems that we're using right now in the cloud have a lot
better capabilities. They have a lot better security than some
of these very, very old systems.
So, you correctly note that, in many cases, we may not save
costs doing modernization, but it would be better for the
services of our taxpayers to do so.
Ms. Norton. Thank you.
Finally, Mr. Mahanand, could you talk about your experience
with establishing an IT capital fund at USAID?
Mr. Mahanand. So, that has been an ongoing issue for the
last three years for us. We've actually worked very close to
OMB, our examiner and senior level, senior leadership within
the agency. They are all very supportive as far as getting--
putting the language together and getting us to at least get it
into the President's request, but as far as what happened
there, we're not necessarily sure. We actually included it in
the 2019, 2020, and 2021 budget requests. But it never made it
into any of the appropriations.
Ms. Norton. My time is close to expire. I had another
question.
But thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. If you have one more question, Ms. Norton,
you're free to ask it.
Ms. Norton. Yes. Mr. Ahluwalia, how can technology, the
Technology Management Fund, which was established by the
Modernizing Government Technology Act, which received $1
billion, and the American Rescue Plan, has that helped the
Department of Labor accelerate certain IT modernization
projects?
Mr. Ahluwalia. Thank you, Congresswoman. So, I'll try to be
really very quick here.
We are one of the few agencies who has received two TMF
awards from that board, and it is a toolset that we use in
conjunction with our appropriations Working Capital Fund
authorities to resource and modernize technologies. I am very
proud of one of recent temp worker program. The visa requires a
labor certificate from DOL that used to be printed on a
currency-like paper, and I shudder to think what would have
happened to that printing operation during COVID-19.
Fortunately, this January, in part due to the TMF funding, we
were able to completely digitize that process and shut down the
printing operations, which has now resulted in a $2 million
savings that will be returned to the fund.
I do agree with my colleague, Kevin Walsh. Not every--when
you replace a bicycle with a motor car, will it result in
savings? The motor car will require sometimes more to maintain,
but it takes you farther and faster. So, that construct has to
be considered in the future mechanisms when the DMF awards are
made.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Ms. Norton.
The chair now recognizes the distinguish ranking member,
Mr. Hice, for five minutes of questions.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, the challenge of any effort like FITARA at the end of
the day is to prevent it from going stale. I think, when we are
trying to ensure Federal IT funding is spent well, the most
obvious question is whether there are metrics to determine
whether or not that money is spent well and how we gauge it.
So, let me start with this train of thought.
Mr. Walsh--and we spoke a little bit about this before the
hearing this morning. But given the fact that this is the 11th
iteration of the Scorecard, what changes perhaps need to be
considered by the committee to deal with the metrics to make
sure we're being effective?
Mr. Walsh. So, to the Scorecard's credit and to the
committee's credit, it has changed in every single iteration
since the second. Every single time the committee has made
sometimes minor but important tweaks to improve this Scorecard.
This most recent 11 Scorecard is an excellent example of some
of the changes that can be made with the sunsetting of the
software licensing and the adding of EIS. So, it's a credit to
the committee that this Scorecard continues to evolve and
change.
To get closer to how to evaluate the efficacy of how the
government is spending our money is a very, very difficult
concept, sir. I think the Scorecard is helping move us in that
direction, but measuring how good an agency is at delivering
its mission or meeting its mission is something that we in the
GAO and Congress have struggled with for quite a long time.
Mr. Hice. Well, is there any way we can quantify the return
on investment through 11 scorecards so far?
Mr. Walsh. So, the $22.8 billion that have been saved or
avoided as a result of the PortfolioStat initiative is one
very, very large metric we can use to measure ourselves. The
increases in CIO authorities are also important but harder to
quantify.
Mr. Hice. I would like to see more of that on a page, like,
how do we really know there's this much savings, and where is
that savings coming from?
You mentioned in your opening statement the Solar Winds and
several--a couple of our witnesses did. Again, the metrics of
something like solar wind in the Scorecard, how do we develop
that to better equip Congress to recognize problems and deal
with problems before they happen?
Mr. Walsh. So, part of the challenge when deliberating with
you folks on how to come up with these metrics is what data are
currently available. Especially in the case of supply chains,
we want to be careful not to utilize nonpublic data. We don't
want to put a target on any agency's head that's not already
there. I agree that supply chain management and the risks
associated are critically important to cybersecurity and our
government's operations, and we would love to work to explore
further metrics that we can use to measure that. I think a note
of caution is warranted though with things as secure and
sensitive as that.
Mr. Hice. Let me cast that question over to Mr. Mahanand
and Mr. Ahluwalia. As it relates to the cyber issue, the cyber-
attacks, No. 1, I guess, what keeps you both up at night? And
what can we do on this thing and on our side as it relates to
the Scorecard to better assess where we are on the cyber-attack
concern?
Mr. Mahanand?
Mr. Mahanand. Yes. So, I think we're on a good path here.
If you actually look at the cybersecurity metrics that you have
on the Scorecard, half of it is about cross-agency priority
goals, which is something that the agency--the Federal
Government can decide, know exactly how they want to measure
that. But the other part of that is really it comes from the
audit of your system or the audit of your network. And as far
as that audit is concerned, it does take a close look at really
the controls that you have in place in terms of your systems.
And it gets to whether, you know, you are doing well in
cybersecurity, where you're actually monitoring and managing
it, or you're not doing so well in it.
I think that's a really good start because in the new
version of the kind of the audit document here, they're going
to be looking at supply chain controls for the next, you know,
assessment period here. So, I would think that, as far as the
metric is concerned, I think it's a good place to start. You
can also incorporate more into that as far as the cross-agency
goals or as far as the audit is concerned.
But this is something that I know it is becoming more
visible. I just think this year the audit is possibly going to
be looking at supply chain and controls the agency may have in
place. So, I think you will get some better, you know, better
data when the audit is complete or the next Scorecard is put
out.
Mr. Hice. OK. Mr. Ahluwalia--I'm sorry--if you could
provide us an answer with that, I'm really curious. I mean, you
are among our experts, and I'm curious how we can be better
informed as Congress when it comes to the cyber threat. So, if
you could provide an answerfor us in the next week or so, I
would appreciate that.
Mr. Ahluwalia. Happy to do that, Congressman Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the ranking member.
The chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
Mr. Walsh, what is a legacy system?
Mr. Walsh. So, legacy means many things to many different
people.
Mr. Connolly. I have got to hear you. You have got to speak
up.
Mr. Walsh. Legacy means many things to many people, sir. I
think probably one of the better definitions is something that
is no longer vendor supported, whether that be hardware or
software. So, if the vendor's not supporting it, if we're not
able to easily maintain it, I think that's an easy definition
of a legacy system. Similarly, you could say something along
the lines of what DOD does, that a legacy system is a system
that no longer meets its mission needs. So----
Mr. Connolly. Are we concerned that, under either of those
definitions, legacy systems cannot be encrypted to protect from
cyber hacking, cyber attacks?
Mr. Walsh. Absolutely, sir. And I think that's one of the
things we saw at OPM when they had that breach a few years ago.
One of the things that came out of that was we heard that OPM
was not able to encrypt the data that was on the servers at
rest because of the age of the systems.
Mr. Connolly. I think that's a pretty critical point to be
emphasized.
Are agencies required, Mr. Walsh, to have a plan to retire
or upgrade legacy systems?
Mr. Walsh. So, we did work on this a few years ago, sir,
and we looked at the most important and the most critical
systems in the government to be retired, and we found that in
many cases not only were they not required but they did not
have plans and those plans did not include things like a
description of the work to be done, milestones, or a plan, most
importantly, to turn off the legacy system that they're
retiring.
Mr. Connolly. From GAO's points of view, think, putting on
your high-risk category hat, would it be helpful if, in fact,
they were required to have such a plan?
Mr. Walsh. I think we should absolutely be thinking about
the oldest systems in need of modernization and have some form
of plan going forward on how to either turn it off or get it to
a more secure space.
Mr. Connolly. Has GAO done any kind of cost estimate? On
just, you know, spit-balling, if we were to have by fiat all
legacy systems need to be replaced and you need to have a plan
to do that, what would it cost across the 24 Federal agencies
we're looking at?
Mr. Walsh. We have not done that work, sadly, sir. We did
have some case studies in our report that looked at some of the
most important, for example, one of the top 10 was--and we did
not name these systems but it was at the IRS. IRS spent $10
million per year to operate and maintain the system, and their
estimate on how much it would cost to modernize the system was
$1 billion.
Mr. Connolly. Billion.
Mr. Walsh. Billion.
Mr. Connolly. With a ``B.''
Mr. Walsh. So, to Mr. Hice's earlier comments, the return
on investment there would be somewhat dubious.
Mr. Connolly. Well, yes, although every dollar you're
invested in the IRS has a return on it. It's not a sunk cost.
Mr. Walsh. Absolutely. You've got the $40 billion that----
Mr. Connolly. By the way, that's true for your agency as
well. We get a return on our investments with you and your
colleagues at GAO. So, we have to think it in those terms, too.
And as you pointed out, then there are the sort of imponderable
or indecipherables. But they're still so important, right, like
quality of service to the American people. That kind of
matters, too.
Let me ask about CIOs. How, from GAO's point of view, when
you're looking at the Scorecard, how much progress are we
making or not making in having a premier CIO report directly to
the boss?
Mr. Walsh. So, since this first Scorecard, we now have five
more CIOs that directly report to the boss. We also have seen
incremental progress elsewhere. It's a lot harder to measure
which CIOs have a seat at the table that they did not
previously have, but those five CIOs having reporting authority
I think is the most important metric there.
Mr. Connolly. We've had--have we had some backsliding in
that regard?
Mr. Walsh. To the best of my knowledge, I am not aware of
any agencies that are backsliding I think in large part due to
the attention brought by this committee.
Mr. Connolly. I mean, you know, if you look at the private
sector, I can't think of many successful companies where the
CIO does not directly report to the CEO and even dotted-line
relationships in the organizational chart don't count, and
we've got to evolve to a system where the CIO, because if we
really mean it about fundamental changes in IT modernization,
in order to undergird the mission, we've got to have a CIO
who's empowered. And the best way in a bureaucracy to empower
somebody is to make sure everyone can see that person reports
to the boss.
Mr. Walsh. Absolutely, sir. It's hard to imagine a company
these days that does not have IT-involved core to its mission.
Similarly, it's hard to imagine a government agency that does
not have IT contributing critical amounts to its mission.
Mr. Connolly. And final question in this round, we just got
$1 billion for the Technology Management Fund, which is not
what we wanted or what President Biden wanted. But it's
certainly a huge quantum leap from what was appropriated at $25
million. Do you believe that that $1 billion will be a
significant catalyst to incentivize agencies to make the
investments we're talking about including the return of legacy
systems?
Mr. Walsh. So, previously the fund was receiving $25
million per year, as you noted. Getting $1 billion in a year is
going to allow them to explore projects that were previously
outside of their ability. They didn't have the money to address
some of these most critical needs. So, I think it will be
important. The challenge is going to be ramping up that team
that manages the TMF to make sure that they have the expertise
necessary to oversee these projects.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, I also think we're going to have to have
clear criteria soon because the expectations are really high
about this. We're going to have to have criteria soon from OMB
in terms of how that fund could be used and how it should be
used. And we're going to hope GAO is monitoring that carefully
so that if there are real-time issues, we can try to address
those in real time rather than retrospectively because then the
damage is done.
Mr. Hice, who is to be recognized?
Mr. Keller is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Chairman Connolly. And thank you to
the witnesses for taking time to be here today.
The pace of government often lags behind that of the
private sector, and the process of technology acquisition is no
exception. As agencies struggle to keep up with current
technology, Federal acquisitions often overshoot their targeted
time and cost estimates. Along with ensuring cybersecurity and
transparency, the Scorecard should measure how effectively an
agency is purchasing and utilizing new technology. My time in
private industry, our mentality was that the team I worked with
could not improve unless we knew exactly how well we were
performing and what targets we were hitting. The same should go
for Federal agencies.
The question I have is for all the panelists here today.
Part of Congress' job is ensuring Americans get the most out of
their tax dollars. How does FITARA achieve this end? And are
they--and are there any modifications to FITARA that would help
us better capture this metric? And that could be for anybody.
Maybe all the panelists can give me a little bit of explanation
of what they think.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Keller, without prejudice to your time,
are you asking modifications to the Scorecard or to the
underlying legislation itself?
Ms. Kelly. The Scorecard.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Ahluwalia. So, I'll go first. This is Gundeep. I'm the
CIO for the Department of Labor.
I think the ability to use various types of resources is,
that span across multiple years is an important mechanism and a
differentiator in the way government and the private sector
works. So, I look back at my private sector years and on what
the differences are. One is these projects are multiyear, and
we try--and we don't have the visibility for the resources on
that. Having a clear plan that has outcomes not about moving to
the cloud or about taking software out--those are important as
well--but having outcomes like I will remove paper from a labor
certification process or digitize it completely or I'll reduce
the number of--reduce the number of days that it takes for a
person to consume its service from the government, or I will
make it mobile friendly like the private sector. You can go to
Amazon and sort of have that shopping experience and that kind
of customer experience.
Those are the metrics that we focus on to bringing the
services that we render to our constituents at par with the
private sector. And a focus on that, managing resources as a
multiyear resource and with a strategy to execute to, those are
the key ingredients that I remember worked in the private
sector and would work in the public sector as well.
Mr. Keller. So, as far as modifications to FITARA that
would better capture the metric, I understand how we want to do
it better. But, again, any other thoughts from the other
witnesses?
Mr. Mahanand. This is Jay Mahanand, USAID CIO.
So we--as you can--from my testimony, you can see we've
actually moved quite a bit of innovative technologies, you
know, that we've implemented or started. For instance, really
looking at, you know, how we can get started, I think that's
the key to anything we do. But whether or not a technology is
viable for an organization, that's something to be said and
something we need to go through.
For us, we're--an example is that we're very intensive when
it comes to data and so, you know, questions in terms of all of
the data that we have, what do we do with it, and how do we
make it--you know, how do we use technology to actually
innovate and be able to get answers on the raw data there. So,
for us, it's really just taking, you know, some time off and
basically create a pilot, some use cases, initiate those use
cases with the technology that we have, and try to validate
whether or not that is something we can go.
But for us is that, given the fact we don't get a large
amount of money, we simply use, you know, kind of the
prototyping to kind of make a determination whether or not the
technology would work for us. And so we've been pretty
successful because if we can show the agency that, hey, this
provides or brings value into the organization, then there's
always funding that is, you know, that would be subsequently,
you know, coming for that specific technology.
So, I think that's how we do it internally because we
always look at something. And even I mentioned, you know,
robotic process automation, in terms of efficiency that it
gains because, you know, there's quite a bit of just manual
process we have in agencies. We talked about doing more for
less. That is the way that we see things and how we would
actually get things started. Technology has been in place. But
we need, you know, the people, processes, and technology all to
work together. So, we pilot certain things to make sure that
there's an appetite for those types of technology in the agency
because there's an adoption. There's also change-manage-related
issues to bringing technologies in place as well.
So, it's a complex discipline in terms of how you would
measure that. You know, for me, kind of getting back to, you
know, some of the comments that were made, you know,
specifically when it comes to, you know, ROIs and, you know,
getting money to actually make a determination of how
technology would be used, the TMF is a good example of that. We
kind of--it has been mentioned that, you know, for us, we
actually made proposals in the TMF for a couple of--we would
say innovation, and we got declined for that because it was
more--not necessarily a modernization but also it was toward
innovation.
So, I think, on the TMF, my two cents is also not look just
at modernization but, getting to your point, really is take a
look where agencies can use that money to innovate and be
better at that.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. I see I'm out of time, so I yield
back.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Keller, I will certainly entertain Mr.
Walsh if he wishes to respond to your question before you yield
back.
Mr. Walsh. Sir, one of the ways that we could perhaps
better measure how we are serving the citizens is how well
their websites, which, you know, is the prime portal that
people interact with, citizens, are compliant with best
practices, are enforcing privacy metrics. So, that is something
that we would love to explore with the committee and look
forward to doing so.
Mr. Keller. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Keller, we can talk to you offline,
but I believe we have some legislation that actually addresses
trying to upgrade websites and make sure they're user-friendly
and that they're ranked and reviewed. So, that's absolutely--
because that's the portal for most citizens to the government,
at least electronically.
Mr. Hice, is Mr. Biggs the next one? Yes. Mr. Biggs is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for being here today, for sharing their perspectives
on this critically important topic.
Like many of my colleagues, I was especially disturbed by
the early 2020 Solar Winds hack, which left nearly 20,000
entities vulnerable to data breaches, including the Departments
of Defense, State, Energy, Justice, and Treasury in the public
sector, and Microsoft, Cisco, and FireEye in the private
sector. Amazingly, that attack happened over the course of more
than a year, which showed a chilling level of patience and
discipline.
So, my first question--and it's for each member of the
panel--is this: How confident are you that we are better
protected from a drawn-out, solar-wind-style attack now than we
were in early 2020?
And I'll start with you, Mr. Walsh.
Mr. Walsh. So, we had a remarkably timed report at the same
time as the Solar Winds hack, GAO 21-171, which looked at
agencies' implementation of supply chain risk management.
We looked at seven key practices identified by NIST
guidance that attempted to help agencies manage those risks. We
found that only nine agencies had done any of those seven. So,
to your point, sir, I think we should be very concerned.
Mr. Biggs. Please, the other panelists, please respond as
well. Thank you, Mr. Walsh.
Mr. Ahluwalia. So, at Labor----
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend just yield for one second and
without prejudice to----
Mr. Biggs. Yes. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Just to followup on that. Could it have been
avoided? I mean, you said we need to be very concerned. Well--
but could we have stopped it, done something about it?
Mr. Walsh. So, one of the seven practices that we
identified is helping to detect problematic items in your
supply chain. But, backing up it even further than that, part
of the issue is knowing what your supply chains are.
There are many agencies that don't fully know what their
supply chain, not only of the hardware but also of the
software, is. So, I think could we have prevented it? Probably
not at that time. It's disappointing as well that it took so
long to detect it. So, it's very, very concerning, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you for yielding.
Mr. Biggs. You bet, Mr. Chairman.
And I--just so you know, Mr. Chairman, I intend--if there
is time, I want to followup with what's happening now and the
steps that are being taken.
So, would the other panelists please respond.
Mr. Ahluwalia. So, at Labor, just like other departments,
we take the cybersecurity very seriously. I think the DHS'
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program, the CDM program,
has had significant impact and probably protected us from that
breach when it happened.
We've implemented a 24/7 SOC. We are meeting--and
implemented newer technology as well.
I completely agree with my fellow panel members here, as
well as the committee, that the supply chain risk remains one
of the largest risks that is there to the entire U.S. economy,
in the private sector as well as public sector.
From the public sector perspective, it is my thinking that
there are some steps that can be taken in individual
departments. For example, understanding what our supply chain
means, adding language to our contracts, and things of that
nature.
But then a more comprehensive approach, looking at the CDM
success, I think can be led by DHS. That crosscuts and protects
the entire government apparatus rather than piecemealing it at
each department at a time.
So, I think there is a combination of a strategy where some
steps need to be taken locally within the departments, and then
a comprehensive CISA-, DHS-led strategy to protect our
apparatus would be the biggest bang for the buck, Congressman.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. And then our last panelist, if you
could please be brief because I want to get back to what are we
doing now, how are we going to get----
Mr. Mahanand. Yes. So, just to--the one thing that we need
to realize is that this is a cost application that was
vulnerable, right? And so one of the things that we really need
to look at is the supply chain. But, also, how do we extend
some of the cybersecurity measures to these specific vendors?
And it's something that we need to think about.
I know DOD is looking at the cybersecurity certification
for vendors, but that is something within the Federal space we
know--we have risk-management frameworks. We have cybersecurity
frameworks. We have everything to protect our systems in C.
The ability to, you know, implement zero-trust--zero-trust
architecture is something that we are all looking to do. But
the point still goes back to we still need to do something with
the vendors to make sure that there is some sort of
certification that they also validate the supply chain.
Thank you.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
Mr. Walsh, would you please respond to the followup
question, which is where are we going----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Biggs, if you had a brief followup,
you're recognized for that.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Walsh, if you'd just go to the followup, which is where
are we going from here?
Mr. Walsh. Sure. So, I think the best practices that we can
implement are detailed in the report I cited earlier, which is,
as Mr. Mahanand said, getting some idea of what our supply
chains are and working closely with the vendors to make sure
that we are securing them.
Having executive oversight is also very critical. But, to
sound an alert on where we are now, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency has issued multiple alerts over
the past several months citing similar things happening with,
for example, Microsoft Exchange, or even our critical
infrastructure--the water, power plants, and the like--which
were vulnerable to attacks.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Walsh.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I hope that, in the
future, we might have an additional time where we can actually
expand on this particular topic even further.
Mr. Connolly. Absolutely. Be glad to work with you on that,
especially, frankly, the--Mr. Walsh's insight in terms of
supply chain. I think that's really--we need to understand that
more than the phrase, right? Like, are we talking hundreds of
parts? Because, if that's the case, no wonder somebody could
penetrate, because----
Mr. Biggs. Right.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. how are we monitoring all that.
What are the mechanisms for monitoring all of that?
Mr. Walsh. Sir, it's not only the parts, but it's also the
software. Every single piece of cloud software that we have
installed on the network is potentially----
Mr. Connolly. No, no. I'm including that in the supply
chain. And, I mean, when I heard that, it--my ears perked up.
So, we'll followup on that, Mr. Biggs, with you. Thank you so
much.
We're joined by the vice chairwoman of the subcommittee,
the gentlelady--and I know it's early out there in California,
so thank you so much for joining us so early. Ms. Porter is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you very much, Chair.
Mr. Walsh, can you briefly tell the committee what a data
center is?
Mr. Walsh. So, currently, OMB defines a data center in two
different tiers. A tiered data center is essentially something
that you probably picture when you hear the word data center.
It was purpose built. It has uninterruptible power supply,
cooling solutions, and the like.
There is also what OMB categorizes as a nontiered data
center, which are getting less attention, but those are things
like servers in smaller rooms that were not purpose built but
are still important vectors of bad actors trying to get into
our agencies.
Ms. Porter. I understand that there is a data center
operation initiative. What is it meant to do exactly?
Mr. Walsh. So, the data center optimization initiative is
intended to help our data centers, the big ones that already
exist not only consolidate but get better. So, we want them to
utilize more of their capacity. We want them to run on more
modern hardware, which can save us operational costs, and make
sure that we're best using the tools that we have available to
serve our citizens.
Mr. Connolly. Could I interrupt one second, Ms. Porter----
Ms. Porter. Of course, sir.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. on that point? I want to stress
the law, FITARA, refers to data center consolidation. It does
not refer to optimization, a phrase that was invented by OMB
and OPM that we were--this subcommittee, on a bipartisan basis,
was concerned could be used to actually circumvent the
requirement of the law.
And, Mr. Walsh, before Ms.--without prejudice to Ms.
Porter's time, could you just address that because that remains
a concern of this subcommittee. The law must be complied with,
and the law says consolidation, not optimization.
Mr. Walsh. Absolutely, sir. And I think my fellow witnesses
here might be able to serve very well in terms of what the
current state of their data centers are, how many they have
left. But you are absolutely correct. The law says
consolidation, and we still want to see agencies closing and
consolidating those data centers. We don't want empty data
centers.
Mr. Connolly. Right. So, in response to Ms. Porter's
question about what is this optimization initiative, that is
what? In addition to the requirement of the law?
Mr. Walsh. Sir, the law is the law.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I know that.
Mr. Walsh. Yes. So, OMB's data center optimization
initiative, yes, it is in addition to FITARA.
Mr. Connolly. OK. It's in addition to.
Thank you, Ms. Porter. I wanted to clarify that.
Ms. Porter. Absolutely. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
So, in the past, the GAO has testified before this
committee that data consolidation not only protects us from
cyber-attacks, but it also decreases cost to taxpayers. In
fact, Mr. Ahluwalia--I'm going to mess up his name--Ahluwalia.
How did I do? Slow.
Mr. Ahluwalia. Excellent, Congresswoman.
Ms. Porter. In fact, Mr. Ahluwalia, how much has the
Department of Labor realized in cost savings through closing 73
data centers?
Mr. Ahluwalia. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I think this is one of the bright spots of our portfolio
and how we have been able to realize savings. Over the last few
years, we have been able to close down 73 of these data
centers, and despite what the regulations are and the current
initiative status is, we are tracking every tiered and
nontiered data center. We have saved around 70-plus million
dollars, to answer your question directly.
Ms. Porter. Thank you. So, you were able to save over $70
million and able to reduce office space, consolidate contracts
and services, cut duplicative costs.
Mr. Walsh, do you know how much agencies in total have
saved because of the initiative?
Mr. Walsh. I do not have the numbers at hand. It is in the
order of billions of dollars.
Ms. Porter. What I have is total of about $7.1 billion in
savings, either cost savings or cost avoidance, for fiscal
years 2012 through 2020. Clearly, this metric has prompted some
pretty big savings for taxpayers.
But, in June 2019, the day before the FITARA 8.0 hearing,
the OMB issued guidance updating the data center initiative.
They redefined and narrowed the definition of a data center in
a way that, according to the GAO, eliminated the reporting of
over 2,000 facilities governmentwide.
So, Mr. Walsh, if we leave out more than 2,000 facilities,
we're missing out the evaluation and potential, you know,
improvement and cost savings of all of those facilities through
this effort. Isn't that right?
Mr. Walsh. That is correct.
And to Mr. Ahluwalia's point earlier, he mentioned that
they are tracking not only the tiered but also the nontiered
data centers. Tracking the nontiered data centers, those are
the ones that fell off. That's the 2,000 that you mentioned
there. So, it's, in a sense, the----
Ms. Porter. And those are those smaller ones that weren't
necessarily intended to be data centers, those nontiered ones.
This could open us up to cyber-attacks, couldn't it?
Mr. Walsh. That is correct. And we have encouraged the OMB
and the agencies to continue their tracking of these nontiered
data centers.
Ms. Porter. That's potentially wasting taxpayer dollars,
because we're not evaluating these nontiered data centers for
potential consolidation or optimization?
Mr. Walsh. That is correct. And to help put a face to the
name, some of these smaller data centers include things like
FAA's air traffic control centers or large medical machinery
that has basically supercomputers built into it.
Ms. Porter. I'm pretty concerned about those things, FAA
data and medical data.
Thank you very much, Mr. Walsh.
At every hearing since OMB issued this rule, members of
this subcommittee have brought up the data center definition
issue. It seems from these hearings that OMB thinks it's
following appropriate private-sector best practices. And GAO
thinks that we're exposing cyber insecurities.
Has GAO been working with OMB to ensure Federal agencies
are not turning a blind eye to potential cybersecurity risks or
wasting tax dollars?
Mr. Walsh. So, we do correspond very closely with OMB. We
work with them as best as able. So, we try. And we do have
annual reporting requirements----
Ms. Porter. Mr. Walsh, are they listening to you, or are
they ignoring you?
Mr. Walsh. I would say it's a push-pull. We work as
collaboratively as we can, but sometimes it does feel like it's
more of us talking and them not listening.
Ms. Porter. But I get the sense, Mr. Walsh, that you're
doing the pushing and the pulling, and they're doing the
resisting. Is that an incorrect takeaway?
Mr. Walsh. So, there are times that we have worked very
collaboratively, and I do not want to disrespect OMB or the
good work they do. But, on certain issues, we don't always see
eye to eye, so I think you're correct.
Ms. Porter. Are they currently--with the GAO in its
professional opinion--again, respecting the mission of OMB and
the work that they do, is OMB in compliance with FITARA?
Mr. Walsh. So, I hesitate to come out with an official GAO
opinion on this just because, right now, with the
administration change, we have not yet seen how they are going
to treat this issue.
Ms. Porter. OK. Well, I look forward to finding out what
you find in the post-administration change.
So, I think we're really right that we need to consider
potential solutions, not just letting you do the investigation
under the new OMB management, but I also support a potential
legislative fix if OMB continues to not follow through. If
they're not following the statute or they're defying
congressional intent, then I think we need to consider
legislation or even enforcement action.
Thank you very much for sharing your expertise with the
committee today.
I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Porter. And I love your spirit
because I feel the same way.
You don't get to come into compliance with FITARA by
redefining what a data center is, and you don't get to come
into compliance by actually substituting a word in the law with
another one that suits your purposes better and gets you off
the hook.
And we are going to insist on compliance with the law. And,
if we have to--as Ms. Porter suggests, if we have to further
refine legislative language to make it very clear and,
unfortunately, more restrictive, we will.
And we certainly will back up your efforts, Mr. Walsh, and
those of your colleagues to insist on compliance. Let there be
no doubt about that.
We are joined by the distinguished ranking member of the
full committee, Mr. Comer. Mr. Comer, welcome. You're
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a couple of questions for Mr. Mahanand and Mr.
Ahluwalia. I mispronounced that. But since most people now
experience government through digital interactions, an agency's
IT system is critical in building citizens' trust in their
government, obviously.
How does your agency measure the digital experience that
you are designing in your IT systems?
Mr. Ahluwalia. So, I can go first, Congressman. Thank you
for the question.
At Labor, the service that we provide to the constituents
that we serve is extremely important for us. So, the--one of
the discussions earlier was around IDEA Act and compliance with
it. We have taken that--the implementation of that act very,
very seriously.
We developed a one-web initiative, where we have instituted
the responsive design parameters that the private sector uses,
and also made all our websites mobile friendly and accessible
for the general public. The mobility as well as the user-
centric design of these are in compliance with the IDEA Act and
at par with the private sector at this point in time.
I will say, with every new project we come up with, we
measure the ease with which customers or consumers or employers
across the Nation are able to consume our services. So, are we
shortening the amount of time taken for the business process to
yield the results of mission outcomes? And those sort of
success measures are in each and every one of our projects.
Mr. Mahanand. So, this is Jay Mahanand from USAID.
So, like Mr. Ahluwalia, we also follow the IDEA's act, but
we take it kind of, you know, a step forward. When I say we are
100 percent cloud enabled, we consider that as kind of the
digital implementation of things that we do for the agency.
The ability for our staff overseas and locally to be able
to get any of the services that they need should be--should be,
you know, accessible to no matter where you are, and so we take
that in terms of the insight in terms of our strategy and
develop that--develop basically our architecture around that.
So it is, you know, something that we take very seriously
given the fact that where we work in. We also have to look at
our challenges of low-bandwidth, you know, areas in different
parts of the world.
And so, when we look at digital technology, we also look
at, you know, cloud services to be associated with that
because, really, that's where the--you know, the rubber meets
the road specifically when it comes to the digitization of, you
know, services.
You know, we take something like digital forms, right? And
so we've looked at DocuSign. And, you know, the ability for us
to not necessarily be in the office to do that is something
that, you know--that we would try to roll out for everything
that we do.
So, it's just looking at what--you know, looking at the
service themselves and seeing what we can actually digitize, or
move it--again, move it to the cloud, where it is more
accessible and then put the security around that.
Mr. Comer. So, what actions do you all take based on
feedback from citizens and employees who use your agency's
online tools?
Mr. Mahanand. So, although it is--so, from--our primary
interaction with users is--and the public is really through our
main website, usaid.gov, and there is a feedback loop from that
website into the agency, and there is a team of folks that
actually look at suggestions that comes in. And, if it's
something that's viable, again, we act on it. But, if it is
something that--you know, we modernize the site just to make
sure that we are able to be everything in the IDEA's act,
right, in terms of all five of those categories.
Mr. Ahluwalia. We have a similar loop, Congressman. We take
these things very seriously. And I'll give you an example. It
was in my testimony earlier as well, the apprenticeship.gov
website that we created.
We went to Job Corps centers. We went to jobs work centers,
employment agencies across various states to figure out what is
needed. We did a user-centric design study, and we continued
that kind of a feedback loop to remain at par with the
experiences these folks are getting with the private sector
tools.
Mr. Comer. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the distinguished ranking member.
In closing, I want to reiterate some of the things we've
heard here today.
We want to make sure there is full compliance with what's
in the law, and nobody gets to sort of redefine that
unilaterally.
Second, we do remain flexible with respect to the
Scorecard, and we will be, as Mr. Hice suggested, remaining
flexible and looking at categories to make sure we're capturing
performance as accurately as we can.
And of course GAO has always been our partner in that
regard, and we thank you, Mr. Walsh, and your colleagues for
that continuing partnership.
And we hope that this kind of hearing--oversight hearing
reinforces your ability to communicate with counterparts in
respective Federal agencies that Congress means it. I can't
think of another example on Capitol Hill for a single piece of
existing legislation that has already had 11, going on 12,
oversight hearings over five or six years on a very bipartisan
basis, you know, to reinforce compliance and implementation.
And so I hope that strengthens your hand as well.
And, you know, our goal is to try to make the Federal
Government more efficient, to save money along the way. And we
have saved a fair amount of money.
We want to followup on Mr. Biggs' question with you about
supply chain vulnerability because I think--I think that might
be the key to helping us better understand what happened and
the how and why. The soft underbelly is the supply chain, and I
think that's a pretty key takeaway from your testimony today,
Mr. Walsh.
And, finally, I would ask--and, if you need a formal
request, I think we'd do it, but I think all of us, on a
bipartisan basis, would like to know, how did IT play a role in
relief efforts--Federal relief efforts, and, for that matter,
even state relief efforts related to Federal policy guidance in
this pandemic?
You know, we look at the Small Business Administration and
its E-Tran system, for example, that got overwhelmed. We look
at the IRS, which had 60 different IT systems, some of which
work well, some of which didn't. And, you know, it had to both
remain the tax collector, audit entity, while also becoming a
benefit delivery entity. And that transition really challenged
IRS in terms of its IT systems.
And then we also, of course, want to followup on legacy IT
and the TMF and how we can best use that to leverage more--the
acceleration of the retirement of legacy systems so that we're
more cyber secure and we're saving taxpayers' money.
So, those are some things, I think, from today's hearing.
I want to thank my partner, Mr. Hice, and Mr. Comer for
your presence here today as well.
One of the hallmarks of this--you know, we don't agree on a
lot of things, but, when it comes to IT modernization, we've
had bipartisan harmony coming out of this subcommittee. And, in
fact, I'm very proud of the fact that the very first bill
passed in the House in this Congress, on January 5, was a bill
coming out of this subcommittee on a bipartisan basis, the
FedRAMP bill, to codify the certification of private entities
wanting to provide cloud services to the Federal Government.
And I thought that was a pretty strong statement about
recognizing and elevating the importance and role of IT, which
GAO first brought to everyone's attention in its high-risk
report. So, we're continuing to try to take it seriously and
push the system to betterment.
I thank my colleagues. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:27 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
