- LESSONS LEARNED: THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S RESPONSE TO THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LESSONS LEARNED: THE FEDERAL
RESERVE'S RESPONSE TO THE
CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CORONAVIRUS CRISIS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 22, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available at: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-368 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Jennifer Gaspar, Select Subcommittee Deputy Staff Director
Beth Mueller, Investigative Counsel
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director

Select Subcommittee On The Coronavirus Crisis

James E. Clyburn, South Carolina, Chairman
Maxine Waters, California            Steve Scalise, Louisiana, Ranking
Carolyn B. Maloney, New York             Minority Member
Nydia M. Velazquez, New York         Jim Jordan, Ohio
Bill Foster, Illinois                Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Nicole Malliotakis, New York
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 22, 2021....................................     1

Witnesses

Jerome Powell, Chair, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Oral Statement...................................................

Written opening statements and the written statements of the
witnesses are available on the U.S. House of Representatives
Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

Questions for the Record: to Mr. Jerome Powell; submitted by
Chairman Clyburn.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

LESSONS LEARNED: THE FEDERAL
RESERVE'S RESPONSE TO THE
CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

----------

Tuesday, June 22, 2021

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:07 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James E. Clyburn
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Clyburn, Waters, Maloney, Foster,
Raskin, Krishnamoorthi, Scalise, Jordan, Green, Malliotakis,
and Miller-Meeks.
Mr. Clyburn. Good afternoon. The committee will come to
order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
I am pleased to welcome Federal Reserve Chair Jerome
Powell.
Thank you for being here today, Chair Powell.
Today's hearing will examine the Fed's response to the
economic crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the current
state of the recovery, and what steps we must take to ensure a
strong, sustainable, and equitable economic future.
The pandemic resulted in the loss of over 22 million jobs.
In March 2020, Congress passed the CARES Act, which allocated
up to $500 billion for emergency lending by the Fed, including
for loans to small and medium-size businesses, as well as
states and municipalities. The lending programs established by
the Fed for these recipients helped prevent some economic
damages but were limited in their effectiveness.
The Fed's Municipal Liquidity Facility sought to provide
much-needed emergency lending to state and local governments,
but the program's restrictions limited its impact at a time
when many states and localities were in dire need. During the
crisis, state and local governments shed 1.5 million jobs, and
there is little evidence that the Municipal Liquidity Facility
saved jobs or led to their return.
The Fed's Main Street Lending Program similarly imposed
restrictions that made its loans unattractive to struggling
businesses and partner banks. Today's hearing will help us
learn from the shortcomings of these programs and the Fed's
efforts to improve its future crisis response capabilities.
The Fed has admirably highlighted the toll of economic
crisis on the American people, and its unequal impact on Black,
brown, and low-income workers. The Fed's report last month on
the economic well-being of United States households in 2020
shows that Black and brown Americans suffered disproportionate
economic pain last year. I look forward to hearing from Chair
Powell today on how we can continue to make the recovery more
equitable.
Congress and the Biden-Harris administration have
accelerated the recovery. As Chair Powell predicted in late
March, the dramatic ramp-up in the vaccination campaign, which
occurred as a result of the Biden administration's leadership,
with support from Congress in the American Rescue Plan, has
enabled--and I quote him here--``us to reopen the economy
sooner than might have been expected.''
The American Rescue Plan also delivered desperately needed
financial assistance which has been and will continue to be a
lifeline for American families. The American Rescue Plan
provided direct relief checks, extended unemployment, and
increased healthcare access.
And we have seen the results of that extraordinary action.
Over the last four months, the economy has added over 1.6
million jobs, and new unemployment insurance claims have
dropped significantly. As Chair Powell predicted in March,
Congress's aggressive action to provide fiscal relief through
the American Rescue Plan is ``accelerating the return to full
employment.''
But there is more work to do. There are still 7.6 million
fewer jobs than before the pandemic, with Black and brown
Americans still unemployed at disproportionately high rates.
As Chair Powell said earlier this year, to raise Americans'
standard of living over the long term, Congress must make
investments to increase the productivity of the economy. I
agree, and Congress is working to do just that. The American
Jobs Plan and the American Families Plan will make the
investments we need to ensure a strong, sustainable, and
equitable economic recovery.
The American Jobs Plan will sustainably modernize our
transportation infrastructure, bring affordable household
access to millions of Americans, build schools and housing,
upgrade water and power systems, and create well-paying jobs
for essential home-care workers.
The American Families Plan will invest in preschool and
higher education, allow parents to return to the work force by
providing childcare assistance, and support families by
extending the American Rescue Plan's expanded child tax credit.
Congress is working hard crafting legislation to enact the
American Jobs Plan and the American Families Plan so that we
will build back better in our recovery from the pandemic. I
look forward to hearing from Chair Powell about what else we
can do to ensure that our country's economic policy is
effective, efficient, and equitable.
Thank you for being here, Chair Powell.
I now yield to the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Scalise. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also welcome
Federal Reserve Chairman Powell.
Thank you for being with us, and I look forward to having
an interesting conversation about the state of our economy.
But I first want to begin by making sure to reiterate a
point that we've been making for over a year, and that is that
House Democrats still refuse to hold a hearing on the origin of
COVID-19.
If this virus did, in fact, leak from the Wuhan lab--by the
way, which a growing mountain of evidence now indicates is the
real possibility--everyone in this country and around the world
who has been touched by this evil virus deserves to know what
happened and how it happened. Given the Chinese Communist
Party's documented cover-up and lies, every member of this
subcommittee should agree.
If this is a manmade virus, then this is exponentially
worse than Chernobyl. Yet not a single hearing by the House
Democrat majority. Two-hundred-and-nine House Republicans wrote
Speaker Pelosi asking that the committees of jurisdiction
simply hold hearings. I have asked repeatedly that this select
subcommittee hold a hearing on this important topic.
We were told that the Science Committee is looking into it.
Mr. Chairman, every single Republican member of the Science
Committee signed this letter to Speaker Pelosi. The Science
Committee hasn't even scheduled a hearing on this subject. Not
a single committee----
Mr. Raskin. Would the gentleman----
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. has, indicating clearly that
Speaker Pelosi has sent word that the House will not
investigate the origins of COVID-19.
We are amid a long, global competition with China. Much of
the world must decide whose values to espouse and with whom to
align. Speaker Pelosi and the House of Representatives should
not be covering up for China's lies and potential crimes. We
should be coming together on a bipartisan basis to search for
those answers and shine the light of transparency on the origin
of this virus to the world and to do it on a bipartisan basis.
I urge you to reconsider and schedule a hearing on the
origins of COVID-19, without further delay, Mr. Chairman.
Now let's get back to the focus of today's hearing, the
economic crisis.
Chairman Powell, welcome back to this subcommittee. We
appreciate your openness and accessibility during these
challenging times.
Inflation has been defined as ``too much money chasing too
few goods.'' It also happens to be a nearly exact description
of the Biden economic plan.
Last year, Congress worked together on a bipartisan basis
to provide much-needed relief from the government-imposed
lockdowns. America did not know a whole lot about this novel
coronavirus, and we did not, at the time, have a vaccine.
Some in Congress used this crisis to spend trillions of
dollars on things that had little or nothing to do with COVID.
We still have hundreds of billions of dollars from the many
relief packages that are still left unspent.
We also learned that the revenue shortfalls some predicted
state and local governments would face were dramatically
inaccurate. Congress provided hundreds of billions in aid to
states that are running billions of dollars in surpluses. This
is borrowed money, keep in mind.
Republicans have a clear set of policies for the economy.
Since we passed the initial CARES Act last year on a bipartisan
basis, Republicans at the national and state level have called
for schools to be reopened, to get in-person learning going
again. We called for an end to enhanced unemployment and other
policies that discourage people from going back to work.
We called for full, from the beginning, support for
Operation Warp Speed, because that is what got us not one, not
two, but now three safe and effective vaccines. We've also
called for safely reopening our economy and for repurposing the
unused COVID funds for real infrastructure, not with job-
killing taxes that would actually slow our economy down even
more.
We're focused on growing our economy and increasing
supply--supply of workers, expanded investment--and for
bringing back jobs to America, strengthening supply chains and
returning the American people to a country that is open and
free.
Twenty-five Republican Governors have moved to end the
enhanced unemployment insurance program that is clearly causing
so many of these labor shortages we see around the Nation.
The Biden inflation agenda of too much money chasing too
few goods is causing major harm to hardworking families: a $1.9
trillion COVID bill that had almost nothing to do with COVID,
but airdropped more borrowed money into the economy while
restricting supply; canceling the Keystone Pipeline; siding
with teachers' union bosses to keep schools closed, when the
science said to open up the schools, causing long-term damage
to millions of our youngest children; extending the enhanced
unemployment insurance, and paying people more to stay home
than to work.
And, alarmingly, President Biden actually wants to give
away our intellectual property for the vaccine to China. On top
of that, he's proposed a $3.5 trillion tax hike that will crush
American workers, small businesses, and family farms. He wants
a higher tax rate than Communist China. Add to that, he wants
another $4 trillion of spending.
Too much money chasing too few goods. Welcome to the Biden
inflation agenda.
The Washington Post's lead story yesterday said, quote,
``The U.S. economy is emerging from the coronavirus pandemic
markedly transformed, as businesses and consumers struggle to
adapt to a new landscape with higher prices, fewer workers, and
a range of inconveniences.''
They go on to say, ``What Americans are encountering,
though, is almost unrecognizable from just 16 months ago.
Prices are up. Housing is scarce. It takes months longer than
normal to get furniture, appliances, and numerous parts
delivered. And there is a great dislocation between millions of
unemployed workers and millions of vacant jobs.''
The Washington Post is hardly a conservative news outlet.
Larry Summers, top economic advisor to both President
Clinton and President Obama, has been warning since February
that President Biden's agenda is inflationary. The Consumer
Price Index is up the most since 2008. The 6.2-percent increase
in the Producer Price Index is the highest on record. Milk is
up five percent; bacon is up 13 percent; used cars are up 30
percent; transportation, up 16 percent. The list goes on,
unfortunately.
Housing prices are soaring, and economists are warning of a
rental crisis. The cost of building new homes has made it
prohibitive for home builders, restricting supply while
flooding the economy with cash.
Inflation is outpacing wage gains, the past few months. In
the first five months of the Biden Presidency, 500,000 fewer
jobs were created than in the last five months of the Trump
administration, and the Biden administration started with
approved vaccines already in place on day one.
Chairman Powell, these Biden inflationary policies have put
you in a tough spot. I have confidence, Chairman Powell, that
the Fed has tools to deal with inflation, but those tools are
harsh. Raising interest rates and constricting the money
supply, they work, but, as we saw with Paul Volcker, it causes
tremendous pain.
The job of taming inflation belongs to Congress and this
administration. Take the $4 trillion in new spending proposals
off the table. Send a message to the markets that we will do a
bipartisan infrastructure bill that is paid for with unused
COVID relief money. There's plenty of it. Let's agree to end
the enhanced UI, drop the massive tax hikes.
President Biden proposed shipping jobs overseas with many
of his agenda items. Why don't we reverse that? Why don't we
come together on a bipartisan basis to focus on getting a long
and sustained recovery from this pandemic? That would be a good
start.
Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Clyburn. Thank you very much, Mr. Scalise.
Chair Powell, please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you're about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
You may be seated.
Let the record show that the witness answered in the
affirmative.
Without objection, your written statement will be made part
of the record. Chair Powell, you're now recognized for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JEROME H. POWELL, CHAIR, BOARD OF
GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Mr. Powell. Thank you, Chairman Clyburn, thank you, Ranking
Member Scalise and other members of the select subcommittee,
for the opportunity to update you on our ongoing measures to
address the hardship brought by the pandemic.
Since we last met, the economy has shown sustained
improvement. Widespread vaccinations have joined unprecedented
monetary and fiscal policy actions in providing strong support
for the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and
employment have continued to strengthen. And real GDP this year
appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in
decades.
Much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounce-
back in activity from depressed levels. The sectors most
adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak, but have shown
improvement. Household spending is rising at a rapid pace,
boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy, fiscal
support, and accommodative financial conditions. The housing
sector is strong, and business investing--investment is
increasing at a solid pace. In some industries, near-term
supply constraints are restraining activity.
As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor
market have continued to improve, although the pace has been
uneven. The unemployment rate remained elevated in May, at 5.8
percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in
unemployment, particularly as participation in the labor market
has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for
most of the last year. Job gains should pick up in coming
months as vaccinations rise, easing some of the pandemic-
related factors currently weighing them down.
The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all
Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have
been the hardest hit. In particular, despite progress,
joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage
workers in the service sector, and on African Americans and
Hispanics.
The Fed pursues monetary policy aimed at fostering a
strong, stable economy that can improve economic outcomes for
all Americans. Those who historically have been left behind
stand the best chance of prospering in a strong economy with
plentiful job opportunities. And our economy will be stronger
and perform better when everyone can contribute to and share in
the benefits of prosperity.
Inflation has increased notably in recent months. This
reflects, in part, the very low readings from early in the
pandemic falling out of the calculation, the pass-through of
price increases in oil prices to consumer energy prices, the
rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, and the
exacerbating factor of supply bottlenecks, which have limited
how quickly production in some sectors can respond in the near
term. As these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is
expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal.
The pandemic continues to pose risks to the economic
outlook. Progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of
COVID-19, and will likely continue to reduce the effects of the
public health crisis on the economy. However, the pace of
vaccinations has slowed, and new strains of the virus remain a
risk. Continued progress on vaccinations will support a return
to more normal economic conditions.
The Fed's policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to
promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American
people, along with our responsibilities to promote the
stability of the financial system.
In response to the crisis, we took broad and forceful
measures to more directly support the flow of credit in the
economy and to promote the stability of the financial system at
the onset of the pandemic. Our actions, taken together, helped
to unlock more than $2 trillion of funding to support
businesses large and small, nonprofits, and state and local
governments between April and December 2020. This, in turn,
helped keep organizations from shuttering and put employers in
a better position to keep workers on and to hire them back as
the recovery continues.
Our facilities were designed as backstops to private credit
markets, not as replacements. Once lenders and investors
understood that borrowers would have access to emergency loans,
conditions improved.
For example, yields in spreads on municipal bonds started
to fall dramatically following the announcement that some
municipal notes would be eligible at our money fund facility,
and that we were opening the Municipal Liquidity Facility. This
is detailed in the charts accompanying my testimony.
Over the succeeding months, issuance of municipal debt
surged. Over the period from April to December 2020, state and
local governments and other muni issuers borrowed almost $380
billion in the private markets at extremely attractive rates,
and 2020 as a whole saw the highest volume of municipal
issuance on record.
We've deployed these lending tools to an unprecedented
extent. And our emergency lending tools require the approval of
the Treasury and are available only in unusual and exigent
circumstances, such as those brought on by the crisis. Many of
these programs were supported by funding from the CARES Act.
Those facilities provided essential support through a very
difficult year, and they are now closed.
We continue to analyze the facilities' efficacy and to
review the lessons learned from their establishment and
operation. And additional analysis is included in my written
testimony.
To wrap up, we understand that our actions affect
communities, families, and businesses across the country.
Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the
Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as
long as it takes to complete the recovery.
Thank you.
Mr. Clyburn. Thank you very much, Chair Powell.
Each member will now have five minutes for questions. The
chair now recognizes himself for five minutes.
Chair Powell, as you have suggested in the past, our
delivery of direct assistance to the American people--and I'm
quoting you here--``is going to wind up very much accelerating
the return to full employment.''
You have also observed--and I'm quoting you again--``the
economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans.'' We
have observed that in our own communities. And I know the Fed
has extensive data that are backing it up and is looking
closely at steps that can be taken to address economic
disparities.
Now, my question is, why do you believe that economic
equity is important for the strength of our economy as a whole,
and necessary to successfully fulfill the Fed's core mandate of
price stability and maximum employment?
Mr. Powell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So disparities in economic outcomes along various lines
have been a persistent and growing feature of our economy for
several decades. We can contribute to addressing those through
our tools. It does, of course, take a much broader set of
policies from the legislature to really make significant
progress on this.
So, what we can do, really, is to focus principally on the
employment mandate and to assure that we achieve maximum
employment, which we now define as a broad and inclusive goal,
meaning we will not just look at the headline numbers for
unemployment, we will look at all kinds of measures of
unemployment, including unemployment and employment for various
groups, ethnic groups, gender groups, and things like that.
We'll look at--it is a broad and inclusive goal.
We will also, under our new framework, respond to
shortfalls only in full employment. We will not raise interest
rates preemptively because we think employment is too high
because we fear the possible onset of inflation. Instead, we
will wait for actual evidence of actual inflation or other
imbalances.
So those are the--that is the most important thing that we
can do.
I mean, I think the point is that there's a growing
realization, really, across the political spectrum that we need
to achieve more inclusive prosperity. Real incomes at the lower
end of the spectrum have stagnated relative to those at the
top. Mobility across income spectrums has declined in the
United States and now lags that of most other advanced
economies.
These things hold us back as an economy and as a country.
And I do think these are important issues that relate to the
overall performance of the economy and, therefore, are in scope
for us to analyze and call out.
Mr. Clyburn. Well, thank you for that.
You know, one of the primary goals of the select
subcommittee is to ensure that our response to the pandemic is
effective, efficient, and equitable. Now, I appreciate that the
Fed, under your leadership, recognizes the importance of all
three of these attributes for future economic strength.
I'm not a social scientist, by any means, but I am well
aware that in past recoveries--and we don't have to go all the
way back to the 1930's to see this phenomenon; we saw it taking
place in 2009. And that recovery was slow because, I feel, we
did too little when we should've been going bigger and bolder,
which we've done here.
And I appreciate the fact that you are recognizing that and
helping to build America back under this Rescue Plan, this
Families Plan, all these things that are necessary to make sure
that all elements in our society build--or, come back, not just
to where we were but hopefully beyond. And I thank you for the
way you have handled this, and I look forward to continuing to
work with you on that.
And, with that, I'll yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Powell, Chairman Powell, if we can go back to the pre-
pandemic and look at, first, where the economy was, how it was
performing, were we experiencing a record economic expansion
prior to the pandemic?
Mr. Powell. The longest in our history.
Mr. Scalise. And so, we saw the lowest overall
unemployment. Is that correct?
Mr. Powell. That is. Well, since--in 50 years, really. Yes.
Mr. Scalise. Since the 1960's, let's say.
Mr. Powell. That's right.
Mr. Scalise. How about how it was affecting everybody? I
know we've got some that try to say it didn't impact all
groups. We've seen other numbers--I've surely seen other
numbers that show that everybody benefited but especially those
lowest-level entry levels. We saw record startups, African-
American unemployment, Hispanic unemployment at all-time
records. Is that what you saw as well?
Mr. Powell. Yes. And, really, that started to happen in the
last two or three years of the very long expansion, which shows
you the benefit of a very strong labor market. We saw all-time
record-low unemployment since 1972 or so when we started
tracking it for African Americans and very low for Hispanics as
well.
Mr. Scalise. Right. And, obviously, the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act passed, that is when we started seeing that happen. In
fact, right before the bill was signed into law, we saw major
companies--AT&T started and then every day there would be more
announcements of companies announcing bonuses and increased
wages for their employees because of a more competitive tax
rate globally.
Did you see that same thing?
Mr. Powell. You know, we don't comment on particular--the
effects of particular bills, as you can imagine, of any kind.
Mr. Scalise. I'll give you that. And, obviously, there's
enough documentation of those reports as people would announce
that they were doing it strictly because America had become
competitive again. We had the highest corporate rate in the
world. We made ourselves not only competitive, we had a 21-
percent rate when the world average was 23 percent, and then we
saw all of those great benefits.
We also saw record-high markets, didn't we?
Mr. Powell. We did, yes, I guess.
Mr. Scalise. So, when we saw the government-ordered
lockdowns, whether it's businesses, schools, didn't that
ultimately hurt this record-setting economy?
Mr. Powell. You know, I don't know that I can say that. I
mean, I think the--of course, the economy was very hard hit by
the pandemic, and it's assigned to others to decide how we
should've reacted. It's really not something that the Fed has
expertise in or the ability to judge.
Mr. Scalise. Yes. Would you say that the lockdowns were
caused by a reaction to COVID-19 becoming a global pandemic?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Scalise. And did COVID-19 come from China?
Mr. Powell. I really--I don't know.
Mr. Scalise. Well, hopefully this committee will have that
hearing on the origin of COVID; we won't have to wonder about
it. Obviously, there's a lot of data out there that indicates
not only did it start in China, but that it also started in the
Wuhan lab. Whether it was intentional or accidental, that is a
question no one should have doubt about when we could be having
those hearings. So, we'll continue to call for that.
But you could see that straight line between the pandemic
hitting, from this virus that came from China, and then the
shutdown that had a devastating impact not only on lives--over
600,000 in America, millions worldwide--but also on this
economic crisis that we're dealing with.
Now I want to turn to the inflation crisis that we're
seeing. As you can see right behind me, we've seen a dramatic
increase in the cost of many household items, everyday items
that families buy--milk up five percent, bacon up 13 percent,
gas up 56 percent, used cars up 30 percent--as we're seeing a
shortage of products, harder for people to get products, supply
chain backups, harder to get workers. We're seeing, as the
result of that, about a five-percent inflation rate recently.
So, I would ask you, Chairman Powell, is five-percent
inflation acceptable to you?
Mr. Powell. No. Certainly not.
Mr. Scalise. So, clearly, we want to address this crisis.
Now, when you look with the unemployment crisis, there's
9.3 million job openings right now, which is a record high, yet
the economy only added back 500,000 jobs in May.
We've seen the enhanced unemployment being a big factor. In
paying people--40 percent of the people that are getting these
checks are getting more money not to work than work. That was a
policy decision made here in Washington, a very flawed one.
You're seeing many states try to address it.
But, ultimately, as we have this labor shortage, as it's
creating supply chain backups, as it's starting to get worse,
especially on the inflation side, Chairman Powell, will the
economy ever reach a full pre-pandemic level if this labor
shortage continues?
Mr. Powell. Well, if it continues. I strongly suspect that
labor supply and job creation will be moving up well over the
rest of this year.
Mr. Scalise. And I think that will follow, as you see, many
Governors, half the Governors in the country now have decided
to end, on their own, that enhanced unemployment, and that is
getting people back to work in those states. Unfortunately,
some states want to continue paying people not to work, and
that's causing inflation in other areas.
Hopefully we can confront this, address it. I wish you well
as you look at the tools you have available to you, but
hopefully we, as policymakers, get this right as well.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I'm
sure he's going to join me later in making sure we increase the
minimum wage so we can do something about the----
Mr. Scalise. There is no minimum wage right now, Mr.
Chairman. They're giving bonuses to people to go back to work.
Mr. Clyburn. Yes, but I don't think the minimum-wage people
got bonuses. Or did they?
Mr. Scalise. I've seen wages in almost every state go up
well above minimum wage.
Mr. Clyburn. Almost every state. Missed South Carolina. I'm
sure they caught Louisiana.
Mr. Scalise. I know my restaurants in the New Orleans area
cannot find workers, and they're looking and paying more than
they were pre-pandemic. And New Orleans has got the best food
in the world. I'm sure South Carolina's not far behind, but----
Mr. Clyburn. Oh, no, no, no.
Mr. Scalise. They would like to get those workers back too.
Mr. Clyburn. Yes, Gullah Geechee's a little better.
With that, I'd yield five minutes to Ms. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. It's good to see you again, Chairman Powell.
I want to start by asking about the Fed's monetary policy,
and inflation in particular. I am very concerned that the Fed
is going to raise rates too early, which would seriously harm
the economic recovery.
As you stated last week, much of the recent rise in
inflation had actually been expected. I strongly believe that
the recent spike in inflation will only be temporary, and that
shouldn't cause the Fed to raise interest rates too soon.
In the early months of the pandemic, prices fell incredibly
low, so now, a year later, the year-over-year rise in prices
looks very high. But that was only because prices fell to
artificially low levels last year at this time. This is
something that everyone saw coming for many months, so it
shouldn't come as a surprise at all.
How much of the recent rise in inflation do you attribute
to artificially low prices from early in the pandemic, and how
much do you attribute to other effects like supply bottlenecks
pushing up prices and a genuine rebound in economic activity?
Mr. Powell. Well, a pretty substantial part or perhaps all
of the overshoot in inflation comes from categories that are
directly affected by the reopening of the economy, such as used
cars and--used cars and trucks in particular. There's sort of a
perfect storm of very strong demand and weak supply due to the
reopening of the economy and various factors. We see airplane
tickets, we saw hotel prices, we see other things.
So those are things that we would look to to stop going up
and ultimately to start to decline as these situations resolve
themselves. They don't speak to a broadly tight economy and to
the kind of thing that has led to high inflation over time.
I will say that these effects have been larger than we
expected, and they may turn out to be more persistent than
we've expected. But the incoming data are very much consistent
with the view that these are factors that will wane over time
and that inflation will then move down toward our goals.
And we'll be monitoring that carefully. Of course, we're
prepared to use our tools as appropriate, if that turns out not
to be the case to, you know, to guide inflation to two percent.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Let me followup on that, because we know that inflation
statistics are fundamentally flawed right now due to the
pandemic. We typically measure inflation using a basket of
goods and services that represents what people usually
purchase, but the pandemic completely scrambled what everyone
was spending money on. People weren't traveling or going out to
restaurants, so spending on those items stopped entirely, while
spending on groceries surged dramatically.
As a result, a lot of economists question whether we should
be relying so heavily on inflation statistics that we know
don't represent what people are actually spending money on.
So, my question is, do you have any concerns with relying
on traditional inflation statistics, which we know are
unreliable right now in setting monetary policy?
Mr. Powell. I think the overall point is that the data that
we're looking at in the labor market and for inflation and for
growth, it's in such an unusual setting of reopening the
economy, we have to be very humble about our ability to really
try to draw a signal out of it. And it may take some patience
to see what really is happening.
Specifically on inflation, you're really talking about
consumer price inflation, the CPI. We actually use, at the Fed,
PCE--Personal Consumption Expenditure--inflation. And the
basket is actually updated on a monthly basis for PCE. And
that's one of its more attractive features, from our
standpoint.
Still, at a time like this, when people are changing their,
you know, consumption patterns in ways that are outside of
experience, I would say there's also a challenge there, even
though we are--our measure is, in fact, updating monthly in
terms of its basket.
Mrs. Maloney. Switching gears a little, I want to ask about
the Main Street Lending Program.
It seems clear that both the Main Street Program and the
Municipal Program generally improved credit access. Fed
officials have acknowledged that the Main Street Program would
likely have been more productive with different bank incentives
and more generous terms.
And, as you know, the eligibility threshold for the
Municipal Program excluded many cities and counties that were
deeply affected by the pandemic.
What do you believe are the most important adjustments the
Fed could make to the Main Street Lending Program to make it
more effective in future crises?
Mr. Powell. Well, I would say the Main Street Lending
Program overall was effective. It made a couple thousand
dollars--a couple thousand loans, and it helped a lot of
businesses.
So, if I could take away a lesson there, it is that it's
very difficult to reach small businesses across America. And I
would look to the PPP program and things like that. A lot of
these very small businesses didn't need unforgivable loans.
These were statutorily unforgivable; they could not be
forgiven.
Mrs. Maloney. Uh-huh.
Mr. Powell. And so, I would look in that direction going
forward.
In terms of Municipal Liquidity Facility, I think that the
overall assessment of that is that it was a resounding success.
And the test of it is not how many loans we made; the test of
it is how much lending took place.
The municipal markets were collapsing. There was no lending
going on. The people who put their money in those funds that
wind up making all the loans were taking their money out. We
announced the facility, and all of that turned around. And by
through much of last year, municipalities, states, had great
access to market, including ones with relatively low ratings.
Record amounts of borrowing took place at low, low rates.
So, it really worked. I mean, it really stands for the
proposition that a backstop is better than a direct loan, in a
lot of cases. So, we would look at it that way, and I think
that's the way it's generally seen.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes Dr. Miller-Meeks.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, Mr. Powell, thank you so much for coming up for us
today and for your testimony.
There has been--I think, first and foremost, that the
improving economic position we see today, do you think that it
would be in existence without Operation Warp Speed and three
safe and effective vaccinations?
Mr. Powell. I think that the vaccines and the widespread
adoption of them are absolutely essential to the recovery.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
And, currently, about 40 percent of workers on enhanced
unemployment are paid more than they did while they were
working. Coincidentally, there is a labor shortage.
In my home state of Iowa, as of May 2021, 87,000 workers
dropped out of the labor force since February 2020, a five-
percent decrease in the size of Iowa's work force.
Notwithstanding, employers in my state cannot find workers. And
these are jobs that are greater than $15 an hour. Even some
employers cannot find people to work at salaries of between
$80,000 and $130,000.
As Governor Brainard pointed out earlier this year, true
unemployment is far higher than the headline rate, and the
labor force participation rate is nearly six percentage points
below where it was at the beginning of the 2lst century.
Shouldn't we be doing everything we can to incentivize work
for our own citizens? And shouldn't we be looking at bringing
in additional unskilled workers into this country at a time
when we have a labor shortage of skilled workers?
Mr. Powell. So, I'll try to answer.
So, I think a number of things, we think, are weighing on
labor supply right now, and those are things that should be
expected to abate and wane and go away over the course of
coming months. So, we should be seeing our way to strong job
creation, we think, as the year goes on.
And there I'm thinking of: A significant number of people
still report themselves as not wanting to work because of being
afraid of being infected or being afraid of carrying the
infection to somebody they may live with who's vulnerable.
Also, schools not being open, that's weighing on participation
by caretakers.
And, also, unemployment insurance may be interacting with
some of those other factors and causing people to go on with
their job search longer.
There's another thing, though. The very quick job gains of
the early recovery essentially involved going back to your old
job. That's not so much what's happening now. Now it's actually
finding new jobs. And that's a matching function that is more
labor-intensive and time-consuming, and there may be a bit of a
speed limit on that.
We expect, though, as I said, a lot of progress to go
forward.
On immigration, it's something we--really isn't in our
bailiwick, and so I try to stay at a high level on a question
like that.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. President Biden promised not to raise
taxes on anyone making under $400,000 a year. But inflation, as
already been noted, has increased dramatically. And I realize
you use the PCE rather than the CPI, but it's over five
percent. And it's the most insidious and regressive tax,
affecting low-income, minority families, hardworking taxpayers,
and seniors on a fixed income.
You stated recently that want current inflation surge is
likely to be transitory. Does ``likely'' mean greater than a
95-percent chance? A 50-percent chance? Or do you have any
level of confidence in that prediction?
Mr. Powell. I have a level of confidence in that
prediction. What I have been saying, though, is that we--it's
very hard to say what the timing of that will be. When will
these bottlenecks disappear? When will there be enough
microchips? We saw what happened in the lumber business. Prices
have come way down, but they're still pretty high. When will
the used-car markets get back into equilibrium?
And so, it's hard to say exactly when it will be and
exactly how large the effects will be. But, honestly, if you
look at the--if you look behind the headline and look at the
categories where these prices are really going up, you'll see
that it tends to be areas that are directly affected by the
reopening. That's something that we'll go through over a period
that will then be over, and it should not leave much of a mark
on the ongoing inflation process.
So, there's no reason why it should leave a mark on
inflation, say, a year or so ahead, because we should be
through it then.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you.
And, finally, ``The Financial Report of the U.S.
Government,'' published annually by the Treasury Department,
says unambiguously, the current fiscal path is unsustainable.
On our current path, debt is projected to exceed six times the
GDP by the end of the century and annual government spending
will exceed 50 percent of GDP.
Do you agree with the conclusions of this report? And, if
so, isn't this an additional and one of our greatest avoidable
crises that our country currently faces?
Mr. Powell. I think that it--``unsustainable'' just means
that the debt is growing faster than the economy. That's been
the case for a long time, and I don't think that's
controversial.
I think the point I would make is that the time to work on
that problem will come, and that time is when employment is
high, unemployment is low, economic activity is strong, taxes
are rolling in. That's the right time to go to work on a
longer-term program that gradually moves us back to, you know,
primary balance.
And, ultimately, you just have to get the GDP growing
faster than the debt, and it has to do that for an extended
period of time. That's how countries get back to a sustainable
path.
Mrs. Miller-Meeks. And to be mindful of their spending when
the economy is growing.
Thank you so much.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Raskin for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I'm sorry that you were harangued again this morning about
the origins of the coronavirus. I'm very eager also for the
House Committee on Science to take up this scientific question,
and also deal with the facts that I have emphasized since the
beginning: that Donald Trump repeatedly defended the
performance of the Chinese Communist Party and General Xi in
COVID-19. In February, in March, in April, in May, for many
months, I think on 19 different occasions, he defended them as
doing a great job and a wonderful job and praising their
partnership. So, I'm very eager to get to the bottom of it.
Regardless of whether the virus came out negligently,
recklessly, or deliberately, none of it excuses the lethal
recklessness of Donald Trump in his complete mismanagement of
the coronavirus in our country. And, of course, we lost
hundreds of thousands of people before he left office and we
got organized to crush the disease, finally.
Mr. Chairman, welcome to our committee.
I was taken with something that you said in February, when
you said, ``What it takes to drive productive capacity to raise
living standards over time is investment--investment in
people's skills and aptitudes, investment in plants and
equipment, investment in software.''
Do you agree that investing in our Nation's infrastructure
will increase our productive capacity and contribute to long-
term economic growth in the country?
Mr. Powell. Mr. Raskin, I want to start by saying, I don't
want to be seen to be addressing any particular legislative
proposal. But I think it's basic economics that productivity is
what--and demographics are what drive longer-term growth in a
country. And one of the big ways to affect productivity is
through investment. And that includes infrastructure, includes
plants and equipment and people, education, skills, things like
that.
So, I think that is the point that I made--was making back
in February.
Mr. Raskin. Gotcha.
Well, let me take a specific example then, and maybe you
can help me with it.
Thirty million Americans live in areas with inadequate
broadband, which severely limits their abilities to do their
work, to develop their businesses, to participate equally in
school. I have had high school kids tell me they have to go to
McDonald's or Starbucks in order to get internet that they can
use for their assignments.
The American Jobs Plan would make unprecedented investments
to expand broadband to these rural communities, like Frederick
and Carroll County in my district.
And I know that you don't comment on specific legislative
proposals, but would you say that, in general, expanding high-
speed broadband access to millions of Americans who don't have
it, especially in rural areas, would create new economic
opportunities and potential for long-term economic growth?
Mr. Powell. Again, without commenting on particular
legislation, I think I would look at broadband like that in the
same way that prior generations looked at electricity.
If kids don't have access to the internet and to,
basically, all the knowledge that's available through that,
they're not going to be able to maximize their potential or
realize their potential in this economy.
Mr. Raskin. Well, that's a fascinating answer to me,
because when I tried to look at it historically, it seemed like
the definition of ``infrastructure'' has expanded over time.
And, you know, when Eisenhower said, ``Let's build the
highways,'' people said, ``What's that got to do with
infrastructure? Infrastructure is bridges.'' And, you know,
when President Lincoln did the land grants, you know, to do
universities and colleges across the country, people said,
``What's that got to do with infrastructure?''
And so, it does seem like the definition of
``infrastructure'' changes. What is your working definition of
``infrastructure'' as an economic concept?
Mr. Powell. I don't--I hadn't taken the trouble to really
write one down, and I wouldn't like to do it in real-time here,
if I can avoid that.
Mr. Raskin. OK. Well--or, let me just pose it, then, in
kind of a more abstract way. Would you say that infrastructure
is anything that allows for the expansion of productive
capacity and contribution to long-term economic growth?
Mr. Powell. I don't see anything objectionable about that.
Mr. Raskin. Yes.
All right. Well, I just very much appreciate your emphasis
on investment, because that's what we've been doing with the
American Rescue Plan, that's what we want to do with the
American Families Plan, that's what we want to do with the
American Jobs Plan. We want to reinvest in America, to keep
those jobs here in America, and to invest in our communities so
we have a solid foundation for the continuing growth of the
great American middle class and for the opportunity for lots of
poor working people to get into the middle class.
And, with that, I will yield back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Jordan for five minutes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Powell, the Fed has two mandates, right?
Mr. Powell. Maximum employment and stable prices.
Mr. Jordan. Maximum employment and stable prices. Seems
like both have got--both got some problems today.
I want to spend a little time on the first. Why are the
jobs numbers so bad right now?
Mr. Powell. Well, I think we're digging out of a very deep
hole. We've made a lot of progress, but I would agree with you,
we have a long way to go.
Mr. Jordan. Over 9 million job openings; over the past two
months, only 800,000 jobs added back. That's pretty bad. Well,
is there a specific reason you point to as why those numbers
aren't where we would, frankly, hope they would be?
Mr. Powell. You know, it's a good question, and my thinking
is that there are some temporary factors that are weighing on
job creation. And I mentioned those earlier.
Another thing is, actually, actual hiring is at very high
levels but it's being offset by high levels of quits and
retirements. So, the net--what's happening is that the net job
creation has been lower, but actual hiring is high.
And that's--in a sense, quits is a good thing because
people are looking for----
Mr. Jordan. Got it.
Mr. Powell [continuing]. jobs that they want more.
Retirements are just something that happens.
Mr. Jordan. What about unemployment benefits? Does that
factor in as well?
Mr. Powell. It may be a factor, and it'll be a temporary
one, because something like 15 million people will see either
those benefits disappear or significantly decrease.
Mr. Jordan. My understanding is the state unemployment plus
the Federal enhancement is $37,000 a year. Might that
discourage people from going back to work?
Mr. Powell. We're going to find out. We're going to find
out, because it's going to be gone really quickly.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I think we are finding out. Yet, in the
stimulus package, child tax credit, family of four, it's about
$110,000.
I mean, every single employer, literally every single
employer I talk to in our district--and, frankly, folks I--
employers I talk to around the country--tell me they can't find
people to work. And you think it's more of quitting and
retirements, or is it more unemployment, or a combination, or
what is it?
Mr. Powell. I think it's, in terms of things that are
weighing on people getting in the labor force, I think it's
those three things I mentioned.
It's still--some people are still afraid of COVID. Maybe
they're living with someone who is vulnerable.
It's also schools are closed still, and having schools be
open again will free up a lot of caretakers.
I think unemployment benefits, too. I think you would
expect a significant, a really strong set of jobs numbers
coming up beginning in the next month or two----
Mr. Jordan. Well, didn't you expect higher numbers in April
and May?
Mr. Powell. Yes, I did.
Mr. Jordan. I mean, it sort of surprised me. I guess when
you pay people not to work, you shouldn't be surprised when you
don't have workers.
I've never seen a situation like this where we now have, as
the ranking member mentioned, we now have several Governors,
25, I believe, who have turned back, who said: We don't want
the Federal enhancement to unemployment.
I've never seen that. I've been in politics 26 years. I've
never seen Governors turn down Federal money. So, I think that
just underscores how serious the problem is.
But you said you think it changes soon?
Mr. Powell. Well, we know that these benefits run out on--
the Federal ones run out----
Mr. Jordan. What if the Democrats renew them, which they're
talking about doing?
Mr. Powell. Excuse me?
Mr. Jordan. What if the Democrats renew them? That would be
a problem, wouldn't it?
Mr. Powell. Again, I don't comment on----
Mr. Jordan. No. But you said you expect it to run out and
that will help. I'm asking you--that's not what Democrats are
saying. They're talking about renewing them. And so, if it
helps if they run out, if they renew them, won't that hurt?
Mr. Powell. Well, these are judgments for people who stand
for election.
Mr. Jordan. No, I'm just following your logic. You said, if
it runs out, that will help the employment situation. I mean,
I've got employers----
Mr. Powell. I think we'll see strong job creation in the
fall, I really do. And I think there are all these, as you
point out, 9.3 million job openings, many millions of people
unemployed.
There seems to be some kind of a speed limit. It may just
be that it's hard to match up with a new job and people feel
like they can wait a little bit longer and really shop
carefully.
Mr. Jordan. It seems to me, Chairman--and, again, I know
you don't talk--you're not going to comment on policies--but I
don't know that Democrats are doing anything right. They kept
the economy locked down. They're spending money like crazy,
proposing more, I think a $6 trillion budget the White House is
proposing, all causing inflation.
Inflation went up the last four months, continues to
increase. As you said, you've got two mandates at the Fed:
stable employment, low inflation. We've got unstable
employment, we've got high inflation.
And now they're paying people not to work, and that may
continue.
And then, finally, on top of all that, they're thinking
about raising taxes.
I mean, this is amazing to me. First you pay people not to
work, and then the folks who are working, you're going to raise
their taxes, and somehow they think that's going to help our
economy, when, as I said now a couple times, every single
employer I talk to tells me they can't find people to work.
What do you think about all those policy ideas from the
Democrats?
Mr. Powell. Again, it's not my job.
Mr. Jordan. No, but your job is stable employment and low
inflation. Right now, we have 9 million job openings and
inflation that's went up five months in a row. So, something
has to give.
I don't necessarily--I'm not necessarily blaming you. I'm
blaming the Democrat policies. And it seems to me the idea that
they're going to extend the Federal enhancement make absolutely
no sense. The idea they're going to raise taxes on hardworking
Americans makes absolutely no sense. And the idea they're going
to spend $6 trillion also makes absolutely no sense.
So, as I said, it seems to me they're doing everything
wrong, making your job that much harder.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Clyburn. It's a good thing, too.
Mr. Jordan. I don't give comments when you make your
statements. Tell me what I said wrong in that statement.
Mr. Clyburn. It's a good thing that you're yielding back so
I can give five minutes to Mr. Foster.
Mr. Jordan. It's a good thing I made those points about how
bad the Democrat policies are. That's the good thing.
And I'd like to answer--and it would be nice if the Fed
Chairman would answer the fact that, if you guys extend
unemployment, which he said if it goes away will be good for
the economy, and if you extend it, he wouldn't answer that
question.
Mr. Clyburn. With that, I yield five minutes to Mr. Foster.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
And I sympathize with the chairman sort of being left
speechless by the logic that we just saw demonstrated.
I'd also like to respond to some of my Republican
colleagues about the origin of the coronavirus. The Science
Committee Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee that I
chair is, in fact, having a hearing on--hearings on the origin
of the coronavirus. The first is scheduled July 14 at 11 a.m.
These hearings are going to be science based. And I think
it says a lot about how seriously my Republican colleagues take
science that they cannot even find a complete set of members to
serve on that committee, on that Science subcommittee. They
have only two members, the ranking member and Representative
Sessions.
Well, with that out of the way, I just want to thank you,
Chairman Powell. In your testimony, you correctly note the
importance of the successful vaccination campaign. Under the
Biden administration's leadership, we've now administered over
300 million vaccine doses, and COVID infections have fallen
dramatically.
The CDC has advised that vaccinated people can safely
engage in a wide variety of activities, and states have been
able to do that and ease coronavirus health restrictions. And
when they do that, our economy recovers.
I think it's clear to everyone that the return on our
investment on vaccines, starting with money and directions
provided by Congress before Operation Warp Speed was even
announced, and following decades of federally funded research
into the underlying science, has had the highest return on
investment of really any that our country has ever made.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Powell. I don't have a number to put on that. But, yes,
I would think the return on investment would be high.
Mr. Foster. But the return on investment is not limited to
vaccinating the United States. We also benefit economically by
helping vaccinate our trading partners.
Would you also agree that the return on that investment is
likely to be very high?
Mr. Powell. I would, yes.
Mr. Foster. Yes. And would you be willing to have some of
your brilliant economists that work for you actually try to put
a rough number on that, because it's an important thing for us
to appreciate as we decide how much of resources to devote to
helping other nations around the world?
Mr. Powell. I will be glad to do that.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
And now with COVID, our economy has experienced a number of
inflation shocks--the tight labor markets, commodity shortages,
release of pent-up consumer demand, chip shortages, as you
mentioned, due to underinvestment in foundries and
overinvestment in Bitcoin and meme stocks, proposals to move on
shore the supply chains that have historically been offshore,
which will in general increase prices.
And all of this, however, happens against a continuing
backdrop of long-term technological job loss that was arguably
accelerated by COVID.
So how do you think this is all going to net out when the
transients are over, the longer term, say medium term effect of
inflation?
Mr. Powell. I mean, it's incredibly hard to say really.
If you're positing an actual reversal of globalization,
that could have implications as you suggest.
But I wonder if that's really going to happen because of
policies that we adopt. Technology goes instantly around the
world. It's not going to be easy to stop that. The economy's
become very globalized.
And also production technology is so much more efficient
than it was. You can do things with the new technologies. You
can manufacture things here that may or may not result in a lot
of jobs in manufacturing, but you can certainly make things.
There may be reshoring here that's actually quite efficient in
terms of costs.
Mr. Foster. So, the jobs will come back to the U.S., but
they'll be taken by robots.
Mr. Powell. There is some of that----
Mr. Foster. There is some of that.
Mr. Powell [continuing]. in manufacturing, as you know.
Mr. Foster. Yes. So, you really maintain some uncertainty
on how this is going to net out for the inflation.
Mr. Powell. A lot of uncertainty, yes.
Mr. Foster. Yes. OK.
Let's see. And my last thing. You've been talking a little
bit about high-speed broadband, which is, I think, an important
investment with huge return.
An important part of that is that when Americans get, for
the first time, access to the internet, that they're also
provided a secure digital ID that prevents them from becoming
victims to identity fraud and allows them to safely participate
in our economy.
One of your other projects you're working on, central bank
digital currencies, is going to need to have a secure digital
ID to allow people to transact in digital dollars in a safe way
that can't be abused.
Are you working internationally to try to get these secure
digital IDs as part of your negotiations on central bank
digital currencies and others?
Mr. Powell. I think it's part of the discussion. I would
say we're not as far along as your description would suggest on
that. But that's--it's certainly something you would need to be
able to have----
Mr. Foster. Well, will it be addressed in your white paper
coming out this summer?
Mr. Powell. A lot of things will be addressed. I'm not sure
if that would be. That's something--you certainly need that
down the road. We probably will be. We're just laying it out
right now.
Mr. Foster. Yes. No, it's important for our economic
recovery as well as planning to respond to China, frankly, on
central bank digital currencies. So, put it--move it up on your
to-do list.
Thanks much, and I yield back.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
My understanding is that Dr. Green has joined us. If so,
he's now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Green. Can you hear me, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Clyburn. We can hear you, yes.
Mr. Green. OK, thank you. Sorry about that. Thank you,
Chairman Clyburn and Ranking Member Scalise. And I want to
thank Chairman Powell for being here today.
Last summer, when the former Fed Chairs Bernanke and now-
Treasury Secretary Yellen testified before this subcommittee, I
expressed some concern that the excessive spending by Congress
and money printing by the Fed might cause inflation. Mr.
Bernanke denied this, saying that people said there'd be
inflation in 2008, but they were wrong.
Mr. Chairman, the numbers are in, and it looks like there
is some inflation, at least the past couple of months, four and
now five percent.
When Congress spends trillions of dollars and the Fed
prints money, something's got to give.
Prosperity isn't created by government, I don't believe.
It's created by workers, by businesses, by entrepreneurs
creating and inventing, innovating.
I founded a healthcare company, grew that company up to
over 200 million in annual revenue in just eight years, and I
have a little bit of experience on understanding how to create
jobs, grow business, et cetera.
And I genuinely believe those businesses out there are
looking at this inflation as a tax. Now, it's a hidden tax.
They see it as a tax on their ability to do B-to-B transactions
or B-to-customer.
Every dollar the government spends has to come out of
somebody's pocket. Whether it's through another tax or a
reduction in their purchasing power, it comes out.
And if we don't get our fiscal house in order, I worry that
that inflation won't be transitory, as I know you've said both
in the press and probably here today. And I apologize for being
a little bit late.
My first question, Chairman Powell. Are you concerned from
an economic and really a national security perspective about
Russia and China dumping the dollar and their, what appears to
be a move to some kind of financial alliance between the two of
them?
Mr. Powell. That's not something that's really within our
bailiwick or on our radar screen.
The dollar is the world's reserve currency. There really is
no currency that's close to being able to compete. That's
because of our democratic institutions and our record of
maintaining low inflation, and because we have open capital
markets and are great traders with the rest of the world. I
don't see anything changing that anytime soon.
Mr. Green. Do you see the threat of raising the capital
gains tax to 40 percent as a challenge to those capital
markets?
Mr. Powell. Again, I really don't comment on tax and
spending proposals. We don't have any authority over that. The
level of capital gains tax is something that is the business of
elected officials, not the business of the Fed.
Mr. Green. I appreciate that.
Over the past 10 years, the Fed's--the Federal Government's
net interest costs have grown about 25 percent relative to GDP
despite the historically low interest rates.
If spending remains on its current trajectory and interest
rates reach their historic average of 5.7 percent, do you think
the Federal Government will be able to pay its bills?
Mr. Powell. I have no question that the U.S. Government
will be able to pay its bills for the foreseeable future. There
is no case in which that would not be the case. We have the
strongest and largest and most flexible economy in the world.
It's also true, though, that we're on an unsustainable path
and that we're going to have to address that. And, as I
mentioned, the time to address that is when the economy is
strong, unemployment is low, and economic activity is high.
Mr. Green. Is it possible that the high interest rate that
we're seeing today is the start of something that could be as
bad as the 1970's? And, if not, could you explain why?
Mr. Powell. You say higher interest rates or higher
inflation?
Mr. Green. Inflation. I'm sorry.
Mr. Powell. OK.
Very, very unlikely. What we're seeing now, we believe, is
inflation in particular categories of goods and services that
are being directly affected by this unique historical event
that none of us has lived through before, called ``reopening
the economy after closing it.''
So, you see extremely strong demand for labor, for goods,
for services, and you see the supply side caught a little bit
flatfooted in trying to catch up.
And you see bottlenecks with--and you see this all over the
world, by the way. This is not just the United States. You see
it everywhere. And it's very similar kinds of situations.
And you also, you have a central bank that's committed to
price stability and has defined what price stability is and is
strongly prepared to use its tools to keep us around two
percent inflation.
So, all of those things suggest to me that an episode like
what we saw in the 1970's--and I graduated from college in
1975, I had a front row seat--that nothing like that--I don't
expect anything like that to happen.
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. Chairman, I can't see the clock, unfortunately. I don't
know if I have any more time.
Mr. Clyburn. You are out of time.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Clyburn. Thank you for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Krishnamoorthi for five
minutes.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chairman Powell, for appearing before us.
Back in 2019 you said the following. You said: ``We try to
create a strong labor market. For many, many people and many,
many communities, that's enough. But for people who are at the
margins, the low-to moderate-income community, that's not
enough. They need a chance.''
And earlier that year you said you were cutting rates, in
part, to help those who are, quote, ``left behind.''
How do you see the impact of the pandemic on these groups
of people for whom you expressed empathy and concern back in
2019? And how do you see the recovery affecting them?
Mr. Powell. Well, in the first instance, the pandemic hit
the service industries very hard, industries that involve
dealing with the public--hotels, travel, entertainment.
And the people in those customer-facing, public-facing
jobs, they tend to be relatively low-paid jobs, and they're--
minorities and women are significantly overrepresented among
the people in those jobs. And that's who got laid off. Most of
the layoffs, a big chunk of the layoffs disproportionately were
in those industries.
So, it's clear this pandemic really hit those people hard.
And why it was even more painful was that, in the last couple
of years of the very long expansion that ended in March 2020,
the longest in our history, you really began to see benefits
going more to those groups than to the high end. I mean, wage
gains at the lower end of the income spectrum were bigger than
they were at the higher end. That began to be the case in year
8, 9, 10, and the 11th year.
And that was a very positive thing--high labor force
participation, the benefits of prosperity being spread widely--
and it could have gone on for a long time but for the pandemic.
So, we have the pandemic. And those industries are hiring
people back. A whole lot of the job creation we're seeing is in
those industries. You're still several million short in those
industries of where employment was. But there are really high,
very large numbers of job openings in a number of industries,
including the service industry.
So, I really am hopeful, with the strength of labor
demand--it really is remarkably strong--that over time--and not
a lot of time--this will sort itself out, and we'll find
ourselves in a very, very strong labor market with low
unemployment, wages going up across the spectrum.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Can I jump in for one moment? Which
is--thank you for that answer.
You were talking about the matching function that's
happening right now between people who are perhaps dislocated
and people who--I mean, the job openings that exist.
What is your perspective on efforts by educational systems
working with governments, state, local, Federal, in upskilling
people to match them with the jobs that currently exist in the
post-pandemic economy, through skills-based education or career
technical education and the like?
Mr. Powell. You know, I've been exposed to a number of
programs of that nature, and they seem to work really well.
Some of them do, anyway. The idea being companies--you actually
see it in South Carolina quite a bit. You see companies teaming
up with schools and technical schools in these apprenticeship
programs, and they really work.
I would say that's a great idea, and it would be great to
see more of it all over the country. But those things take
time. They take policy support. They'll take time to really
build and produce value, whereas this is something we have the
immediate need to get people back to work.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Yes, sir.
Last question. What is the impact of other countries in the
world not getting their populations vaccinated at the rate that
we are and the COVID fires continuing to rage over there?
What is the impact on our economy? If you have any metrics
that can measure that or that you'd be willing to share, I'd be
very interested in that.
Mr. Powell. I don't have any metrics. But I will say, to
Mr. Foster's earlier point, to the extent large countries
around--large populations around the world are not getting
vaccinated, we're giving time and place for new strains, more
virulent strains of the virus to develop and spread. Viruses do
not respect natural--national borders.
And so, I think it is very much in our interest to support
broad vaccination around the world. It's also the right thing
to do. But it clearly is the best thing for us as well, because
no one is really safe until we're all safe.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Very good. Thank you so much for your
service, sir.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member for a closing
statement.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
hearing.
Chairman Powell, appreciate the work that you do.
Obviously, some of the questions that we have, both Republican
and Democrat members had, are more in the policy realm, which
is not your purview.
You have tools as the Chairman of the Federal Reserve. You
have mandates, as I know Mr. Jordan and you were talking about.
But many of those tools are harsh tools, tools that we don't
want to have to get to if we don't have to.
And I think that's really where we as policymakers need to
step up and do a better job so that it doesn't fall in your
lap. And I think those points were made clear.
If you look at just the two mandates of the Federal
Reserve, maximum employment and stable prices, right now we
don't have either. And it's because of policy decisions, policy
decisions primarily by the Biden administration.
Paying people not to work is causing real damage to our
economy. You can't have 9 million openings for jobs right now,
at the same time that we're paying people on average $35,000 a
year not to work and then wonder why we have 9 million job
openings. It's pretty clear.
Every small business in America will tell you why. I hear
the same thing across the board. They can't get all their
workers to come back. And because of that, they can't open
their business fully.
Restaurants who are struggling, just scrapping and clawing
to hold everything together, want to reopen fully, and in many
states are able to reopen fully, but they can't because they
can't get all of their workers back.
And it's not like they've gone on to other places. They
know exactly what's happening. They're being paid more not to
work than to work. That policy has to end.
You even said it: When the benefits run out, it will help.
The problem is, Democrats here in Congress don't want those
benefits to end. And we're borrowing that money from our
children and our grandchildren to keep people out of the work
force. It makes absolutely no sense. It undermines your very
mandates.
And, again, it would push us to a place where you would
have to use tools, and we don't want to see high interest
rates, we don't want to see limits on monetary policy. But
that's where it would go if we leave it up to other entities,
like the Federal Reserve. We need to confront this here in
Congress.
We can look at how states have done well and how states
have done poorly. We don't have to reinvent this wheel. You can
just look at a few of the states who have done it right.
Georgia probably has the lowest unemployment, 4.5 percent.
They were the first state to open. They took a lot of
criticism, just like Florida when they opened their economy
early. Some said, ``Oh, everybody is going to die.''
The only problem is, when you look at the states that
stayed mostly closed, they were the states actually that had
the higher COVID death rates. And right now, to this day, just
looking at recent numbers on seven-day average of COVID,
Georgia 14 per 100,000 cases a day, New York's 36 per 100,000,
almost triple Georgia.
Georgia is fully open. New York is still mostly closed.
Broadway is not even going to open until September. There is
absolutely no reason for that. They should be open today. They
could be open today.
Schools should have been open months ago. All the
scientists--we've had people sit in the very chair you're
sitting in, including Dr. Fauci, say under oath, schools should
have been open months ago, and, actually, you're doing long-
term damage to the kids by not reopening schools.
This isn't something that the Federal Reserve Chair has
anything to do with. That's policy, policy of local governments
that are hurting their economies and their people, and
especially the children that are paying a big price. This is
what's got to end.
We need to focus on getting the economy fully reopen, on
getting kids back in the classroom.
And, oh, while we're doing that, we surely ought to be
addressing the origins of COVID-19. Not a month from now.
Should have been months and months ago when we started calling
for it, because nobody should have to sit here and go, ``Why
did it happen? Why did this calamity, deaths, destruction of
economies, people's whole livelihoods going away?''
Suicide rates, we didn't even talk about that today.
Suicide rates, drug overdoses, all off the charts because of
what we went through in the last year. And yet, not a single
hearing in over a year on the origins of COVID-19.
So hopefully we can get back to focusing on the very
policies that will help us get through this the right way so
that it doesn't end up in your lap and things end up having to
be abruptly changed to the point where it actually harms real
families even worse than they've already been harmed.
Because as we've seen so many things that are happening,
like all of this inflation across the board, that shouldn't be
happening right now.
We shouldn't be seeing all this inflation that is brought
on by President Biden's policies and his overreaction to
something where the science--in fact, one of the things we've
seen is a whole lot of political science being practiced
instead of medical science.
So hopefully we can get back to common sense and the
science that shows us where we should be going, when, instead,
we're seeing a whole lot of actions that are devastating to
people when they shouldn't be going through some of this pain.
So, let's focus on getting things open the right way,
following that science, and doing it--again, not reinventing
the wheel. Go look at the states that have done it right.
Many states have gotten it right. Many states have gotten
it wrong and still to this day are doing it wrong. Let's not
have the Federal Government continue to do it the wrong way by
making things worse.
With that, I would yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the ranking member for yielding back.
I want to close by thanking Chair Powell for his testimony
today. We appreciate the opportunity to discuss the lessons
learned from actions that the Fed took during the pandemic to
support our economy, the Fed's current outlook as our economy
recovers, and the action needed to ensure a strong,
sustainable, and equitable economic future.
Today's hearing has made clear that the Fed must improve
its crisis response tools to ensure that communities, small
businesses, and workers, not just large corporations, receive
support during emergencies.
The Fed's pandemic relief efforts, while innovative and
well intentioned, were often too little too late and did not
have the impact they could have had to bolster the economy. The
Fed must learn from this experience to improve on these
responses in future crises.
The good news is that, thanks to smart and bold economic
policy by Congress and the Fed alike, our economy is recovering
swiftly. The American Rescue Plan is delivering desperately
needed relief that is supporting a broad-based economy--
recovery.
Since March, the economy has been adding an average of
540,000 jobs a month, and new unemployment insurance claims
have dropped dramatically.
Direct payments have eased Americans' financial concerns
and have enabled them to support their local economies. Soon,
the Department of the Treasury and IRS will begin to deliver
advanced payments to families from the expanded child tax
credit relief that experts project will cut child poverty
nearly in half.
As vital as the American Rescue Plan is, it must only be a
first step toward a better economic future. The pandemic
exposed significant faults in our economy, and we cannot be
satisfied with a return to the pre-pandemic status quo.
I notice that our Chairman Waters has finally made it.
Ms. Waters. Just got off a plane today.
Mr. Clyburn. I understand, and I'm glad you got here
safely. And I don't think we ought to close this hearing
without hearing from you.
Ms. Waters. Oh, well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I'm pleased I was able to get in at the end of the hearing.
But let me just say that of course I've worked with
Chairman Powell for quite some time now, and I was so very
pleased with the way that he worked even with the Treasurer
during the pandemic, and of course now with Yellen, who is our
Treasurer--Secretary of the Treasury now.
The two of them work very, very well together. And I was
very pleased that, at the beginning of this pandemic, they both
said you have to go big, you have to think big. And that's
quite unusual for a Fed Chair, who is usually more cautious and
more careful about expenditures.
Also, I'm very pleased at the way that he opened up and
initiated so many facilities. Some of them I still don't
understand. But I do know that there was every attempt to be
able to meet the needs of the business community.
With the Main Street Facility, I was very pleased that,
after opening that up and getting the information out from
that, they modified some, and they brought in the opportunities
for smaller businesses to have access to the Main Street
Facility.
And so, I compliment and thank Chairman Powell for not only
his leadership during this pandemic, but his creativity and the
way he was available to us to always help us think through what
more can we do, and how can we do it.
So, I'm pleased that I was able to at least come in on the
end of this hearing today to say to you, Mr. Powell, I credit
you, along with others who worked so very hard to get us, you
know, past this pandemic and to get us back on the road so that
our economy can do what we know it can do.
And I've never really been worried about inflation, but I
want to keep an eye on that, and I want you to keep us informed
about what is happening in our economy.
I think we're coming back, and we're going to come back
strong. We've got to answer some questions about employment.
We've got to find out what is happening with the need to
increase the minimum wage, because I think that is what is
keeping some of our people from wanting to come back to work.
They're looking for better wages. They're looking for better
opportunities.
So, with that, let me just say thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Chairman Powell.
Mr. Clyburn. I thank the gentlelady. And I'm sure Chairman
Powell is very pleased that I did not close this meeting
without your comments.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Mr. Clyburn. Let me continue to close by reminding--many of
you may recall when we passed the CARES package, as we were
debating it, I said at a meeting that I thought this would give
us an opportunity to build an economy with the vision, with our
vision. I was chastised for having said that.
But I want to say once again, fulfilling the vision of this
country, as we heard from Chair Powell today, is integral to
our, what I call the pledge, as we close our Pledge of
Allegiance, with liberty and justice for all.
That's the vision that all of us have for this great
country, and that is why we are working hard to pass the
American Jobs Plan and the American Families Plan, which will
make the investments in our infrastructure and our families
that are necessary to build back better.
As we listened to the testimony today and the Q&A, we were
talking about why people have not gone back to work. I've
talked to a lot of people in my state that will go back to work
tomorrow if we could cure their childcare problems.
That's what we've got to do. We've got to make sure that
this Families Plan is put in place so people's children will
not be endangered when they go back to work.
So, Chair Powell, I thank you so much for testifying today.
The Fed continues to play a critical role in helping our
Nation recover from the coronavirus crisis and in ensuring
equitable recovery. I trust that you will never lose sight of
the fact that millions of Americans are dependent on the Fed
continuing to support the economy's recovery.
With that, and without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit additional written
testimony for the witness to the chair, which will be forwarded
to the witness for his response.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:38 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
