- REGENERATIVE AGRICULTURE: HOW FARMERS AND RANCHERS ARE ESSENTIAL TO SOLVING CLIMATE CHANGE AND INCREASING FOOD PRODUCTION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REGENERATIVE AGRICULTURE:

HOW FARMERS AND RANCHERS

ARE ESSENTIAL TO SOLVING

CLIMATE CHANGE AND INCREASING

FOOD PRODUCTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 19, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-93

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov
oversight.house.gov
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-224PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Mike Flood, Nebraska
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Katie Thomas, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Environment

Ro Khanna, California, Chairman
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Ralph Norman, South Carolina,
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York       Ranking Minority Member
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Jimmy Gomez, California              Pat Fallon, Texas
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Cori Bush, Missouri

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 19, 2022....................................     1

Witnesses

Bonnie Haugen, Owner, Springside Farm
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Kara Boyd, President, Association of American Indian Farmers
Oral Statement...................................................     8
Doug Doughty, Missouri Grain Farmer and Cattle Producer
Oral Statement...................................................     9
Dr. Rachel E. Schattman, Assistant Professor of Sustainable
Agriculture, University of Maine
Oral Statement...................................................    11
Brian Lacefield, Director, Kentucky Office of Agricultural Policy
Oral Statement...................................................    13

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

* Citizens Petition on the Rescind Air Consent Agreement;
submitted by Rep. Tlaib.

* Citizens Petition on the Concentrated Animal Feeding
Operations; submitted by Rep. Tlaib.

* Report, ``Well-Fed: A Roadmap to a Sustainable Food System
That Works for All''; submitted by Rep. Tlaib.

Documents entered into the record during this hearing and
Questions for the Record (QFR's) are available at:
docs.house.gov.

REGENERATIVE AGRICULTURE:

HOW FARMERS AND RANCHERS

ARE ESSENTIAL TO SOLVING

CLIMATE CHANGE AND INCREASING

FOOD PRODUCTION

----------

Tuesday, July 19, 2022

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Environment
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:06 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ro Khanna
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Khanna, Cooper, Ocasio-Cortez,
Tlaib, Gomez, Krishnamoorthi, Norman, Gibbs, Fallon, Herrell,
and Comer.
Also present: Representative Flood.
Mr. Khanna. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Climate change poses serious threats to food security. As
the magnitude and frequency of extreme weather events
increases, disruption threatens our food supply at home and
abroad. Elevated temperatures contribute to causing drought,
which depletes water reserves, worsens crop yields, and
increases fire risks.
The United Nations estimates that global food production
must increase by at least 60 percent to meet the expected rise
in the Earth's population by 2050. Global yields of maize and
wheat, by far the world's two most consumed crops, will decline
significantly due to global warming in the coming decades.
The resulting higher food prices and food insecurity will
disproportionately harm low-income communities and communities
of color.
Farmers are a key part of the solution. Regenerative
agriculture is a system for food production that puts more back
into the ground than it extracts. With regenerative practices,
farms provide benefits to their environment. Regenerative farms
improve water and air quality, soil health, and ecosystem
restoration, all the while increasing productivity. It's driven
not by Washington, DC. It's driven by the farmers themselves
and their ingenuity. Regenerative practices can lower carbon
emissions and provide clean water, clean air, and rebuild farm
communities.
It's rooted in millennia of tradition. Our modern
industrialized food system makes it difficult to practice. The
market power exercised by agribusiness or family farmers leave
little flexibility for regenerative practices.
The top four beef-packing companies control nearly 85
percent of the market. The top four pork packers control 71
percent. Just four companies control 90 percent of the entire
global grain trade. Companies use that market power to dictate
how farmers must produce livestock, grain, fruits, and
vegetables. Farmers are often prevented from diversifying
crops, integrating livestock with crops, or adopting other
regenerative practices.
The industrialization of agriculture has had a tough
impact, a negative impact often on rural economies.
Consolidation and industrialization have caused nearly 17,000
cattle ranchers to go out of business every year since 1980.
Today family farmers earn just 16 cents on every dollar spent
on food at the grocery store. Financial stress has contributed,
unfortunately, to a suicide rate among farmers that is six
times the national average.
We should support farmers and invest in rural America.
Farmers providing environmental services through regenerative
agriculture must be compensated for those services. Pay farmers
for regenerative agricultures. For example, the Environmental
Quality Incentives Program and Conservation Stewardship Program
are two of USDA's primary working lands conservation programs.
They're underfunded. Listen, just last year, the USDA granted
27 percent of Environmental Quality Incentives Program's
eligible applicants and just 35 percent for the Conservation
Stewardship Program.
Federal policy supports inherently unsustainable practices.
By law, the Environmental Quality Incentives Program must spend
50 percent of its funds to benefit livestock producers. Those
same companies will control the vast majority of the market
share. Commodity subsidies and subsidized crop insurance
primarily go to crops used for livestock feed. The government-
subsidized loan costs primarily benefits the largest producers,
who often don't use regenerative practices.
Today I'm introducing legislation to support regenerative
agriculture. We must fully fund the USDA's conservation
programs. We must reform them to provide farmers more
flexibility to do what they think is best, as opposed to being
dictated by corporate executives, who may have no actual
experience in farming. We must enable farmers to be
environmental entrepreneurs on their land. Basically, we must
listen to farmers themselves. No one knows what's best for the
land better than those who work on it day in and day out. They
know better than those of us in D.C. They know better than the
corporate executives. And the resolution says: Listen to
farmers and pay farmers for the practices that they think are
best for their soil.
In addition to our witnesses here today, I want to thank
Matt Russell of Iowa for his many years of leadership on this
issue. Matt Russell really has pioneered listening to farmers.
Finally, I want to thank Secretary Vilsack for his relentless
leadership for farmers and rural America and his investment in
many programs on regenerative agriculture.
I now recognize Ranking Member Norman--we may sometimes
disagree, but he is always collegial, and I really respect his
service--for an opening statement.
Ranking Member Norman.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Chairman Khanna.
I'll return the compliment to you. You have always been
open, and we may not agree on many issues, but you're
congenial, and I really appreciate that.
I would ask for unanimous consent for Representative Flood
to waive on for today's hearing.
Mr. Khanna. Yes. I see no objection. He is on the
committee.
Mr. Norman. Great.
Agribusiness in South Carolina is South Carolina's No. 1
industry. From corn and cotton to tobacco and turkey, the
farming industry in South Carolina accounts for a quarter of a
million jobs and almost $50 billion in direct annual economic
impact. Farmers and ranchers are the real stewards of the land,
not left-wing bureaucrats in Washington, DC.
Since President Biden took office, the agriculture industry
has fallen under severe attack. Input costs for farmers are
surging. From May 2021 to May 2022, these costs increased 15
percent. The cost of fertilizer alone is 77 percent higher
today than it was the same time last year.
I had a farmer three months ago, which is planting season,
tell me: Where can I get fertilizer?
He could not get fertilizer to fertilize his crops, which
produce the yield, and as all of you know--and I did research
your background. All of you are farmers and have experienced it
firsthand, but he couldn't get fertilizer. That's a direct
result of a lot of different reasons, but fuel leads the way as
one of the main culprits.
Farmers and American people are facing record-high prices
for gasoline and diesel, and I can assure you tractors,
combines do not--you cannot plug in. They do not run on solar
panels. Increased input costs are cutting deeply into the
farmers' bottom line. Some are not sure if they can even break
even.
I was telling Chairman Khanna, my cousin is a pretty good
size chicken farmer. Guess what he called me about that he
could not get? Feed for his pullets. He could not get feed for
the pullets to feed the chickens, and I was telling Ro that
they supply a lot of the fast-food markets. It's coming pretty
quick when we will not get be able to get the chicken biscuit
or they will be severely limited or they will be priced so high
people won't have it because the trucks cannot afford to get on
the roads to deliver the feed for his pullets. Eighty-year-old
company, first time he's ever had this problem.
The Biden administration's proposed revisions to the Waters
of the United States, otherwise known as WOTUS, rule, will re-
ignite Obama-era uncertainties, uncertainties that President
Trump had resolved to benefit America's farmers. The revisions
would broaden the definition of what a navigable Federal
waterway. This will lead to nationwide revaluation of Federal
stream and wetland permits, saddling farmers with additional
hoops to jump through.
Just last month, President Biden's EPA proposed a new rule
that would severely limit the use of Atrazine, one of the most
popularly used herbicides used by farmers, and I'm anxious to
get into the debate on the elimination of pesticides and how
that works. Atrazine, which is safe for humans, it allows
farmers to produce a large yield of crops while keeping prices
affordable. President Biden has again put the interests of far-
left environmental groups over farmers, ranchers, and the
American consumer.
The Biden administration has not targeted farmers with
regulations--it has not just targeted farmers with regulations,
but also with the new tax proposals as well. His proposed
legislation, the American Families Plan, would cost farmers
millions of dollars. And God help us if a farmer dies because
transferring wealth and transferring that farm could be saddled
with an exorbitant tax bill. When the head of a household dies
under President Biden's reckless taxation and spending plan,
they could be forced to sell their farm, which they will have
to do.
Ironically, President Biden recently called U.S. farmers
the backbone of freedom. If that's the case, why do Biden's
administrative policies continue to harm the livelihood of
farmers, which is what many of you--most of you testifying
today do for a living.
Democrats want to tell farmers they need to lower their
carbon emissions, but they will allow China to pollute the
environment more and more every day; coal plants being built
every week. We need to let farmers farm, not shoulder them with
burdensome regulations and huge tax bills. As most farmers tell
me: Get the bureaucracy, get the government out of the way and
just let them do what they were born to do and, in many cases,
born with their families to do.
Last, but not least, this came out today. On top of all of
the issues we've got: Global supply chain crisis could worsen
in 2022, the survey shows. Just getting products to the farmers
to help do what you do is going to be even worse than it is
today. God help us all.
Chairman Ro Khanna, thank you so much for the witnesses
today.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
I now recognize Ranking Member Comer--good not to see him
on Squawk Box but here--for an opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairman Khanna.
And, before I get into my opening statement, I too want to
recognize Congressman Flood of Nebraska to the Oversight
Committee, and we'll be giving you a formal introduction in a
full committee hearing tomorrow.
And I want to thank the witnesses for participating here
today.
The U.S. agriculture industry is the best in the world. For
generations, American farmers have combined technology,
science, ingenuity, and work ethic to outpace global
competition. Simply put, American farmers are the best at what
they do. I understand firsthand what our farmers do for our
Nation and our world.
When I served as the Kentucky commissioner of agriculture
prior to coming to Congress, I worked very closely alongside
Kentucky farmers. The agriculture industry in Kentucky alone
provides over 250,000 jobs and is home to more than 74,000
farms, most of which are small family farms.
However, the Biden administration's radical environmental
policies are hurting our farmers. Hours after taking office,
President Biden shut down the Keystone Pipeline, cutting off a
huge source of American energy independence. The Biden
administration held off renewing or approving oil and gas
leases, contributing to historic gas prices. For the first time
ever, the national average for gas was over $5 a gallon.
California's gas prices, Mr. Chairman, reached nearly $10 a
gallon.
Further, our supply chains were already struggling to
recover from COVID shutdowns. Now they're trying to recover
with skyrocketing energy prices, and that's pretty tough to do.
Just look at our grocery stores. They are struggling to keep
the shelves stocked. Meanwhile, we have parents across the
country having a hard time to feed their babies because of a
shortage of baby formula. The Energy Index also rose 41.6
percent over the last year, the largest 12-month increase since
1980.
The Biden administration's energy policies have contributed
to all-time high food prices and historic inflation. It would
be great to talk to the Biden administration about this, but
today, once again, the Democrats talk about Federal policies,
and there isn't a single witness from the Biden administration
on our panel. Instead, we're going to hear how farmers need to
use regenerative farming practices. Well, American farmers are
already doing that. Farmers regularly use sustainable practices
to create a higher yield and promote efficiency on their lands.
Unfortunately, Democrats love using this catch-all term as
an excuse to justify more regulation on farmers. They want to
claim that if only farmers were forced to use these techniques,
then climate change would be solved. But we should not and
cannot wrap up farmers in bureaucratic red tape. Doing so will
hurt farms, destroy American food supply, and do nothing to
solve climate change.
Sadly, the Biden administration continues to burden farmers
with more regulations that create more costs and uncertainty,
and these costs are passed on to the American people who are
struggling to make ends meet due to a 40-year high inflation.
Take the proposed revisions to the Waters of the United
States rule, the WOTUS rule, for example. This rulemaking would
cutoff access to crops on farmers' lands because it gives the
Federal Government power over any waterways on the land. Now,
what sense does that make?
Under President Biden, the EPA is also trying to limit
useful herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers. These products,
however, allow farmers to produce high yields and safeguard
human health. Again, what sense does that make, especially when
our economy is suffocating from inflation?
President Biden tells American farmers they should be
feeding the world, yet he removes the tools and the technology
they need at every turn. Advances in these technologies keep
the U.S. No. 1 in agriculture and keeps food on the table for
America and the world.
For the sake of American farmers and consumers, the
government should not have a bigger seat at the table. It needs
to excuse itself from the table and let American farmers do
what they do best, and that is succeed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Now I would like to introduce our panel of witnesses.
Our first witness will be Bonnie Haugen, who is owner of
Springside Farm in Minnesota.
Our second witness will be Kara Boyd, who is the president
of the Association of American Indian Farmers.
Our third witness will be Doug Doughty, a Missouri grain
farmer and cattle producer.
Our fourth witness is Dr. Rachel Schattman, assistant
professor of sustainable agriculture at the University of
Maine.
I recognize Ranking Member Comer to introduce the final
witness.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairman Khanna.
The final witness I'm very pleased to have with us today:
Mr. Brian Lacefield. He is the director of the Governor's
Office of Agriculture Policy in Kentucky, a lifelong friend of
mine from a great farm family in Christian County, Kentucky,
and, like me, a graduate of Western Kentucky University with a
degree in agriculture. So very pleased to have Brian Lacefield
as a witness.
I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
The witnesses will be unmuted so we can swear them in.
Please raise your right hand.
Do you swear to affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Ms. Haugen. Yes.
Ms. Boyd. Yes.
Mr. Doughty. Yes.
Ms. Schattman. Yes.
Mr. Lacefield. Yes.
Mr. Khanna. Let the record show the witnesses answered in
the affirmative. Thank you.
Without objection, your written statements will be made
part of the record.
With that, Ms. Haugen, you are recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF BONNIE HAUGEN, OWNER, SPRINGSIDE FARM

Ms. Haugen. Thank you.
Chairman Khanna, Ranking Member Norman, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I am Bonnie Haugen, and I believe that farming is truly
everybody's bread, butter, and water. I had a raindrop on my
head this morning. Keep that in mind, and the significance will
come to that in my last paragraph.
In southeastern Minnesota, in hilly karst geology, 50 miles
from the Mississippi River, my family runs a grazing dairy
business with a seasonal herd of 160 cows. On our 270-acre
farm, we use rotational grazing, and our cows graze on pasture
with forages that includes grasses, clover, and more. These
forages sequester carbon and keep soil from eroding by wind or
water.
My passion for farming and environmental stewardship has
led me to be involved with several different organizations,
including Land Stewardship Project, Campaign for Family Farms
and the Environment, and other groups. I'm also a part-time
Dairy Grazing Apprenticeship, or DGA, education coordinator and
a certified farm transition coordinator with International Farm
Transfer Network. But I'm representing myself today.
Until 2011, I did the management, feeding, and most of the
milking on our seasonal herd averaging 130 cows. My husband
worked off the farm and supplied health insurance, which is a
typical arrangement for farmers today. In 2011, our son, Olaf,
came home to manage the dairy. Currently, on our farm, I do the
bookwork and grandchild care when needed. Three of the
grandkids, ages 8, 6, and 3, want to farm. I want them to have
the opportunity to farm without being a serf to corporate ag.
When we bought these acres 29 years ago, there were about
12 dairy farms within a three-mile radius of us. Now there's
only one other dairy with approximately 400 cows aside from us.
What I have seen in my community mirrors national trends. In
1970, there were about 620,000 dairy farms nationwide, and now
there's only 32,000 dairies or less, or about 19 percent.
The pressure of corporate ag and CAFOs, which are
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations, on the dairy sector in
my community has taken away a fair opportunity from the
neighbors who wanted to keep or pass on dairy farming.
Corporate dairy farms also often use management actions
that threaten the safety of our water and air. These operations
concentrate millions of gallons of liquid manure in one spot,
which is risky, especially in this karst area. I really think
that a moratorium on any new CAFO dairies is a good idea for
the milk markets and our communities. Please remember that big
CAFO dairies are not the same as ours. They're like big box
stores similar to a Walmart building in the middle of one of
our small towns.
It's also important that sustainable farming practices are
supported. Our unique farming methods have helped us survive
difficult times on the farm and benefit the environment. Our
cows live outside, walk to the barn for milking, and go back
out to the paddock to get most of their feed and leave most of
the mature in the paddock, which is a specified fenced area,
where it will start to benefit the soil, soil bugs, dung
beetles, and plant roots right away. The cows get a new paddock
area after each milking twice a day. Studies, such as Grassland
2.0 at the University of Wisconsin, show that perennial
pasture, like the pasture, we have grown, is the best crop for
carbon sequestration and also increases water infiltration,
which benefits water and soil quality.
I'm submitting research studies and some comments from some
of my colleagues in my written testimony, and please give them
at least a skim.
Now, Federal programs such as the Conservation Stewardship
Program help farmers understand and benefit from implementing
regenerative practices. I urge you to support increased funding
for them.
Now, this summer, whenever you might be caught in a rain
shower or thunderstorm, I challenge you to remember this: The
raindrops landing on you may have landed on my cow's back,
fallen down in the grass, soaked into the ground, followed a
karst crack in the St. Peter aquifer. Then my neighbor's
confined cow drank it, passed it on into their slurry store,
then out to the cornfield, but before it could soak through the
dry crust, it was carried with a deluge into the stream, the
creek, the river, the ocean, then evaporated to the sky where
it connected with other drops while floating in the wind, the
wind currents being carried over your head, clinging to other
raindrops and getting too heavy, so it drops on you.
And there's supposed to be a picture of drops. There we go.
There it is.
We are all so interconnected. What I do on my hills truly
does affect water quality and quantity for all of society, and
farming truly is everybody's bread, butter, and water.
Thank you.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Ms. Boyd, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF KARA BOYD, PRESIDENT, ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN
INDIAN FARMERS

Ms. Boyd. Honorable Congressman Khanna, Ranking Member
Norman, and committee members, it's truly an honor to be
invited to speak with you here today. Thank you.
I'm Kara Brewer Boyd, an enrolled member of the Lumbee
Tribe of North Carolina. My Tribe is the largest Tribe east of
the Mississippi and the eighth largest in the United States. My
Tribe is located in southeastern North Carolina down along the
South Carolina border, and we have been producing agriculture
for centuries.
My husband is John Boyd, the founder and president of the
National Black Farmers Association. My husband and I maintain
1,500 acres in Southside, Virginia. Our agriculture production
includes corn, soybeans, wheat, hemp, summer vegetables. Our
livestock production includes beef cattle, meat and dairy
goats, chickens, and hogs.
The Association of American Indian Farmers has about 3,500
members across the United States in which I serve as their
founder and president.
Being an indigenous person here in North America, I highly
value food security and resiliency. As we have always found
food to feed our families, travel communities, and others,
indigenous people understand being a good steward of the land
includes making decisions with forethought of future
generations.
The COVID-19 pandemic, the war in Ukraine, and increasingly
extreme weather conditions have each contributed to bringing us
into a farm crisis, which may lead to a food crisis in the very
near future, and which threatens the longevity of our
agricultural system as well as our national security and food
supply.
Yet, underpinning all of this, playing arguably the biggest
role in the farm crisis and our collective future, is our soil.
Regenerative agriculture is a critical solution to the farm
crisis. Combining indigenous knowledge, holistic, adaptive, and
cutting-edge science, it puts forth six key principles that
allow any farmer or rancher to restore sole function.
The principles are: context, least disturbance, living
roots, soil armor, increased diversity, and animal integration.
Regenerative agriculture increases the resilience of our
land and profitability for producers, but, unfortunately,
Federal policies, including the farm bill, currently are not
supporting farmers and ranchers in this transition.
On behalf of our regenerative farmers, Mr. Chairman, and
members of the committee, you have the opportunity to foster
this change. The House Oversight Committee should be aware of
these problems, profound problems, that are detailed in my
written testimony, as well as you're hearing from the other
witnesses, and their root cause, as well as the solution and
opportunity that lies in regenerating the soil beneath our
feet.
We're living in a time like no other, and we need science,
technology, indigenous wisdom, and holistic thinking, working
together to move us toward regeneration. Building back soil
health is the most cost-effective Federal investment we can
make at this time. From risk mitigation to farmer prosperity,
to human health to carbon sequestration, it is a win-win for
all. And this committee can help secure regenerative
agriculture moves us forward as a critical comprehensive
solution to the farm crisis.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Ms. Boyd.
Mr. Doughty, you're now recognized.

STATEMENT OF DOUG DOUGHTY, GRAIN FARMER AND CATTLE PRODUCER

Mr. Doughty. Chairman Khanna, Ranking Member Norman, and
members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity to be
here today.
I'm Doug Doughty. Barb and I grow corn, soybeans, and hay,
along with a cow-calf operation in north Missouri. I returned
to our family farm during the eighties' farm crisis. Little did
I know another crisis was unfolding and is continuing to gain
strength today, the proliferation of large-scale, industrial
CAFOs.
From where I stand in my 38 years of farming, industrial
agriculture nutrient pollution, such as nitrogen and
phosphorous, is increasing due to runoff and leaching of animal
manure and fertilizer from our fields. And Concentrated Animal
Feeding Operations, CAFOs, are escalating, both posing
environmental threats to our rural communities, our urban
neighbors, and even the Gulf of Mexico.
There is less soil. There is less topsoil, more carbon in
the air, and more agriculture-related greenhouse gas emissions
than yesterday. Overall methane emissions have declined since
1990, but agriculture-related methane emissions have risen, a
71-percent increase. EPA ties this growth of emissions to hog
and dairy factory farms. The sophisticated CAFO industry is
highly dependent on cheap feed and avoiding environmental
regulations, pushing Earth, farmers, and animals to their
limits. Recent state assessments show a laundry list of water
bodies impaired with bacteria, nitrates, and phosphates.
We raise cattle. I grew up raising hogs, was a pork
producer in my early farming years. I understand what is
involved raising animals for food, but what CAFOs do is
different than what we do on our farm. Buildings the size of
football fields concentrate thousands or tens of thousands of
animals and create massive amounts of manure in quantities
equivalent to cities, a challenge to be handled responsibly,
putting surface and groundwater at risk of contamination.
We need more effective CAFO regulations to counter this
massive environmental impact. It's past time to regulate the
waste and air pollution. Let's bring nitrogen and phosphorous
inputs in line with crop needs, an easy way to improve water
quality. Let's stop over applying manure and fertilizer, less
excess to wash away.
EPA has identified phosphate and nitrogen farm runoff as a
serious threat to the public's health and call for identifying
those responsible.
In 1997, our county enacted a local health ordinance to
govern CAFOs. The ordinance did not ban CAFOs but was stronger
than state regulations. The 20 Missouri health ordinances fell
victim to intense lobbying from corporate agriculture in 2019,
another domino to fall in a series of laws to deregulate the
industry.
We were taking a reasonable approach, but the attack on
local control takes that tool away, and our state government,
commandeered by corporate ag, has eroded state protections and
regulations on CAFOs to near the EPA baseline. Weakening state
rules are described as coming in line with Federal regulations.
Shortly after the overturn of our health ordinance, we
resisted a 10,500 head industrial sow CAFO proposed near the
6,000-acre Poosey Conservation Area. We knew the impact it
would have on the neighborhood, dealing with air and water
pollution, health issues, flies, noise, and truck traffic, plus
the burden on our deteriorating highways and county roads, and,
finally, the potential harm to the conservation area, an
important public land, natural resource destination for
recreation. This was not opportunity knocking.
This CAFO was going to produce feeder pigs for JBS, the
Brazilian multinational, the largest meatpacker in the world.
How would JBS be held accountable? Other Missouri communities
deal with pollution issues from industrial CAFOs run by China-
owned Smithfield. China and Brazil get the pork. We get the
manure and environmental issues.
The permit was withdrawn for now, but Missouri is
determined to provide minimal protections. Recently, our DNR
removed perched water from the definition of groundwater.
Shallow groundwater had been discovered on the aforementioned
proposed CAFO site. Often perched groundwater is our only
source of groundwater that is reasonably available. Curiously,
the definition change applies to CAFOs, not other industries,
such as landfills and mines.
Federal regulations of CAFOs are weak. The EPA doesn't have
regulations in place to protect us from CAFOs, but EPA is our
last line of defense.
In the meantime, our own USDA funds CAFOs to pay for manure
lagoons and animal mortality facilities. Why is USDA
underwriting pollution with conservation dollars? Let's direct
a larger percentage of USDA dollars toward small and midsize
family farms seeking to implement cover crops, sustainable
livestock practices, farmers' markers, farmers selling directly
to consumers, or urban ag projects and neighborhood kitchen and
grocery initiatives. Let's fund resourceful farming and food
initiatives that contribute to the public good.
Thank you.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Doughty.
Dr. Schattman, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF RACHEL E. SCHATTMAN, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE, UNIVERSITY OF MAINE

Ms. Schattman. Good afternoon, Chair Khanna, Ranking Member
Norman, and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Rachel Schattman, and I serve as an assistant
professor of sustainable agriculture at the University of
Maine, an R1 land, sea, and space grant institution.
Before I begin, I would like to say thank you to
Representative Khanna for the invitation to testify and to the
National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition, which helped invite
me here today.
We're in this hearing because every agricultural sector in
every region of our country is already being affected by
climate change in some way, and the impacts are intensifying.
This is a long-term problem with consequences for us all. Even
if we were to stop putting greenhouse gases into the atmosphere
today, we would see temperatures increase throughout the
country and beyond with cascading effects on precipitation and
other weather patterns. These weather patterns in turn affect
the balance of agroecosystems which our communities of plants,
insects and animals, diseases and, importantly, the
interactions between all of these.
Though there are many uncertainties associated with what
the future holds, because of research that has already been
conducted, we know enough right now to support farmers as they
adapt to a changing climate, build resilience into their farms,
and anchor thriving U.S. agricultural industries so that they
can provide essential rural jobs and feed our population and
the world.
We can do this through unwavering support for sustainable
regenerative agriculture through evidence-based programs and
policies that meet farmers where they are and provide what they
say they need to move forward, which I touch on in my written
testimony and based on my own research and past work with
diversified farmers in the Northeast and wheat farmers in
Kansas.
To farm sustainably means that we grow food, fiber, and
fuel in a manner that does not undermine our ability to do so
in the future. To farm regeneratively is to do this in a way
that has a positive effect on natural resources. This term is
often used in the context of sequestering carbon, improving
soil health, or improving water quality through agriculture
management activities.
Specific practices guided by these principles include
reduced or no-tillage, cover cropping, crop rotation, and
integration of livestock into cropping systems. These practices
also have the added climate mitigation co-benefit of
sequestering carbon in soil when they are implemented over an
extended period of time.
Other practices, such as managing manure and amending
animal feed, alternative wetting and drying of fields in rice
production, and only using the most efficient irrigation and
fertilization practices have the benefits of reducing nitrous
oxide and methane emissions.
How to increase the use of sustainable regenerative farm
practices across different agricultural sectors is a question
for behavioral science. My research on adult education in
agriculture and forestry specifically related to climate change
led to a program called the Climate Adaptation Fellowship. This
program was based at the University of Maine and co-led by the
USDA Northeast Climate Hub and the Rutgers Climate Change
Institute. We piloted it last year with vegetable and small
fruit growers in the region and the agricultural advisers who
work with them. Together pairs of fellows completed on-farm
risk assessments and adaptation planning, put key adaptation
approaches into place, and engaged in peer-to-peer learning.
And this is just one example of an effort to create learning
communities where farmers can support one another to pursue
sustainable and regenerative practices and keep using them.
Support for farmers to learn and apply adaptation and
mitigation practices has been provided to a limited degree by
Federal and state and private programs in the past, but there's
room to do more. Many past efforts have been piecemeal, and
they are not universally acceptable to U.S. food, fiber, and
fuel producers.
For agriculture to meaningfully contribute to addressing
climate change, we need a unified approach, supported and
sustained by Federal policy and investment, and complimentary
community and state resources. This means heavily investing in
agricultural research, especially at land grant universities,
including historically Black colleges and universities and
Tribal colleges, and expanding education programs, technical
assistance, and financial assistance for farmers.
There are many sound evidence-based recommendations in the
2020 report by the Select Committee on Climate Crisis, which
are also included in the Agriculture Resilience Act, H.R. 2803,
put forward by Congressman Pingree of Maine and cosponsored by
the subcommittee's chairman. Passage and funding of these
initiatives would accelerate our ability to adapt to and
mitigate climate change through agriculture.
We must also ensure that Federal agriculture programs are
available to all who steward the land. In addition to climate
change being a matter of science, it's also invariably a
racial, gender, and economic justice issue as the negative
effects of climate change will fall disproportionately on those
who can least afford it.
To minimize the future harm to our country, we should bring
Federal policy to bear on extending and expanding how U.S.
agriculture adapts to and mitigates climate change. The health
and well-being of our people and the agroecosystems that feed
us demand it.
Thank you.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Schattman.
Mr. Lacefield, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN LACEFIELD, DIRECTOR, KENTUCKY OFFICE OF
AGRICULTURAL POLICY

Mr. Lacefield. Good afternoon, Chairman, Ranking Member,
members of the subcommittee, and other witnesses.
Throughout my career, I've worked directly with Kentucky
farmers in multiple capacities. I've worked with the University
Extension Service, as a banker, as a crop input retailer, and
most recently as state executive director of the Farm Service
Agency. Each role has provided me with a unique view of the
farmer's decision-making process. The topic we are covering
today is very broad and difficult to find a one-size-fits-all
solution.
Regenerative ag and agriculture technology, while newer
names, are not new concepts. Throughout our history, there has
been a push for efficiency and sustainability. Our human nature
has driven us to find new and innovative ways to maximize
production and limit resources used. This has driven the
evolution of our agriculture industry.
The first agriculture technology advancement was possibly a
simple stick, allowing tilling of the soil, establishing better
seed-to-soil contact, and establishing the plant where we
wanted. This has continued to evolve over time with technology
advancements. As technology advances, the costs must be
weighed. Practices must be sustainable both economically and
agronomically. We have learned as our industry evolved that
there are both short-and long-term costs to production, and we
must balance production practices with goals of preserving
resources for the future.
Kentucky farmers have been pioneers and early adopters of
conservation and regenerative practices. The land we work has
driven the need for this. Early work with terrace farming in
Kentucky was studied during the Dust Bowl. No-till farming was
started commercially in western Kentucky by a progressive farm
family working with the University of Kentucky. Today it is a
widely utilized practice throughout the world, as it balances
agronomic and economic sustainability.
Kentucky agriculture had a paradigm shift in 1998 with the
Tobacco Master Settlement. The individual states had sued the
tobacco companies for Medicaid health costs related to tobacco
consumption. At this time, more than half of Kentucky's farmers
raised tobacco. This was over 48,000 farm families in our
state. Tobacco receipts accounted for 25 percent of our farm
gate receipts.
Agriculture leaders and members of our state legislature
had the foresight to understand the impact to our producers in
our rural economy. In 2000, Kentucky's Office of Agricultural
Policy was created, and half the available funds were dedicated
to be invested in agriculture. The investment was established
to provide economic incentives to diversify Kentucky's
agriculture and to grow our farm income. Twenty-two years
later, our General Assembly continues to dedicate 50 percent of
available annual master settlement agreement payments to
agriculture.
To date, nearly $700 million have been invested in Kentucky
agriculture. The majority of these investment dollars have had
a cost-share component, so well over a billion dollars of
public-private investment have been made for this purpose in
Kentucky. The result is Kentucky farm gate receipts have more
than doubled. Our tobacco dependence has declined from 25 to 4
percent of income, and we have declined from more than 50
percent of Kentucky producers raising tobacco to now we're just
slightly over one percent.
The most popular program that we currently administer is a
menu-based cost-share program covering 11 different investment
areas. Each producer can find items that are based on research
and best management practices to utilize. There's a producer
education component required for participation and a
requirement to have a water quality claim. This program has had
a very high participation rate across the state and repeat
annual applications. It is a purely optional plan, and a great
distinction has been built in to be the economic carrot to best
management practices and not a subsidy.
Many of the items available for cost-share participation
are consistent with several of the principles of regenerative
agriculture: enhancing and improving soil health, improvement
of water quality, optimization of resource management.
The optimization of resource management is of critical
concern as our producers are facing many challenges in our
current market. High input prices, global disruption of
markets, challenges finding labor, and rising interest rates
are putting intense pressure on our Nation's farmers and
ranchers.
As I was preparing for this meeting, I went to the
University of Kentucky Ag Econ website. The first link was for
information related to financial and mental stress. Our
producers need our help as we navigate these challenging times.
Additional regulations or production mandates would cause
detrimental stress. I share the examples of my agency as a way
we can work toward offering elective incentives for practices
that are proven to be agronomically and economically viable.
I appreciate the opportunity to visit with you today. I'm
happy to discuss these points and any additional topics you
have as questions.
As we move our industry forward, it will take the
collective work of a diverse group of stakeholders, and I look
forward to the discussion. To quote my favorite Kentucky chef,
Ouita Michel: There is room at the table of agriculture for
everyone.
Thank you.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Lacefield.
I now recognize myself for five minutes of questioning.
Farmers know the difference that regenerative agriculture
makes. Many of the environmental and economic benefits of
regenerative agriculture are not quantified or taken into
account in policy decisions. The U.S. Department of Agriculture
can support rural communities through regenerative agriculture
and paying farmers for those practices.
Ms. Haugen, how does regenerative grazing improve water and
air on your farm?
Ms. Haugen. Thank you, Chairman Ro Khanna.
How does regenerative agriculture improve the water and the
soil on my farm?
Mr. Khanna. Yes.
Ms. Haugen. Did I hear that question correct?
Mr. Khanna. Correct.
Ms. Haugen. Regenerative agriculture differs a little bit
from sustainable agriculture. The terms are similar. Yes, many
things are similar. But I believe when people talk about
regenerative agriculture, we are focusing on looking and really
seeing what is happening and being more interactive with our
thoughts and not just actions.
So, in regenerative agriculture, we look closer at the soil
and think more about how the manure acts with the soil.
Oftentimes the liquid manure that is put on from a CAFO has
already sat for a long time, and when it comes on as liquid, it
may run off, just does not have quite the same consistency as
when a cow drops their cow paddy on the hillside and, because
of its consistency, it does not run off. It sits there. It
doesn't take long before the dung beetles come in and start
acting and the other microbes start acting, and it just starts
to happen right away. That's a regenerative agriculture type of
thing that starts rebuilding the soil right away.
When our soils are rebuilt, we have better water holding
capacity, which means the water does not run off. It's there,
and it stays there so we are better prepared for a drought.
There are reclamation examples of reclaiming desert type of
places if you look in ``Conquest of the Land Through 7,000
Years,'' the NRCS publication. Another way is that regenerative
agriculture, if we don't over concentrate our animals or manure
in any one spot, my vet once told me years ago, Dilution is the
solution to pollution. Whether we talk about cow numbers, I
don't think that's as important as cow density and how we
handle our land and how we handle the manure. That is really
more of the issue than my 200 cows versus 10,000 cows, though
there are plenty of studies where ten 1,000 cows are more
beneficial to a community than one 10,000-cow dairy. That's----
Mr. Khanna. Thank you----
Ms. Haugen [continuing]. Answer that----
Mr. Khanna. Thank you----
Ms. Haugen [continuing]. Dr. Rich Levins, Ken Meter, and
John Ikerd, that have more valuable information on answering
that question with details than mine.
Thank you.
Mr. Khanna. That was a great answer. Thank you, Ms.--thank
you for that.
Let me ask a question. Short answer if you could, Dr.
Schattman. How can farmers help us avoid the worst of the
climate crisis? And would paying them for regenerative
practices help?
Ms. Schattman. I do believe that paying them for good
stewardship practices would increase use across the landscape.
I don't think it's the only way to motivate people to use some
of these practices, but I think it's a powerful tool.
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate that.
And let me ask a question of Mr. Lacefield. You know, we
have a bill that is bipartisan that would give the Department
of Agriculture a hundred million dollars to boost domestic
production for fertilizers, the quickest and most sustainable
fertilizers.
Would you support something like that?
Mr. Lacefield. Well, I, obviously, would want to know all
of the details in the bill. But, from the way you describe
that, yes, I know the sourcing of inputs has been an incredible
challenge for producers this year. This for sure in nominal
terms, and if not real terms, is the most expensive corn crop
in history established. And I know one of the concerns where we
have no way to fix things, we have a problem and have to go
back with different inputs because if we were able to get it,
we had just enough.
I've read some of this. I'm not sure how it all works to do
this because, like we heard in some of our comments about the
concentration in our livestock processing, we had the same
issue with the large suppliers of our inputs.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
I now recognize Ranking Member Norman for five minutes of
questions.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Chairman Khanna.
Let me ask those of you on the farm that, I guess, make a
living farming, the regenerative agriculture if it includes in
your practice no-till farming and the restrictions of
pesticides.
Ms. Boyd?
Ms. Boyd. Yes, it does. I am a no-till farmer, and we've
reduced the amount of pesticides. We try to only spray and use
them when we need to. And it's something that is very
challenging, but we find that with the no-till, we don't have
as much weeds, but we still have some weeds.
Mr. Norman. How does the plant get root generation if you
don't--do you not till at all?
Ms. Boyd. Right. With the no-till, you're still growing
that seed. You can set the depth on the no-till grain drill to
about a half an inch to an inch, so you're still getting----
Mr. Norman. Is it on top of the weeds that--or do you do--
how do you handle the existing weeds that grow during the year?
Ms. Boyd. Well, that's the challenge with some of that
that's in my written testimony because we don't have the
fencing, and so we----
Mr. Norman. You don't have the what?
Ms. Boyd. We don't have perimeter fencing so we can bring
in our cattle and the livestock integration which would help
suppress the weeds to----
Mr. Norman. So you plant seed on top of the ground that has
not been tilled and get a good root system?
Ms. Boyd. It hasn't been tilled, but we spray. And that's
where we want to have more supportive-funded agriculture for
regeneration where we don't have to do a burndown, a chemical
burndown, to kill those weeds because we want to cut back on
the use of those chemicals.
Mr. Norman. How deep is the soil that you're planting in if
it hasn't been tilled?
Ms. Boyd. With our cultivators, the no-till cultivators,
we're getting our seeds between a half an inch to an inch in
the ground.
Mr. Norman. And you're getting a root----
Ms. Boyd. We get good root, and we get on average----
Mr. Norman. Do you make your living farming?
Ms. Boyd. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norman. OK. Let me ask, Dr. Schattman, have you--I
guess you're in favor of no-till farming and reduce--the outlaw
of all pesticides?
Ms. Schattman. No. No, that's not my perspective at all,
sir. I think it can be used judiciously and conservatively. And
I think in sustainable and regenerative agriculture, it's
important to have all of the tools in our toolbox but to use
those that we know have negative environmental consequences
very carefully.
Mr. Norman. OK. Mr. Lacefield?
Mr. Lacefield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Lacefield?
Mr. Lacefield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norman. Would you--the no-till conversation and the no
pesticides, what are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Lacefield. I think it would be very difficult. That's
one of the tradeoffs to what we have with no-till is you're
shifting to a herbicide form of reducing the weeds. So it
would--you're trading soil disturbance for utilization.
But I think Dr. Schattman made a very good point about you
have to have all of the tools in the toolbox and then figure
out the most efficient way to deploy them. As I mentioned, I've
been in the crop retail, input retail business, and I can tell
you producers do not want to use any more than they have to.
And that's where I think we have opportunities for precision
agriculture to where we're able to utilize the right product in
the right place at the right time and, most importantly, at the
right amount.
Mr. Norman. OK. Bonnie Haugen?
Ms. Haugen. Haugen, thank you.
Yes, I would agree with all of what I've heard so far. To
do the details of that, my son who is currently managing our
farm----
Mr. Norman. Very briefly. Bonnie, very briefly. I'm running
out of time.
Ms. Haugen. OK. Refer to my printed testimony.
Mr. Norman. Ms. Haugen, very briefly, do you agree with the
no-till farming and the reduction of pesticides?
Ms. Haugen. Yes, there are better ways than no-till
farming, and, yes, I agree with it.
Mr. Norman. OK. I guess my main questions--and I've got 39
seconds--I've have never--and I don't do this for a living. I'm
a recreational farmer, but I've never had a root system that
when you throw the seed on top of the ground that hasn't been
plowed, I don't understand that. I don't know how you get the
yield that you're getting. The issues that we have with--facing
now that I mentioned in my opening testimony, we're going to
have farmers who are not going to be able to exist anyway. And
I guess we'll have to grow them in China or let China grow the
food because, unless we can supply fertilizer, unless we can
get fuel and other basics to the farmers, they cannot exist.
That's the information I'm getting back. And when you cannot
get feed to feed your pullets, in the case of chickens, we've
got a severe problem.
Thank you all for your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
I now recognize Representative Gibbs for five minutes.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
First of all, I'm going to tell you I'm from Ohio. I'm
going to tell you a little bit of how we do things in Ohio.
I was a full-time farmer before I got this soft job in the
legislature and Congress.
First of all, there's some comments made about the CAFOs
and EPA. When I was in the legislature in Ohio years ago, the
EPA, the U.S. EPA does have jurisdiction over CAFOs. Usually
most states go through their state EPA. We changed that and
made it the Ohio Department of Agriculture. We have a very
strict regulatory framework in Ohio, and we've actually shut
down a couple of large CAFO farms in my time in the
legislature. We had an egg farm that was just a disaster, a
huge farm. They were producing two percent of the eggs in the
United States at the time. We shut them down.
Another misconception I think, Mr. Chairman, is a lot of
people think CAFOs, large farmers are corporate farms. Well, in
Ohio, they're really not. They're mostly family farms. And, you
know, it's all about economics of size. You know, when a
combine now they tell me costs well over a million dollars, you
have got to have more base to produce these crops, and the
machinery, you have to spread that over more acres. And so
we've got family farms. There might be two or three families
involved, but they're all family farms for the most part.
And the question of Ranking Member Ralph Norman talking
about no-till, I have been growing no-till corn and beans for
probably 30 years now every year. You've got to watch it. You
can have a disaster if you're not on top of it, but the no-
till, it does work. You know, the planter goes through there.
It plants it around about an inch deep, and the coulter goes
over it and presses it down and makes the seed bed. And you
cannot grow no-till anything without herbicides and pesticides.
And I would argue that, with the no-till technology and the
seed technology, we use less herbicides than we did before, and
they're safer. You know, one of the problems, years--is what
you call legacy herbicides that we used back in the fifties and
sixties and the early seventies. They stayed around. They
didn't break down the soil. Our herbicides we're using--and
Roundup being one of them--they're a contact herbicide that
don't do much on the roots, and they break down the soil,
microbes that they break down, and it's actually more
environmentally friendly.
And there's no way that we can produce enough food in this
country and also feed the world like we've done in American
agriculture without commercial-type production. I know some
people will say factory farms. You know, that's kind of, I
think, a misnomer. But I would argue too, we have to have farms
of all sizes. And the smaller farms, you know, the 100-cow
dairies, or whatever you wanted to say, a lot of them in my
area, they found niches. They might be organic producing. But
if we're all trying to produce--I used to raise a bunch of
hogs. And if we were trying to raise them all out on the open,
out on the pasture, we wouldn't have been able to have much
production, and we wouldn't be, you know, feeding the world
like we need to do.
Technology has improved yields. Part of this hearing is
increasing food production. In 1950, the average production for
corn in the United States was 50 bushels to the acre. When I
started farming in 1975, our goal was to have a 100-bushel corn
crop. Now we're 200. And I would argue that we're doing it more
environmentally safer and protecting the ground and the soil
because most of it, in my area anyway, is no-till.
When I first started farming, we couldn't grow beans,
soybeans, because we have--we're in rolling hills. We have
highly erodible land. With no-till technology, everybody in our
area can grow soybeans now. So we've got--and my dairy farm
operations really impress me. We have large dairies, you know,
1,000-cow plus dairies, family owned, family run. And they get
a lot of double cropping because they go in there, and they
will take off a corn crop or a bean crop in the fall. Then
they'll plant rye, and they'll take that off. And in the early
spring, you can get a corn or a soybean crop in. You got double
crop, and you get that green manure fertilizer. And this notion
about farmers are putting too much pesticides on, too much
fertilizer, spreading too much manure is really ridiculous. At
the price of fertilizer, you think we're just going to go out
and spread too much? I mean, it just doesn't make sense.
You know, as farmers, we don't set our prices. You know, we
try to hedge, and we try to form a contract and do the best we
can. But, you know, we have to take what we get. And there's so
much going on in the industry with vertical integration and
contracting, that's just kind of a natural progression because
of the cost and the size of the environment, how things go up.
So I could go on and on, but I wanted to say that I think
we are protecting the environment. We do it right. And in Ohio
anyways--I can't speak for the rest of the country. But, in
Ohio, we have a strong regulatory framework for the CAFOs,
thousand animal units and larger, and we have a history of
shutting them down when they don't do what they're supposed to
do. And they have to really manage that manure, and they're
really supervised about how they do that and the recordkeeping
they have to--and they of have to put those records to ODA.
And I think every state should have their Department of
Agriculture doing this for their CAFOs and not the EPA because
the problem--just a second here on my time. The problem we have
in Ohio, we had the EPA folks coming in there trying to
regulate CAFOs, and they didn't know anything about it. They
would walk into a farm, and they'd make--ask questions of
Congress that they had no clue, and they were the regulators.
And so when we had the agriculture people--and some people
might say that was the hem and the haw, you know, the fox in
the henhouse, but it's not true. You know, we want to make sure
our that our farmers in our agricultural communities in Ohio
are doing the right thing because we are a very diverse state,
a population of 11.3 million people and, you know, we have
close neighbors, and we have to do the right thing.
And, you know, to get this done, we have to make sure that
we're doing a good job, but we do need to have the pesticides,
herbicides, and the seed technology and the other technology
that goes with it. And we've increased in our yields, and we
are drawing a lot more--we have a 14 billion bushel corn crop I
think in the last couple of years. Years ago, a 10 billion
bushel crop would be a disaster, and we're doing that in a lot
less acres than we were doing before as everybody knows. So it
is sustainable, and I think it is regenerative, and it's
important to get it done.
I've gone way over my time, so I yield back. But I want to
make those points, that the biggest conservationists and
environmentalists, I believe, is the American farmer because
they live on that land and they drink that water first. And I
can attest to that because I've been living on farming for
almost 50 years now, and I understand that.
So I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. I want to recognize the Ranking
Member Comer.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairman Khanna.
Mr. Lacefield, as you know, farmers innovate with precision
agriculture technology with methods that collect and analyze
large amounts of data to determine the kind and amount of
inputs like fertilizers, water, pesticides, and what they're
actually needed for crop management. These methods can include
using GPS guidance, control systems, sensors, robotics, drones,
automated hardware and software.
How have these advances in technology impacted farming
communities in Kentucky?
Mr. Lacefield. Thank you, Congressman. Greatly. This has--
we've been talking all day today, it's been about the
allocation of resources, and this has been the continued
evolution of our industry. We started off, we used to farm by
the field and then--then we are now farming by the 2-acre grid
with precision ag, and we're going to advance to the point
we're going to be farming by the inch to where we'll be able to
best utilize these practices.
This precision technology that we're talking about is the
ability to select where you're putting the input. So where you
have a higher productive piece of ground, you're able to
increase the seed rate there and reduce it in others that are
not going to produce this. You're able to apply the fertilizer
at a variable rate so it's not a broadcast across the field. So
it is more efficient. It returns more to the producer and is
better overall for the environment.
Mr. Comer. And it does--that's a good point. It obviously
helps the environment as well as will make the farmer more
efficient.
How can the U.S. Government support precision agriculture?
Mr. Lacefield. Well, I think the market is going to
continue to drive this as you're seeing with input prices going
up. But, from the Federal Government standpoint, it goes back
to what my comments were earlier. You know, you want to see a
behavior increased, you create an incentive for that.
So I think it's to try to be able to get a point for the
farmer to try that. That's what I like about our programs that
we're currently running. They give that economic incentive,
some of them 15 cents on the dollar, 75 cents on the dollar to
try our practice, and then they usually see it works, and they
continue it on their own.
Mr. Comer. Now, Mr. Lacefield, I have to put a plug in for
the Princeton Kentucky UK Ag Research Center. Your dad was a
huge part of that, one of the experts in forage research, and I
know you're very familiar with that as well. Would you agree
that the availability of pesticides has improved all types of
farming in the last 50 years?
Mr. Lacefield. Absolutely. As research, we continue, we're
evolving, and that's another reason, to piggyback on the last
question, is continued investment from the Federal level in
research so we can be able to illustrate this to producers that
it makes more sense and to utilize these products.
Mr. Comer. I ask that because there's a lot of concern
among agriculture, as you know, that this administration and
this EPA want to ban certain types of pesticides, insecticides,
fungicides that are crucial to agriculture. And, you know, my
concern is that we could have a scenario with our food, if we
let the government step in and dictate pesticide applications,
insecticide application, like the government stepped in with
the FDA and shut down that baby formula factory and then walked
off and left, and we had a 36-percent shortage in baby food
because that plant produced a third of the baby food--baby
formula in America. If we tinker with production agriculture, I
fear that the same thing could happen with our food supply that
happened with baby formula.
Let me ask you this, Mr. Lacefield--last question here--
farmers in Kentucky and all over America are outraged because
of strict climate rules. What policy measures, if any, would
satisfy a farmer attempting to maximize crop yield efficiency
and profits but still obviously support the environment?
Because I agree with what my colleague and former farmer,
Representative Gibbs, said; I think the farmer is the ultimate
conservationist. But what policy would satisfy farmers that
could also hopefully satisfy the Americans who are concerned
with the environment, like I am?
Mr. Lacefield. Well, we all are concerned with the
environment, and I think that's been the consistent message
from every witness you've heard today is putting the decision
back on to the producer and the farmer. The greatest source of
wealth on a producer's balance sheet is going to be their land.
They're going to protect that asset.
Mr. Comer. I agree. And I, again, appreciate you and the
other witnesses for taking time to testify today.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
I recognize Representative Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
I'd like to start by thanking the--all the witnesses for
coming here today and sharing their insight on a topic
obviously of great importance to our country.
You know, when this Nation was founded, you have to look
back, and as we were rising to prominence on the world stage,
one of the most critical foundations that we had was
agriculture, of course. And American farmers and ranchers today
are helping feed 800 million people; we are the net exporter of
food, and without us, humanity would be suffering from chronic
hunger.
And, according to the United States Agency for
International Development, our Nation spent $8 billion in
emergency and development food aid across the globe since 2018,
I mean just in the last four years. Much of the food was grown
right here in American soil. As the rural population continues
to grow and the urban areas spread into arable land, the need
for food will continue to rise.
Democrats have cited an academic paper from 2011 that
anticipates that the global food production must rise at least
60 percent to feed the world by 2050. I have no doubt that
American farmers and ranchers will be able to meet the needs of
our Nation and export their surplus abroad.
According to the American Farm Bureau, 30 years ago, the
United States agriculture sector would need--would have needed
100 million more acres--100 million more acres to meet the
production levels required for today's food supply. But,
through innovation, they got there. The reason that our
ranchers and farmers were able to meet the goals is because of
sound farming practices and sound grazing practices coupled
with advanced agriculture technologies, and that can't be
understated.
Mr. Biden's so-called American Families Plan would have
done even more damage to the American farmers and ranchers.
Democrats attempted to end the like-kind exchanges and the
step-up in basis and bring back the wealth transfer tax, which
would've quite literally brought an end to American farms
across our country.
Today Democrats are attacking the farmers and ranchers
calling them the great polluters of the world, blaming them for
the environmental calamities that the world is facing and
demanding that we do more to stop climate change. It's a
dangerous game when D.C. politicians think they know better
than the folks that are actually putting their hands in the
dirt.
Regenerative agriculture practices have applied--have been
applied by ranchers and farmers across the country for decades.
They know the land. They know the environment far better than
us. It's their business and their bottom line. The American
farmers and ranchers have potential to feed the world--we
already know that--and we should not be holding them back.
So I have a question with the time I have remaining. Mr.
Lacefield, as you know, farming and ranching operations in the
country are as diverse as the geography on which they operate.
Certain regions, like the Dakotas, for instance, have barely
enough moisture to produce their primary crops let alone a
cover crop.
Hypothetically, if Democrats began mandating for the sake
of carbon caps covered crop requirements on all U.S. farming
operations, how would arid regions be able to accommodate such
pressures?
Mr. Lacefield. I think that's the problem. You can't make a
one-size-fits-all program. The years I served as the state
director for the Farm Service Agency, I would get phone calls
all the time about a new policy that we were rolling out about
how it did not work specifically for one farm in Kentucky. And
that was the one time in my life I enjoyed being able to use
the phrase: It is simply an act of Congress to change it.
So one size does not fit all.
Mr. Fallon. In your opinion, sir, is it feasible for
Democrats to mandate cover crops to ban certain EPA-approved
pesticides or require crop diversity?
Mr. Lacefield. No, I'm not for any mandate.
Mr. Fallon. And that's what scares me. What would you--what
would the primary issue for farmers and ranchers be if mandates
like this would go into effect, in your opinion?
Mr. Lacefield. It would be--it'd be increased cost of
production to--or possibly even feasible to produce.
Mr. Fallon. Well, I want to, again, Mr. Chairman, thank all
the witnesses for their testimony. We have to be very careful
here, tread very lightly. I represent a majority rural
district, a lot of agriculture and a lot of livestock and
ranching, and I know these folks work literally harder than any
other American, and it's a--sometimes it's a very thankless
job.
I think one of the things the pandemic did was really open
our eyes to realizing just how essential and critical our
farmers and ranchers are. They are literally the backbone of
the country. That's where everything begins and everything
ends.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
I now want to recognize Representative Flood. Welcome to
Congress. Welcome to the committee.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the
opportunity.
You know, in the 1930's, Nebraska dairy farmers had over
800,000 dairy cattle producing 4 million pounds of milk. Today
we have 60,000 cows in Nebraska producing the exact same amount
of milk. Dairy producers have become more efficient and
sustainable over the last 90 years and have significantly
decreased their impact on the environment.
Representative Comer's comments about innovation, I think,
were very important, that we point out that the producers are
actually leading the way on the issue of sustainability.
Mr. Lacefield, were you present online when a prior witness
named Ms. Haugen testified that she had 160 dairy cows on her
Canton, Minnesota, farm?
Mr. Lacefield. Yes, sir, I've been here the whole time.
Mr. Flood. So you're familiar with her testimony. Can you
tell me how many farmers make a living in the state of Kentucky
with 160 dairy cows?
Mr. Lacefield. We only have, I think, 380 dairy farms total
in the state, and about half of those would be part of our
Amish and Mennonite community that would probably have 35 to 40
head dairy, and they have multiple enterprises as well on--with
the dairy.
Mr. Flood. So obviously there are differences. You know, in
our state most of our dairy farms are 800--you know, 500 to 800
head facilities for the most part.
Talk about what innovation has done in agriculture,
specifically how we've mechanized a lot of the different
processes. I've seen in Nebraska how dairy farmers have
automated the entire process of milking cows. Talk about
innovation and sustainability as they go hand in hand in the
state of Kentucky.
Mr. Lacefield. Well, it's the evolution of the industry. We
are constantly forced to do more with less, and as we continue
to get more regulations, that puts an additional cost burden on
to the smaller farmer. It--I'll tie it to banking. That's my
other world. I've been in banking and agriculture my whole
career. When we went through the banking changes in the late--
early--I guess, 1908, 1909, 1910 Dodd-Frank era, we saw
regulation increase that really put undue burden on the small
producers--the small banks that, you know, had to have
dedicated staff for the regulatory issue. So it forced growth
to be able to be competing in the market. The same as with our
agriculture, that if we're not advancing with technology, we're
unsustainable and unable to be there, unless you do continue to
count on external income, all farm income to subsidize the
lifestyle.
Mr. Flood. Mr. Lacefield, have you seen inflation impact
the farming economy?
Mr. Lacefield. Significantly, from inputs. We talked
earlier about the fuel and how that drives so many of the input
costs within in the producer's enterprise budget as well as
labor. Everything in a producer's enterprise budget is tied to
inflation.
Mr. Flood. And how is that affecting the producer's bottom
line?
Mr. Lacefield. Significantly. It's going to cut into that,
and ultimately this cost will be passed on to the consumer.
Mr. Flood. Have you noticed that ag policies under
President Biden have changed?
Mr. Lacefield. Yes.
Mr. Flood. How so?
Mr. Lacefield. We have seen a rollback from--of course,
from which administration? You know, the previous
administration, we were navigating global trade wars and a
pandemic, and now we're looking at that. But the signals have
been that it's going to look more toward small producer and
less tied to production agriculture, and as we're discussing
today looking at specific practices.
Mr. Flood. Have you seen the supply chain crisis threaten
American farmers, those in Kentucky especially?
Mr. Lacefield. Significantly. Again, the agency I work
with, we were able to launch a program during the early 2000--
or 2020, right about the pandemic. Folks walked into a grocery
store and saw empty shelves for the first time realizing what
the slightest disruption will do. We increased the slaughter
capacity in Kentucky with a lot of the smaller beef and pork
and chicken processors, bringing some up to USDA giving farmers
an opportunity to where they can direct retail their meat to
consumers.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Lacefield. I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
I now want to recognize Representative Ocasio-Cortez.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much, Chairman.
And thank you to all of our witnesses here today for
sharing your--your testimony.
You know, I think for a lot of folks the term
``regenerative agriculture'' is something that is completely
new to them, and I think it's important that we take a step
back and really frame this for everyday people and why this
conversation is so important.
So let's start with basic food production 101. We grow,
particularly when it comes to growing crops from our soil. Soil
is an essential requirement to that. And, Dr. Schattman, I want
to make sure that we understand what is happening to the soil
in the United States and frankly across the world such that
regeneration, this idea of regeneration is necessary? What is
happening to the current U.S. soil supply, we shall say, we
shall call it?
Ms. Schattman. Thank you. It's a great--it's a great
question. I think one of the main concerns with soil resources
as an essentially nonrenewable resource is that it is eroding
and exiting areas where production happens and entering public
waterways, taking with it some unused fertility nutrients,
either manures or synthetic and pesticides, and that this is
having a negative ecological impact.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So we're seeing with our, in the U.S.
soil supply that we rely on to grow our crops and to serve as
part of our food supply, decarbonization, erosion,
decertification, and chemical pollution, which, as you noted,
is resulting as well in reduced minerals and nutrients that
which can be drawn and put into our food supply, correct?
Ms. Schattman. That is correct. Although it is important to
remember that not all areas are equally vulnerable to soil
erosion at the scale that I think you are--you are pointing to.
We're mostly concerned about areas where rainfall is expected
to become much more variable and more intense, and we're
concerned about farming systems that leave soil exposed, such
as cropping systems with a lot of tillage or a lot of
mechanical cultivation and in arid regions--regions as well.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So what does this mean about how long we
have before we, the United States, literally does not have
enough arable topsoil to continue feeding the population that
it's feeding now? What is the timeline that we have on--on how
much topsoil we have left?
Ms. Schattman. So there was a widely publicized report that
came from a scientist at the U.N. FAO that said we have
approximately 60 years left in crop-producing regions. However,
I've personally looked into trying to track down the data that
supports that report, and I haven't been successful in finding
it.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Ms. Boyd, indigenous farmers have taken
a regenerative agriculture approach to their relationship with
the land for millennia, correct?
Ms. Boyd. Correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And let's go through some of these
practices so that I think folks get a better handle on how we
can help preserve the supply. They include tactics like
rotating and diversifying crops, correct?
Ms. Boyd. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Integrating livestock and forestry on
farms?
Ms. Boyd. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And that also reduces the need for
tilling and pesticide use, as Dr. Schattman had just previously
noted, correct?
Ms. Boyd. Correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And, Dr. Schattman, the Department of
Agriculture itself has recognized more than 170 other farming
practices to be regenerative as well. Is that correct?
Ms. Schattman. I don't know that they are calling them
regenerative, but there is a lot of overlap between
regenerative and conservation practices, that is correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And we're seeing now that even when you
look at 50 or 60 years down the line, Dr. Schattman, just in
2019, farmers--U.S. farmers were unable to plant crops in 19.4
million acres of land due to record-breaking rainfall, correct?
Ms. Schattman. That is correct, yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And, as recently as this year, small and
co-op farmers in the Midwest have had to pivot their lands from
corn crops to others such as sunflowers and soybeans because of
that record rain, correct?
Ms. Schattman. Because of rainfall in this year not in
2019, but, yes, that is correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And, finally, Mr. Doughty, am I right to
understand that on top of contributing to improved water and
air quality, soil health and ecosystem restoration,
regenerative practices are also more productive ways to farm?
Mr. Doughty. Yes, I believe so. I'm a 100 percent no-till
farmer. My father was an early adapter in the 1970's, and I've
continued that tradition and improved upon it. We also use
waterways, crop rotations, field borders, terraces, ponds, and
our land continues to be--to increase in production.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Wonderful. Thank you very much.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Representative Herrell.
Ms. Herrell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you for--for all the witnesses for being here,
your testimony.
I want to ask Mr. Lacefield, just kind of talking about
what has been said in this hearing so far, we know the
inflation crisis facing our country is having a devastating
impact on our ag industry. And input costs for ag producers
like feed, fertilizer, fuel, have exponentially increased in
the last year, which is having direct impacts on how many
producers and especially those in New Mexico are operating.
And, unfortunately, these increased costs are inevitably being
passed onto every consumer.
So, Mr. Lacefield, I would want to ask you, what do you
think Congress should be doing to address the rapidly
increasing cost of agricultural inputs?
Mr. Lacefield. Well, I wish there was a simple answer to
what we can do. I'm very concerned about what we will have to
do to navigate out of this. We've lived through this before,
and fighting inflation is very difficult. We watched that in
the 1970's and the 1980's, and it's a lot like treating cancer
with the chemo to where you almost will have to kill the
economy to fix it. It's going to take increased interest rates
and reduced spending. We're going to have to bring dollars out
of the economy.
Ms. Herrell. Right. And I really just want to, I mean,
thank the farmers, all of them. I mean, this is, you know,
two--up to two percent of the population feeding 100 percent of
the world really, and it is not easy, and there are so many
complexities to it.
And I appreciate, Mr. Chairman, this hearing. But I've got
to say that, because this is so important, because I think we
all can agree that we like to eat, and there's no doubt about
it, there's not going to be a diminishing of that kind of need
in our Nation, but I think I also would be remiss if I didn't
put on record the frustration the producers in my state
especially are feeling toward the Federal Government,
specifically the unnecessary bureaucratic red tape coming from
this administration.
From rolling back needed reforms to NEPA and ESA, to
bringing back the Obama-era WOTUS rule, this administration has
taken many destructive actions that will negatively impact our
ag operations. In ESA alone, I have constituents who are losing
cattle every day due to depredations caused by endangered
wolves or having their herd sizes reduced due tooth endangered
New Mexico meadow jumping mouse, or having a timber industry
completely taken off the shelf because of the Mexican spotted
owl. And pretty soon I fear the only thing that will be
endangered in America is the American farmer and rancher.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I hope that we can find some
way to work together, because I fear that we are going to have
scarcity and shortages in food supply in the next number of
months and years if we are not thinking about how we can better
bring lower energy cost to the table and help our producers,
both with cattle and with produce through this time of crises
as we're talking about the inflation, et cetera. So thank you
so much for having this hearing.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Ms. Herrell. I yield back.
Mr. Khanna. Representative Tlaib.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairman Khanna, for this
important hearing. I do--would like to take a moment by
submitting three items for the record, Mr. Chair, a report from
the folks at Food & Water Watch called ``Well-Fed: A Roadmap to
a Sustainable Food System That Works for All'' and petitions
from advocates to the EPA focused on air and water pollution
from factory farms.
Mr. Khanna. Without objection.
Ms. Tlaib. There are a few industries, as we all know, that
are essential to our survival as--and as uniquely at risk from
impacts of climate change as our agricultural sector. At the
same time, massive consolidation into huge corporate industrial
agriculture has forced many of our small-and medium-size
farmers to go out of business.
According to the Open Markets Institute, Mr. Chair, the
industrial consolidation of ag has actually cost 17,000 cattle
farmers in our country to go out of business every year since
1980. They have been replaced by massive industrial operations
focused on short-term profits and ignore long-term
environmental impacts, putting our climate and our food supply
at risk.
While family farms struggle, big ag thrives, as we continue
to see. The biggest four meat packers made a record, Mr. Chair,
of $13 billion in profit in 2021. JBS, a Brazilian company and
the largest meat packing company in the world, announced that
in 2021, and during a pandemic, they earned over $4 billion.
So let's take a peek at their business practices for a
moment. Over the past 25 years, JBS gave over $100 million--I
would say very much in bribes--to more than 1,800 politicians
in Brazil, where the company is based. The company then turned
around and used those politicians to secure financing from
Brazil's state-owned bank in an effort to consolidate the
American beef market.
So, Mr. Doughty, you mentioned in your testimony that JBS
attempted to build 10,500 hog factory farms last year near your
farm. Can you tell us a little bit more about your experiences
with this company, JBS, and please, you know, why did you, you
know, decide to fight this project?
Mr. Doughty. Well, this was not JBS. This--they--the
operation would have been contracting with JBS. They would have
been growing JBS feeder pigs. We--we--we fought that project
for three things: First was the neighborhood, the potential air
and water pollution, the noise, the flies; and second, the
deterioration of our state highways. They are--they're asphalt
highways. There--there's no shoulders. They're already
crumbling. This particular CAFO would go back among--back in a
neighborhood with several--several houses, many families, about
seven miles, and we were concerned about what we were going to
do about our roads.
And then, third, was a--was our Huzzah conservation area, a
6,000-acre conservation area that's one of over 1,000 public
lands, 1,000 conservation areas in Missouri, along with our 58
state parks and 13 national parks. And it is a destination for
not only hunting and fishing but hiking and biking and nature
watching and kayaking, and it is funded by public dollars. And
we were concerned not only about that CAFO, but we were being
threatened with a proliferation if this CAFO came in.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes.
Mr. Doughty. And so that's why we resisted.
Ms. Tlaib. No, and you should.
And, Ms. Haugen, can you explain why a small family, you
know--our small family farmers are unable to compete? I mean,
you know, you don't get a chance to talk to the American
people. They don't--you know, the food gets to the table, they
have no idea what's actually happening and especially to our
small and family businesses--or farmers in particular. So can
you talk a little bit about your experience competing with
these, you know, corporate agribusinesses?
Ms. Haugen. Yes, they are like David and Goliath. I hear
some people say, we don't want to have as many regulations.
Let's have free market. That would be OK if it were a fair
playing field. It does not stay a fair playing field when we
have these mega corporate farms. We need something to help keep
them in control so we have a fair chance at being what we want
to do and doing what we want to do and doing what we can do. We
don't like the paperwork and extra regulation, but it's
necessary to keep it fair so we have a fair chance.
Ms. Tlaib. No, I think--I really do appreciate you saying
that. And sometimes those regulations impact you more than the
ones that are supposed to be the ones being checked.
Ms. Haugen. Yes.
Ms. Tlaib. It's unfortunate.
But, yes, I appreciate this hearing, Mr. Chair, and I
yield.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. Thank you very much. It's been a
terrific discussion. I want to thank our panelists for their
remarks.
I want to thank our staff, Kevin Fox, Katie Thomas, and
Aria, for their work, particularly Kevin.
I want to commend my colleagues for participating in this
important conversation.
With that, without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses to the chair, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response. I ask our
witnesses to please respond as promptly as you are able.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:35 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
