- CRACKING DOWN ON RANSOMWARE: STRATEGIES FOR DISRUPTING CRIMINAL HACKERS AND BUILDING RESILIENCE AGAINST CYBER THREATS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CRACKING DOWN ON RANSOMWARE:
STRATEGIES FOR DISRUPTING
CRIMINAL HACKERS AND BUILDING
RESILIENCE AGAINST CYBER
THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 16, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-52

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-259 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Peter Kenny, Team Lead
Elisa LaNier, Chief Clerk and Director of Operations
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 16, 2021................................     1

Witnesses

The Honorable Chris Inglis, National Cyber Director, Executive
Office of the President
Oral Statement...............................................     7

Mr. Brandon Wales, Executive Director, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency
Oral Statement...............................................     9

Mr. Bryan Vorndran, Assistant Director, Cyber Division, Federal
Bureau of Investigation
Oral Statement...............................................    11

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

The documents entered into the record for this hearing are listed
below.

* ``Biden tells Putin certain cyberattacks should be `off-
limits','' article, Reuters; submitted by Rep. Cloud.

* ``Garland Refuses to Rescind Memo Asking FBI to Probe School
Board Threats,'' article, U.S. News and World Report; submitted
by Rep. Cloud.

The documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

CRACKING DOWN ON RANSOMWARE:
STRATEGIES FOR DISRUPTING
CRIMINAL HACKERS AND BUILDING
RESILIENCE AGAINST CYBER
THREATS

----------

Tuesday, November 16, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom. Hon.
Carolyn B. Maloney [chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Lynch, Connolly,
Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Khanna, Mfume, Ocasio-Cortez, Tlaib,
Porter, Davis, Wasserman Schultz, Welch, Johnson, Speier,
Kelly, DeSaulnier, Comer, Foxx, Hice, Grothman, Cloud, Norman,
Sessions, Keller, Biggs, Clyde, Franklin, and Herrell.
Chairwoman Maloney. Welcome, everyone. Welcome to today's
hearing.
Pursuant to House rules, some members will appear in
person, and others will appear remotely via Zoom. For members
appearing remotely, I know you are all familiar with Zoom by
now, but let me remind everyone of a few points.
First, the House rules require that we see you. So please
have your cameras on at all times.
Second, members appearing remotely who are not recognized
should remain muted to minimize background noise.
Third, I will recognize members verbally, but members
retain the right to seek recognition verbally. In regular
order, members will be recognized in seniority for questions.
Last, if you want to be recognized outside of regular
order, you may identify that in several ways. You may use the
chat function to send a request, you may send an email to the
majority staff, or you may unmute your mic to seek recognition.
We will begin the hearing in just a few moments when they
tell me they are ready to begin the livestream.
Let me say that this is a bipartisan issue. Everyone in the
country is deeply concerned about cybersecurity, and I hope
that we will be able to work with ways to strengthen
protections for American business and government.
Are we ready to go? OK.
The meeting will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
This has been an unprecedented year for cyber-attacks. The
country is still reeling from last year's cyber-attack against
the company SolarWinds that was linked to Russia and infected
numerous Federal agencies. These attacks have been described as
a wake-up call for America. It attacked all through the Federal
Government and numerous private sectors also.
Just this weekend, it was reported that the FBI, our
premier law enforcement agency for investigating cyber-crimes,
was itself the victim of a hack that allowed emails to be sent
from FBI email servers disguised as genuine FBI emails. In
short, we are at a tipping point, as cyber-attacks have become
more common and potentially more damaging.
Several recent attacks have used a type of malicious
software known as ransomware, which encrypts a victim's system
and demands a payment in exchange for restoring access or
refraining from publishing stolen data. This is especially
dangerous because it can shut down an entire system and can
cause chaos in a community, an industry, or even an entire
country.
And cybercriminals are now demanding, and receiving, more
money than ever. In March, CNA Financial, an insurance company,
reportedly paid the largest known ransom payment ever, a
staggering $40 million.
In May, ransomware criminals from Eastern Europe attacked
the company Colonial Pipeline, resulting in the shutdown of
more than 5,500 miles of gasoline pipeline spanning from Texas
to New Jersey and causing temporary gas shortages up and down
the East Coast. The cost to unlock the system was $4.4 million.
Also, in May, JBS Foods, one of the largest meat suppliers
in the United States, shut down its plants when it suffered a
ransom attack. The cost to unlock their system was $11 million.
In June, this committee launched an investigation out of
concern that these multimillion-dollar ransom payments would
equip cyber criminals with even more financial resources and
encourage future attacks. Today, the committee issued a staff
memo with some of the committee's preliminary findings.
We found that these attacks often stemmed from minor
security lapses, even at companies with seemingly robust
cybersecurity. Our report also highlights the importance of
clearly established Federal points of contact for companies to
avoid wasting precious time when an attack is underway.
Finally, we found that companies faced substantial pressure to
pay these ransoms quickly, making it harder to stop these
attacks.
And it is not just large companies that are targeted.
Ransomware also harms small businesses, hospitals, schools, and
local governments. Since taking office, the Biden
administration has been countering ransom, and they are really
focusing on ransomware as a top priority. This included
bringing together 30 nations for a White House summit last
month to discuss strategies to combat the threat. It also means
taking a tougher line on countries, including Russia, that
harbor cyber criminals.
The Biden administration has also dedicated significant law
enforcement resources to take ransomware networks offline and
bring criminals to justice. Just last week, the Department of
Justice announced criminal charges against two foreign
nationals connected to the prolific ransomware criminal group,
REvil. DOJ also recovered more than $6 million in ransom money
paid.
This is a good start, but we cannot afford to let up on our
efforts. Congress must ensure coordination of anti-ransomware
efforts across the entire Federal Government and between the
public and private sectors. Last Congress, this committee held
a hearing on the need to establish a position at the White
House to lead the Federal Government's response to cyber
threats. I was proud that President Biden nominated Chris
Inglis to serve as the first National Cyber Director this year
and that he is testifying before us today.
I also am pleased that the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act, which President Biden signed just yesterday, included
$21 million in funding for the Office of the National Cyber
Director. This law, which House Democrats passed over the
objections of most House Republicans, will also provide $1
billion to help state and local governments shore up their
cybersecurity so we can prevent ransomware attacks and $100
million to help critical infrastructure respond to significant
cyber incidents. And the Build Back Better Act will provide new
resources to CISA to help enhance cybersecurity in both the
public and private sectors.
Ransomware attacks are a grave national security challenge.
Today, we will hear from our witnesses about the ``whole of
government'' effort needed to disrupt ransomware networks and
how we can help businesses, state and local governments, and
others to prevent, prepare for, and respond to attacks.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member, Mr.
Comer, for an opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair.
This year, we have seen an uptick in major ransomware
attacks that have the ability to wreak havoc upon Americans'
everyday lives. In March, CNA Financial, one of the largest
commercial insurers in the U.S., was subject to a ransomware
attack and paid $40 million to unlock its network. In May,
Colonial Pipeline, one of the largest pipelines in the eastern
U.S., paid $4.4 million in cryptocurrency to retrieve its data
following a ransomware attack. In June, JBS USA, one of the
country's largest meat packers, paid a ransom of $11 million to
hackers.
These companies made these decisions to pay the ransoms
because they did not want to disrupt their supply chain. The
FBI's official policy is not to advise companies whether or not
to pay these ransoms. During our many briefings with these
companies, this is indeed the FBI's position they took during
the negotiations with the ransomware attackers.
Even the FBI, the top law enforcement agency tasked with
fighting cybercrime, is not immune from cyber-attacks. Over the
weekend, hackers accessed the FBI's external email system and
spammed potentially thousands of people and companies by
issuing a fake warning of a cyber-attack. Hackers' ability to
penetrate the FBI systems could create catastrophic
consequences and chaos. We need to hear from the FBI today on
their efforts to disrupt and protect Americans from these
cyber-attacks.
I am pleased that we have one witness here today who is
Senate confirmed to discuss how we can disrupt cyber threats to
better protect Americans from the devastating consequences of
successful ransomware attacks. Unfortunately, this is only the
second Senate-confirmed witness this committee has had this
entire year. That is far below what is normal for this
committee.
Unfortunately, the Oversight Committee, under Democrat
leadership, refuses to call witnesses from the Biden
administration and hold them accountable for waste, fraud,
abuse, and mismanagement occurring on their watch. Today is the
committee's first hearing since the citizens in Virginia sent a
very loud message to the Biden administration, and that message
to President Biden, ``no more.'' The American people oppose the
Biden administration's radical leftwing policies and are
already seeking change.
President Biden and congressional Democrats' action to
spend trillions of the taxpayers' hard-earned dollars on a
socialist agenda has backfired. President Biden is now more
unpopular with the American public than nearly any other
President at this point in history.
Not only that, but over two-thirds of Americans think this
country, under President Biden's leadership, is headed in the
wrong direction. People are appropriately comparing President
Biden to President Jimmy Carter.
President Biden's policies and decisions have created
numerous crises that impact Americans' daily lives. Gas is now
61 percent higher than this time last year. Inflation is at a
30-year high, causing families to struggle with how to pay for
meat, milk, eggs, and other basic necessities.
This year, Thanksgiving is set to be the most expensive
Thanksgiving ever. The price of a 16-pound turkey is up 18
percent. There is chaos at our ports, with ships lining up, but
nowhere to deliver the goods. And to add insult to injury,
certain networks are criticizing truck drivers, the essential
workers who have been shipping goods throughout the pandemic.
A record number of illegal immigrants were apprehended at
our Southern border this year, and the surge continues because
of this administration's pro illegal amnesty agenda. This, not
to mention the drugs flowing across the border. The Biden
administration has directed law enforcement to go after parents
they deem domestic terrorists, but these parents are only
concerned about radical curriculum being taught to our
children.
At the same time, the Biden administration turned a blind
eye to real terrorists in Afghanistan who seek to harm women,
children, and U.S. troops. The Biden administration's
disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan has left a national
security and humanitarian crisis in its wake. And sadly, this
committee is ignoring it all.
Committee Republicans have written to the chairwoman over
20 times requesting hearings, investigations, and briefings on
many of these topics and more. These issues are core to our
committee's mission of rooting out waste, fraud, abuse, and
mismanagement in the Federal Government. But unfortunately,
Chairwoman Maloney has ignored our requests.
We are the people's house. We must be responsive to the
needs and demands of American citizens, but this committee,
under Democrat leadership, refuses to do its job. It is no
wonder this committee has received an F grade for how it has
conducted oversight from a nonprofit organization.
It is past time for this committee to get back to its
mission and conduct oversight on the many issues facing
Americans today. The American people demand it, and they
deserve nothing less.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. But before I
recognize Mr. Connolly for opening remarks, I would like to
take a few moments to address some of his concerns.
The Biden administration has created over 5.9 million new
jobs in the first nine months of President Biden's
administration. This is a record for any new President. We
created 531,000 new jobs just last month. And with the passage
of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which the
President signed into law, a bipartisan bill, it is going to
create even more jobs and help grow the economy.
Our unemployment is under 4.6 percent. And if the
Republicans could see some of the very good things that the
Biden administration is doing instead of just spending their
time attacking them, we are working this week on the Build Back
Better Act, which would further strengthen our economy by
making historic investments in our infrastructure and people.
We did respond to your request for a classified briefing on
Afghanistan. We have government officials before you today.
And with that, I yield to Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the distinguished chair for holding
this hearing, and let me join her in regretting the fact that
the ranking member has chosen to use this hearing for
propaganda rather than an in-depth examination of ransomware
and its impacts on the U.S. economy and U.S. businesses and
U.S. governments.
I find the word ``chutzpah'' is appropriate at this moment,
given the fact that our Republican friends for four long years
resisted any meaningful oversight of the Trump years,
including, you know, serious legal issues from security
clearances to the trampling of democratic norms----
Mr. Comer. Would the gentleman yield to a question?
Mr. Connolly. If the chair will allow me extra time to do
so?
Chairwoman Maloney. Sure. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. Yes, sir.
Mr. Comer. Would the gentleman, in his criticism of the--
our criticism for not doing enough oversight, do you, Mr.
Connolly, generally believe that this committee has provided
any oversight?
Chairwoman Maloney. Reclaiming, reclaiming my time. Let us
get back to the purpose of the hearing. Let us not engage with
their propaganda.
Let us get back. We have three important witnesses. Let us
hear what they have to say. That is why we are here. I would
like to hear what they have to say.
Mr. Comer. And again, Madam Chair, with all due respect,
this is the Oversight Committee.
[Gavel sounding.]
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman is not in order. Mr.
Connolly has the time. He has worked hard on this issue, and he
is absolutely right that we should focus on the purpose of this
hearing.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
The ramifications of ransomware permeate our economy,
public health infrastructure, and national security. In recent
years, ransomware has grown into a multibillion-dollar criminal
industry. In 2020, more than 2,300 U.S.-based entities were
affected by ransomware attacks, inflicting hundreds of billions
of dollars in economic damage.
At least 113 of these ransomware attacks targeted
government entities, costing an estimated $915 million. One of
those attacks happened in my own congressional district. In
September of last year, hackers launched into the Nation's 10th
largest school district in Fairfax County, and the Fairfax
County Public Schools computer system was attacked by
ransomware after obtaining sensitive personal information about
students and employees. That is just one example at the local
level.
The coronavirus pandemic abruptly revealed how ill-prepared
many of our state and local governments were in delivering
vital public services securely and remotely. Criminals took
advantage of overwhelmed public IT systems, generating a
significant uptick in cybercrime.
In June of this year, our subcommittee held a hearing on
the outdated IT infrastructure and rising cyber-attacks on
state and local governments. The hearing examined the role of
Congress and the Federal Government in accelerating IT
modernization initiatives for states and localities so that
eligible individuals and not cyber criminals could gain access
to vital government services.
In response to the hearing, I introduced the House
companion to the Senate's State and Local Digital Service Act.
This important piece of legislation provides guidance and
funding to state and local governments to form digital service
teams focused on delivering fair, effective, and secure public
services.
The bipartisan infrastructure bill, as the chair has noted,
which President Biden signed into law yesterday, provides more
than $1 billion of vital investments that will assist both
private and public entities affected by major cyber events.
These investments will save taxpayer dollars in the long term
by reducing the vulnerability of state and localities to
cybercrime, including ransomware attacks.
While these are important first steps in ensuring the
Federal Government mitigates cyber-attacks, more must be done.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about the
steps the Biden administration has taken to combat ransomware
attacks and the ways Congress can ensure the United States
implements a whole of government response to all cyber-attacks
moving forward.
I thank the chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back, and I would
now like to introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness today is the Honorable Chris Inglis, who
is the first National Cyber Director in the White House. I am
proud of the role that this Congress and this committee played
in creating the position along with Congressman Langevin. And
we look very much forward to your testimony. Congratulations on
your appointment.
Then we will hear from Brandon Wales, who is the Executive
Director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency. Originally, we had planned to hear from the Director of
CISA, Jen Easterly. She was scheduled to testify.
Unfortunately, she had a family medical emergency and was not
able to be with us today. So, we are deeply grateful to Mr.
Wales for appearing on extremely short notice to testify today.
Thank you so much.
Finally, we will hear from Mr. Bryan Vorndran, who is the
Assistant Director of the Cyber Division of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation.
The witnesses will be unmuted so we can swear them in.
Please raise your right hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
[Response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you. And without objection, your written statements
will be made part of the record.
With that, Director Inglis, you are now recognized for your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS INGLIS, NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR, EXECUTIVE
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Mr. Inglis. Thank you.
Chairman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, distinguished
members of the committee, and dedicated staff, thank you for
the honor to appear before you today alongside Deputy Director
Wales from the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
and Assistant Director Vorndran from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
CISA's role as the operational coordinator for Federal
cybersecurity and support to our Nation's critical
infrastructure, combined with FBI's deep expertise and its
essential role in victim assistance, investigation,
attribution, and threat disruption, comprises a breadth of
experience, authority, and resource that does make a critical
difference for the American people. Cyber is a team sport, and
I couldn't ask for better teammates.
I am eager to appear before you today and update you on the
Biden-Harris administration's continuing actions to counter
ransomware and to improve our national cybersecurity, including
recent actions to prevent, deter, and mitigate ransomware
attacks against public and private sector networks, as well as
efforts to bring ransomware actors to justice.
Before turning to ransomware, allow me to say a few words
about the office I have the privilege to lead. The role of the
National Cyber Director was established by the Congress in
January of this year, instantiated by my nomination,
confirmation, and entry on duty in July. I am grateful for the
confidence that the President and Congress have placed in this
role and for the essential investments in cybersecurity that
you included in the recently enacted Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act.
On October 28, I released the National Cyber Director's
Strategic Intent Statement, which outlines the initial scope of
work I expect the office to undertake. At the same time, I
announced the designation of Chris DeRusha as Deputy National
Cyber Director for Federal Cybersecurity, a dual-hatted title
he will hold along with his current role as the Federal Chief
Information Security Officer, to create unity of effort and
purpose in our shared mission to ensure the security of Federal
systems.
Both of these announcements lay the groundwork for a
National Cyber Director team that continues to increase its
contributions to the Nation's overall cybersecurity posture.
Four key outcomes will serve as benchmarks to gauge the success
of the Office of the National Cyber Director.
First, to drive coherence across the Federal enterprise,
both in how it builds and operates its own digital
infrastructure and in how it supports the defense of critical
infrastructure owned and operated by the private sector.
Second, to continue to strengthen and improve private-
public collaboration in cybersecurity.
Third, to work closely with the Office of Management and
Budget to ensure that the U.S. Government aligns its cyber
resources to its priorities to include advising departments,
agencies, and the Congress on recommended changes.
And finally, to increase present and future resilience of
technology, people, and doctrine within the Federal Government
and across the American digital ecosystem.
As this committee well knows, ransomware attacks leverage
systemic weakness in the cyber ecosystem. Cyberspace allows
connectivity and efficiency of scale unrivaled in any other
domain, meaning that by employing cyberspace, our geopolitical
competitors can achieve global reach and strategic effect,
while criminals and malicious actors can wield an unprecedented
level of influence, impact, and coercion.
These attacks are costly and pernicious, and they undermine
both critical functions and the confidence we must have in
digital connectivity that underpins the modern economy.
Accordingly, crafting a strategy to stop the scourge of
ransomware has been a priority for this administration. That
strategy begins with understanding what makes ransomware so
effective.
Ransomware actors are able to purchase their tools on the
black market and mount their attacks from leased and disposable
cloud-based virtual infrastructure, which once exposed can be
torn down and quickly rebuilt. The systems that these criminals
target are far too often left vulnerable by failures to patch,
to properly secure data, to create reliable backups, or to
ensure that frontline employees of targeted organizations
exercise basic cybersecurity practices.
Inconsistent application of anti-money laundering controls
to virtual currencies permits criminals to leverage permissive
jurisdictions to acquire and launder the proceeds of their
crime. And finally, ransomware criminals are often able to
operate with impunity in nation-states where they reside,
facing no meaningful accountability for their actions.
The administration's counter-ransomware efforts therefore
include action on four broad fronts. First, disruption of
ransomware infrastructure and actors. Second, bolstering
resilience to withstand ransomware attacks. Third, address the
abuse of virtual currency to launder ransom payments. And
finally, leveraging international collaboration to disrupt the
ransomware ecosystem and address safe havens for ransomware
criminals.
Consistent with and supportive of this strategy, the Biden
administration supports legislative efforts to require cyber
incident reporting to include ransomware payments to both the
FBI and CISA that will help prioritize the use of precious
resources to support victims, disrupt threat actors, and to
guide future investments to improve resilience. These are
daunting undertakings, and overcoming them will require a
digital ecosystem that is resilient by design, a policy and
commercial environment that aligns actions to consequences, and
ensuring that public and private sectors are postured to
proactively and decisively collaborate.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Wales, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF BRANDON WALES, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CYBERSECURITY
AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY AGENCY

Mr. Wales. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency alongside National Cyber Director Inglis and
Assistant Director Vorndran. I look forward to discussing
CISA's efforts to elevate our Nation's response to the
ransomware epidemic.
CISA is the national coordinator for critical
infrastructure security and resilience, responsible for
reducing risk to the digital and physical infrastructure
Americans rely on every hour of every day. Within the
administration's approach to countering ransomware, CISA's
focus is on bolstering resilience. Unfortunately, strengthening
resilience to withstand ransomware attacks is arguably the most
difficult element of our collective efforts, as it ultimately
relies on changing human behavior.
While certain steps, such as spotting phishing attempts,
implementing multifactor authentication, or patching
vulnerabilities, are easily implemented at the individual
level, they are much more difficult to implement community,
business, or organization wide. Building resilience requires a
long-term investment in people, processes, and technology.
Every organization that wants to avoid being a victim of
ransomware must invest in the practices that will keep their
customers, their systems, and their data protected, investments
that make good security and business sense.
The question that we need to ask ourselves is what do we do
now to truly have an impact? I'd point to three things.
First, we must give people the tools and guidance they need
to increase their resilience and security. That is why CISA is
working to raise awareness and promote basic cyber hygiene
across tens of thousands of businesses and organizations and
governments throughout the country.
Earlier this summer, we led the interagency development and
launch of StopRansomware.gov, the U.S. Government's official
repository for resources from across the interagency to help
public and private organizations tackle ransomware more
effectively. To date, StopRansomware.gov has had more than
455,000 page views, and our Ransomware Readiness Assessment
Tool has been downloaded nearly 15,000 times.
We just wrapped up Cybersecurity Awareness Month in
October, which included over 300 events, trainings, and
webinars, as well as CISA's fourth annual National Cyber
Summit, which reached more than 73,000 individuals, helping
them to understand the importance of being cyber smart.
Second, because vulnerabilities are widespread across
technology environments, it is increasingly challenging for any
organization to prioritize which vulnerabilities to fix. So
last week, we released a binding operational directive, which
established a dynamic system-managed catalogue of more than 300
known vulnerabilities that are exploited, requiring Federal
agencies to remediate such vulnerabilities within a specific
timeframe.
While aimed at the Federal Government, we strongly
encourage every organization to adopt this directive and
prioritize mitigation of these vulnerabilities, those listed in
CISA's public catalogue, as we continually identify newly
exploited vulnerabilities.
Third, we must drive impact at scale if we hope to achieve
the level of resilience we seek. Critical to that effort will
be our partnership with key players who could help us achieve
broad-based effects.
In the coming weeks, we'll be announcing our Cybersecurity
Advisory Committee, and the Cyber Safety Review Board, two
groups of outstanding thought leaders and experts who will
provide critical perspective, insight, and knowledge in dealing
with our most difficult cyber challenges. These efforts build
on the recently launched Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or
JCDC, a partnership between key Federal agencies and private
sector companies who see across networks and industries to help
us identify emerging threats, provide actionable information,
and take action at scale to reduce the risk of compromises of
all types.
Finally, perhaps the most important role is to leverage our
expanse of information-sharing authorities to ensure early
warning of threats and attacks. But presently, we only receive
information of a fraction of incidents. This hampers our
ability to conduct critical analysis, spot adversary campaigns,
release mitigation guidance, and provide timely response. This
leaves critical infrastructure vulnerable, which is simply
unacceptable.
Providing this information to CISA and our Federal partners
quickly will allow us to enrich it and get it out broadly,
protecting future victims and raising the baseline of national
cybersecurity. Given the importance of visibility into the true
size and scope of the cyber threats facing us, I urge Congress
to move quickly on the urgent priority of adopting incident
notification legislation.
I would be remiss if I didn't close with a thank you to
Congress. Today marks our third anniversary as the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. You have
entrusted us with a critical mission, and I am honored to work
alongside an incredible group of men and women who execute that
mission with professionalism, integrity, and excellence.
Thank you for your partnership and support. Our Nation is
facing unprecedented risk from cyber-attacks undertaken by both
nation-states and criminals. In collaboration with our
government and critical infrastructure partners, international
allies, and with the support of Congress, CISA will continue to
lead our national call to action.
I want to thank you again for the opportunity to appear
before the committee, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you for your testimony and for
responding on such short notice.
And our last witness today is Assistant Director Vorndran.
You are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF BRYAN VORNDRAN, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, CYBER
DIVISION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

Mr. Vorndran. Good morning, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking
Member Comer, and members of this committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here to represent the
FBI and our cyber program and to sit with Chris and Brandon as
a unified front against a growing ransomware threat in this
country. The three of us and our staffs are constantly in
touch, and I appreciate the work both of them and their
organizations are doing to keep this country safe.
I'd also like to thank, in no particular order, the
Department of Justice, the Secret Service, U.S. Cyber Command,
NSA, CIA, Treasury, and state--all who have a significant role.
I hope everyone leaves the room today understanding that no one
Federal agency can tackle cyber threats alone, but that we each
have unique authorities and capabilities allowing us to create
a whole greater than the sum of our individual parts.
Ransomware may just now be grabbing the headlines, but the
cyber threats facing our Nation aren't new. In fact, the FBI's
Cyber Division is turning 20 years old next year. Over that
time, we've learned a lot. Most notably, how to work within the
interagency, with foreign partners, and with private sector
companies.
We also have recent reminders about the long arm of the
law, with the arrest in Poland of Yaroslav Vasinskyi, the
individual who conducted a ransomware attack against Kaseya.
Our current strategy for countering ransomware and other
complex cyber-criminal schemes is focused not just on
indictments or arrests, though we do think it's important to
remove players from the field, but on pursuing and disrupting
the actors, their infrastructure, and their money, all while
providing help to victims and actionable intelligence to warn
potential future victims.
Looking ahead, I have no doubt the playing field and the
rules of the game will change over the coming months and years.
In the face of this threat evolving, I believe our interagency
team is improving each day, and we're excited for the
opportunity to continue to serve and protect our country from
cyber threats.
As Chris mentioned, there are four critical outcomes for
all of us--Federal coherence, improving public-private
collaboration, aligning resources to aspirations, and
increasing present and future resilience. The FBI, due to its
unique authorities, will play an important role in achieving
each of these outcomes, but the FBI won't be able to fully
support these strategic outcomes if we don't receive timely
information about cyber breaches.
As the cyber threat has evolved over the past 20 years, one
thing has remained the same. The FBI has been at the center of
acting on U.S.-based cyber threat intelligence. It's what we do
best.
When I discuss the FBI's value proposition in cyber with
people who want to see this country succeed, I describe it this
way. The FBI is the only agency in this country who can get a
well-trained agent working with local computer scientists,
intelligence analysts, and others on any doorstep in this
country within an hour. Cyber is a global, mostly foreign-based
threat. And we can be on the doorstep of foreign law
enforcement and intelligence services in a position to assist
within a day in over 70 countries, too.
Our agents care. They want to make a difference. It's why I
and almost everyone else joined the FBI.
Now I know there are several cyber incident reporting bills
currently being considered, and I can't stress enough the
importance of the FBI receiving full and immediate access to
cyber incidents so we can act on them as soon as possible and
in unison with our Federal partners at CISA. The faster we get
this information, the faster we can deploy a local cyber threat
expert to a victim's door; track, freeze, and seize funds
taken; and ultimately hold cyber criminals accountable.
Twenty-four hours probably wouldn't seem like a big delay
to most people, but the help we can offer within that time can
be the difference between a business or a piece of critical
infrastructure staying afloat or being crippled. Let me state
the same as a sports metaphor. Why would a team bench one of
its best players in the first quarter of the Super Bowl? It
doesn't make a lot of sense to me. And we're all rightly
focused on the incredible harm cyber actors are causing. To
give those criminals a head start against the people protecting
the public doesn't make sense.
As the U.S. Government continues to hone its approach to
this problem to take full advantage of all instruments of power
at its disposal, I believe we'll see two significant types of
outcomes. First, we want to degrade the ecosystem where it's no
longer worth our adversaries' time and effort to commit these
crimes.
Second, we do want to remove players from the playing
field. It's awfully hard to hack a computer from behind bars.
Just ask Yaroslav Vasinskyi.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.
The United States is a major target for ransomware attacks,
and it is really a threat to our national security. It is my
understanding there is legislation attached to the NDAA that
will allow our government and require our government to start
tracking data on cyber-attacks, and I am hopeful that this will
be signed into law. This is a good first step.
Many other experts tell me the next thing we have to do is
get a stronger coordination between the private and public
sector, which Mr. Vorndran spoke about in his testimony. It is
hard for the government to respond and help if we don't even
know about the attacks. There have been numerous bills before
Congress for a long time. We have not been successful in
passing them because there is resistance and, really, objection
from the private sector.
I understand that England has been successful in setting up
systems that have the private sector now working with their
government to respond to cyber-attacks. I would like to start
with Mr. Wales, but invite our other two panelists to answer,
if they would, too. What can we do to pass this legislation,
put in place this type of cooperation?
This is a threat to our national security, our economic
security, and certainly to the public and private sector. So,
if we could start with you, Mr. Wales?
Mr. Wales. Sure. So, I'll answer the question in kind of
two parts. The first part is associated with the legislation
you're discussing. I think as both--all three of us said during
our opening statements, passing cyber incident notification
legislation is a top priority. We need the information because
that enables CISA and the FBI to both engage with that victim,
offer our assistance, understand what's happening on their
networks, and protect other victims, as well as all the threat
response of going after the actor and following the money that
the law enforcement community, including the FBI, begins to do
from that point.
But even today, there is a lot that we are doing across the
U.S. Government to improve our public-private partnership, to
enable more effective cyber defensive activities in protecting
the homeland. I mentioned during my opening statement the
recently launched Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, where
we've brought together the critical government agencies, like
the FBI and the NSA and Cyber Command, along with those
companies in the private sector who have the best visibility
into the cyber ecosystem.
We're talking about major cloud providers, major internet
service providers, the cybersecurity firms in the private
sector who provide response and support and protection to
thousands, tens of thousands of companies across the country.
As we work together to identify and spot adversary
activity, as we share indicators back and forth and enrich them
on both sides, we're able to provide more protection than
anyone can do independently. These are the companies that can
take action on a massive scale to protect networks. And so even
if companies are not part of that collaborative up front, they
are often being protected by the activities that are happening
within that structure.
It is something that is new. We rolled it out in August,
and we've already seen fairly significant success in
identifying recent campaigns and activities. And we really look
forward to working on this more in the future and appreciate
Congress' support, since this effort was enabled by authorities
granted in last year's NDAA.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. And in the interest of time,
I now want to move to Assistant Director Vorndran.
Last week, the Department of Justice announced charges
against two foreign nationals for their role in the ransomware
attack against the Florida-based software company Kaseya. One
of the people indicted is a Russian national who is reportedly
responsible for over 3,000 ransomware attacks.
I commend the Justice Department and our international
partners for bringing to justice these attackers, but to hold
cyber criminals accountable, Russia has to play by the rules.
Can the charges against the Russian national be viewed as a
test case for Russia's willingness to crack down on cyber
criminals?
Earlier, Mr. Inglis has testified publicly, made public
statements that because of the Biden administration's active
engagement on combatting cyber that some of the activities in
Russia seem to be more mild, but you said that you don't know
if this is going to be sustained. But could you respond on
this, and how should the U.S. respond if Russia fails to act?
Mr. Vorndran. Thanks for the question.
I would default the question or defer the question about
the administration and test case to Mr. Inglis. But from an FBI
perspective, we have not seen a decrease in ransomware attacks
in the past couple of months originating from Russia.
Please understand we do have incomplete data. In a best-
case scenario, we only see about 20 percent of the intrusions
in the country, no different than our partners at CISA. But the
FBI has remained focused on investigating the cyber criminals
in and around Russia for well more than a decade at this point
in time. So, the indictment of Yevgeniy Polyanin is just the
latest indictment that we pursued based on criminal conduct
here in the United States.
Chairwoman Maloney. Would you like to comment, Mr. Inglis,
on----
Mr. Inglis. Yes, ma'am. I would simply add to that that
it's very important that Russia play a part in this. It is far
more effective to stop these threats at their source. In a
permissive environment, if harbored, if given safe haven by the
Russians would encourage more--more entry into the space.
That being said, we're not powerless, kind of using only
the Russians as a tool to push back on this. The strategy that
I articulated earlier and that others have reflected on
actually says we can become a harder target. We can increase
resilience and robustness. We can bring international
coalitions to bear. We can find these transgressors not simply
in Russia, but as they travel to other countries or as they
kind of ship their illicit gains broadly across the internet.
So, all of those instruments should be brought to bear. We
will continue to pressure the Russians very strongly to help
them understand that they must do their part.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. My time has
expired, and in answering the question, I went overtime. I give
certainly as much time and more to my distinguished ranking
member, Mr. Comer.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In early July, a Florida software company became the victim
of a ransomware attack, causing widespread outages for over
1,000 institutions ranging from hospitals to schools to grocery
stores. It wasn't until July 23, three weeks later, that the
company announced it had received a universal decryption key to
help companies restore their files.
Now in September, the Washington Post reported the FBI had
secretly obtained the digital key to unlock these files, yet
sat on it for three weeks and never told the companies, costing
untold millions of dollars in recovery cost. The FBI's
rationale apparently was to carry out an operation to disrupt
the hackers, a group known as REvil. Yet according to the Post,
the group's platform went offline without U.S. Government
intervention before the FBI even had a chance to execute its
plan.
In September, the chairwoman and I wrote to Director Wray
asking for a briefing on the FBI's decision. We never received
that briefing. And Mr. Vorndran, I am going to address my first
question to you, but with respect to the briefing, I understand
that you are not at the top of the organizational chart at the
FBI, but please relay to Director Wray that when the Oversight
Committee requests a briefing, we expect a briefing.
I think--I don't think it is any secret in 11 months, we
are probably going to be sitting over there, and we are going
to have a lot of questions for the FBI. From the Steele dossier
to the ransomware attacks, we have a lot of questions for the
FBI. And at the very least, when we request a briefing,
especially in a bipartisan manner, we expect a response.
So, Mr. Vorndran, I am asking you today, can you please
explain the policy rationale behind the FBI's decision to
withhold the digital encryptor key?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I think the question is how do we do
what's in the best long-term interest of the public and balance
that with protecting the public in the short term? Stated
differently, if any one of us had a loved one with a disease,
and we could take a longer-term approach to completely
eradicate that disease, takes a little bit of time, perhaps a
little discomfort for a loved one, we'd probably prefer that
over a less-effective, shorter-term solution because, in the
end, we'd know it would have a more long-lasting effect.
The decisions that you're referring to and asking about are
very, very complicated, and they are ones we take seriously.
And it's why decisions like those are not just made within the
FBI, but they're taken into an interagency environment for
final determination of what makes the most sense.
I think it's also really important to remember that those
decryptor keys that you're referring to were developed and
coded by safe harbored criminals. In this case, we took an
extensive process to develop a safe and effective way to deploy
that decryptor key to the victims at Kaseya. Obviously, simply
grabbing malware that's been coded by criminals in Russia and
deploying that onto U.S. infrastructure would not be a wise
decision, and those things take time to get right.
We repeatedly tested that decryptor in different
environments because an even worst-case scenario for us was
providing criminal-generated decryptor keys to victims that
introduced new vulnerabilities and backdoors into U.S.
infrastructure.
So, I'll stop there for today, sir.
Mr. Comer. So, did the FBI conduct any estimates as to how
much money was lost by the hundreds of institutions due to the
Bureau's decision to withhold the digital encryptor key? Was
that ever--did that play a----
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I'm not--I'm not prepared to answer that
question today.
Mr. Comer. We would--you know, that is--we get complaints
from businesses, as their representatives and their Member of
Congress, about decisions that government agencies make, and it
is always frustrating when the government agencies or the
bureaucracies, bureaucrats don't take into consideration how
much this decision will actually cost. And that is a problem.
Director Inglis and Mr. Wales, did your agencies agree with
the FBI's decision to withhold the digital encryptor key, and
was the decision unanimous, or was there dissension?
Mr. Inglis. Thank you for the question and the opportunity
to comment.
My organization was not in place at the time that this
operation took place. But my read of the record was that this
was a well-discussed and a consensus position of the various
agencies that had the opportunity to comment. I would simply
observe, as Assistant Director Vorndran has said, there was
never a question about the desire to, in a timely, broad way,
disrupt this action and to save the downstream effects on
potential further victims.
The question at the end of the day is how do you maximize
the timeliness and the breadth? If you were to act in the very
first instant, you might then expose your knowledge of what's
happening, allow the criminals to escape, to take their
accesses to various other customers that haven't yet been
sprung and to spring them at some later time.
If you wait for a while--and that is, therefore, a very
subjective choice, one that must be well considered--you might
then be able to simply remove the entirety of this threat from
the landscape. If you wait too long, then there are too many
victims. And so, there's something between zero and infinity
that you have to then come down on to align timeliness and
breadth.
Mr. Comer. Mr. Wales?
Mr. Wales. I think Director Inglis' response was, you know,
on the money. This was a--a challenging environment, and I
think anytime you're in the middle of an incident response,
balancing the various equities of what can be shared publicly,
what needs to be held back so that you can achieve longer-term
benefits, those are part of ongoing discussions during nearly
every incident response that our agency, in cooperation with
the FBI, is involved in.
And I think that care and open discussion was--was evident
in this case as well. And, but I don't think there's anything
else we can say about what happened in the interagency right
now.
Mr. Comer. Well, I will close with this, Madam Chair. I
would strongly encourage the FBI and whoever in the Biden
administration is faced with this decision again to take into
account the hundreds of millions of dollars that private
companies are losing by a decision to withhold unlocking that.
That is something that--that should be taken into account.
So, with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlewoman from the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton, is now
recognized. Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Madam Chair, for this important
hearing. Very important.
The focus on ransomware in the news has been on big
corporations. I was astonished to find that schools are more
likely to be the target, and yet they have the fewest resources
to deal with this matter. So, I looked for examples, and I
found that in Broward County, Florida, a district there had a
demand for $40 million in ransomware. And when the school
district refused to pay, the hackers posted 26,000 stolen files
on the Internet. So, harm can, in fact, be done.
Mr. Wales, it looks like schools face unique risks, and I
wonder what can be done? They have few risks, yet we need to
strengthen their cybersecurity in K through 12 schools. Could
you briefly, Mr. Wales--and I thank you for agreeing to be here
on short notice--briefly say what CISA is doing to address the
problem of ransomware in schools?
Mr. Wales. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We are and have been working hard to expand our outreach to
school districts as a result of the growing threat of
ransomware that they have faced, in particular making them
aware of the free resources that are available today that can
help them improve their cybersecurity. Under a cooperative
grant to the Multi-State ISAC, which helps support state and
local communities throughout this country, there are a number
of free services that the MS-ISAC offers to school districts
and other state and local governments that can help them
provide critical protections, including things that block
malicious domains. They provide initial triage and support
during incident response.
And there is more services that can be taken on.
Unfortunately, school districts are among the least signed up
for a number of those free services. So, we're doing a lot to
kind of raise awareness.
In addition, thanks to some additional authorities provided
by the Congress last year, we have been hiring state
cybersecurity coordinators that are designed to live in each
state and work directly with the state and local governments in
their areas to make sure that they understand the services that
are available. And we now have 36 of them onboard throughout
the country, and part of their job is to help conduct this kind
of outreach and awareness.
In addition, last month, the K through 12 Cybersecurity Act
was passed and signed by the President. That required us over
the next 120 days to better identify what more can be done to
support state and local governments when it comes to protecting
school districts and to begin to roll out those services,
including new trainings. And we have a team across our agency
working with relevant interagency colleagues like the
Department of Education on our response to that legislation,
and we look forward to briefing Congress on our plans in the
coming months.
Ms. Norton. Well, Mr. Wales, it does look like you are
doing a great deal, but the Department of Education, in a
report that has recently been issued by the GAO, noted that
the--that various services to help K through 12 with cyber
threats appear to have an extremely low participation rate. You
have a--you have something called Albert that schools can get
for a modest fee. Yet less than 10 percent of districts across
the United States have signed up for this service.
Mr. Wales, how can we encourage better participation in
programs that CISA--that CISA funds and offers to school
districts around the country? Is the fee too high? Is there
lack of awareness about the program? What is the problem, and
what can we do about it?
Mr. Wales. I think, like a lot of our cybersecurity
challenges, this is a multifaceted problem. We do need to do
more to raise awareness so that people in school districts, and
there are a large number--you know, I think the number is
around 13,000 school districts throughout the country--we need
to raise more awareness so that those folks who are working
on----
Ms. Norton. There are 15,000.
Mr. Wales. Fifteen thousand. We need to do more to raise
awareness so that those people understand what resources they
can get, including a number of free resources for some things
that there is going to require an investment.
Now we are very hopeful with the new state and local
cybersecurity grant program that was established in the
infrastructure bill that was recently signed by the President
will give us more ability to provide resources down further
into the state and local governments. Some of that money can be
used to protect schools. That will be part of the ongoing
conversation we have with the states about the implementation
of that grant program over the next several years.
So, we do think help is on the way, but this is a--this is
a collective problem, and I think anything that you can do from
your perches to raise awareness in the districts that you
represent about the services that are out there and reaching
out to the government to see what else can be done to protect
the Nation's schools, we'd strongly encourage you to do that.
And we're willing to provide any support we can to help enable
that kind of outreach and engagement.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Wales. My time has expired.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from South
Carolina, Mr. Norman, is recognized.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Director Inglis, you have got a big job as head of
cybersecurity of this country. The security of America, not
just with cybersecurity, is being compromised by this
administration allowing the millions coming in here from 152
countries that we have no idea what they--why they are coming.
Do they have terror backgrounds? And the task that you have,
along with the others, is just unbelievable now.
You mentioned Russia, and you mentioned pressure points.
The only non-pressure point that this administration has done
is allow them to build the Nord Stream pipeline, which aids and
abets Russia, the very country that we are attributing the
cyber-attacks to.
So, what specific pressure points do you think this
administration, with their record, will actually do to bring
them to comply? Is it just to ask them to be nice?
Mr. Inglis. So, thank you very much for the question. It's
an important question.
This administration, not unlike other administrations, has
been very clear with the Russians about what we expect normal
behavior looks like, not simply----
Mr. Norman. In words.
Mr. Inglis. In words. Not simply kind of articulating what
we believe they should not do, but what they should not harbor
in the safe havens within their country or their near abroad.
Now we've brought an international coalition to bear to make
the same statement.
Mr. Norman. Give me specifics. What pressure points--with a
rogue country like Russia, what specifics do you think, as head
of the national cybersecurity team, would be implemented to use
leverage to stop their actions?
Mr. Inglis. The first opportunity we give them is to simply
of their own accord to cooperatively respond to the request
that we've made. We have provided----
Mr. Norman. OK. Just more words.
Mr. Inglis. We have provided information to them. We are
now assessing whether they provide that. We would withhold
certain diplomatic status, certain economic benefits, certain
historic rights----
Mr. Norman. What? Give me specifics. What would you do
specifically that would at least slow them down as to the
cyber-attacks? You give them I know words, but words with this
administration mean nothing.
Mr. Inglis. Attribution is important in this case. I think
that we have clearly attributed these actions to persons who
operate in the Russian or Russian near abroad. We've not
attributed these actions to the Russian government.
We, therefore, have to give the Russian government an
opportunity to understand what the nature of that problem is
and then to address it. Our patience is not unlimited in that
regard. We have conducted a number of what are called ``expert
group meetings'' with the Russians to make it crystal clear who
we think is accountable here and what we need them to do about
that.
There is a limit to that patience, and when that is done--
--
Mr. Norman. OK.
Mr. Inglis [continuing]. There are some diplomatic and
financial remedies that are brought to bear on the leadership
of those entities. We've also brought 30 nations to the city to
have a discussion about what an international coalition might
do in this regard, and I think that Russia clearly sees that
the deck is stacked against them in that regard, and they must,
therefore, act.
Mr. Norman. In all due respect, you gave words, but you
didn't have any specifics. It is just asking. It is pleading
with them. I feel for you in your job because, you know, the
next major attack, if it is on our energy grid, as an example,
our water supply, which is--I don't know whether it was one of
the 17 items that this President mentioned that were off
limits, asking them not to attack that. I don't know if that is
on the list.
At what point is this a declaration of war, a declaration
that we cannot put up with? What is this administration going
to do other than words?
Mr. Inglis. It's an important question, and there are
multiple pressure points. Russia is one of those pressure
points, but we can also make it such that we're a harder
target, and they simply cannot prevail. The criminals harbored
or given safe haven by Russia cannot prevail because we correct
the errors that we make in the construction and the defense of
these systems.
We can ensure that we disrupt the architecture that is used
against us, and we have done that. There are any number of
examples from the last week of that. You can find----
Mr. Norman. What? Give me some examples on that.
Mr. Inglis. Essentially taking the money back from the
criminals. There are at least two occasions within the last
month where we've done that, where we've arrested and
extradited----
Mr. Norman. Were they in the country? Were they already
here, or did you have to----
Mr. Inglis. As you note, sir, cybersecurity is a borderless
terrain, and therefore, as much as they can reach us, we can
reach them.
Mr. Norman. It is borderless, but it has got people behind
it. What I am asking is----
Mr. Inglis. It does have people behind it. But therefore,
if we bring allies to bear, we can use jurisdiction in places
like Poland and Romania, the most recent two examples, to
apprehend these criminals and to bring them to justice using
the courts of law that exist in the West.
And so, all of those remedies, essentially giving Russia
the ultimatum, we have to give them an opportunity to
understand and address this. Two, addressing the actors and the
infrastructure that is essentially holding us at risk at the
moment, and making sure that we're sufficiently resilient and
robust.
The sum of those will make a difference, and some of those
can, in fact, push back on this threat. Deterrence isn't found
by simply shooting your way out of it. That's an important part
of the solution, but ultimately, you need to make it such that
you're a hard target, and you're proactive, robust in your
defense.
Mr. Norman. They are shooting their way into us. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
this hearing.
And I especially want to thank our three witnesses for
their great work, and I understand how difficult this challenge
is.
I also serve as the chair on the FinTech Task Force over on
the Financial Services Committee. So, I would like to change
gears a little bit and talk about some of the ransomware
attacks that have been happening with financial services firms.
I know that earlier this month, the FBI released a private
industry notification, and basically, it reported that
ransomware attackers are now leveraging specific significant
financial events, such as mergers and acquisitions, initial
public offerings, as a focus point to launch ransomware
attacks. And the idea is for the ransomware attackers is to
impact the victim company's share price at that crucial time,
you know, at the point of a merger or acquisition or an initial
public offering.
Most recently, the ransomware group DarkSide, that is the
same group that was responsible for the attack on the Colonial
Pipeline in my part of the country and it shut down major fuel
supplies in the East Coast, they recently said about these type
of attacks--and I will quote them--``If the company refuses to
pay, we are ready to provide information before the publication
so that it would be possible to earn in the reduction price of
shares.'' Basically, they are providing information to short
the stock.
And Assistant Director Vorndran, a ransomware attack is
usually not something that is on the top of a company's mind.
You know, there is a lot to do with an IPO or with mergers and
acquisition. I am just wondering is this a particularly
vulnerable moment for these companies, and how much damage can
a ransomware attack inflict especially during this process?
Mr. Vorndran. Thank you, sir, for the question.
You know, I think as the threat has continued to evolve, we
have seen our cyber adversaries continue to change direction
where they have the most leverage. So, the private industry
notification that you're referring to highlights vulnerability
for companies in your discussion in the financial space that
have a lot to lose during the M&A process.
And I think if I were a company, the primary recommendation
I would have would be to evaluate all the vectors of risk
through that M&A process, and how are you going to manage that
situation if something does go wrong?
But to Director Inglis' point, a lot of this comes back to
our net defense posture and our resiliency posture. So, the
same question has to go to those companies. Have they taken all
the proper precautions to build a defense posture that they
deem appropriate for their risk profile as they go through an
M&A process?
So I'll stop there. Certainly happy to take followup
questions.
Mr. Lynch. Sure. Are we doing anything--the FBI or Mr.
Inglis or Mr. Wales, are we doing anything with some of these
companies at this moment? You know--you know, looking at IPO--
maybe working with NASDAQ or the exchanges so that we can
identify that point of vulnerability and have them, you know,
plus-up their--their own security so that at least they are
aware and taking proactive steps to defend themselves during
that period of vulnerability?
Mr. Wales. Sir, I'll take a first stab at that. I think we
have a fairly aggressive posture when it comes to working with
the financial sector. It's one of those sectors that has
focused heavily on organizing itself to make sure that they are
sharing information amongst the various companies in the
financial sector and that they want to work very proactively
with the government to share information and to take action
when possible. So that partnership is good.
There are a number of organizations that have been set up
to enable that type of strong public-private partnership in the
financial industry. There is certainly more that can be done. I
think things like the incident notification that FBI mentioned
earlier are designed to feed into that process, raise awareness
inside that community so that it can be more of a focus.
But I would say, sir, you're looking at one side of the
challenge. But this is--this is--this is industry wide. It
shouldn't matter whether you're going through an IPO or not.
Every board should care about the cybersecurity of their
company. It should be part of the questions on due diligence
when they're going through M&A in every case.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Mr. Wales. And so we are trying to give them more of that
kind of----
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Mr. Wales [continuing]. Make sure that they're asking the
right questions and taking the right actions quickly.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, OK. I was trying to get another question
in, but my time has expired. OK, thank you.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller, is recognized for five minutes. Mr.
Keller?
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
The increase in both frequency and severity of ransomware
attacks shows the urgent need for action. So, I appreciate the
topic of today's hearing. Malicious attacks represent a very
real threat to Americans' privacy, financial well-being, and
the integrity of our national infrastructure. We cannot afford
to let these continue to happen.
So, I just would like to ask Assistant Director Wales, we
all know that fuel prices are already skyrocketing. Gasoline is
already $1 more per gallon than it was last time this year, and
Americans are projected to pay up to 30 percent more to heat
their homes this winter.
Cyber incidents such as the Colonial Pipeline attack just
six months ago underscore how vulnerable we are to various
cyber threats. Can you explain to us how another ransomware
attack on a pipeline or other critical energy infrastructure
might affect the already-high price of fuel?
Mr. Wales. Sir, your point is exact right--is exactly
right. During times like this, the infrastructure becomes even
more critical because disruptions could have even more
significant consequences, and it's why we continue to encourage
critical infrastructure owners and operators of all types and
across all sectors to think carefully about the risk profile
that they have, the potential consequences that could stem from
a disruption of their operations, and what more they can do to
enhance their security and their resilience. That even if they
have a disruption, they can get back up and running quickly
without the full consequences happening.
In the case of pipelines, we have worked since the Colonial
Pipeline with the Transportation Security Administration, which
is the sector risk management agency for the pipeline subsector
and who regulates the security of pipelines. They've put in
place a number of security directives designed to improve the
cybersecurity posture of the pipeline industry, requiring them
to conduct certain assessments on their cybersecurity, provide
those assessments to the government, and provide information on
cyber incidents in those sectors.
There has been a lot more engagement and outreach with the
pipeline industry in response to what we saw from Colonial and
from other information available to the U.S. Government.
Certainly, more can be done, and we have an ongoing work
program underneath the White House focused on improving natural
gas pipeline cybersecurity. At the end of September, CISA
released new industrial control system performance goals across
industry, across all of our critical infrastructure, setting
for the first time what we believe should be the baseline
cybersecurity posture for any company operating industrial
control systems in the United States.
So, we think we're really pushing hard on this to protect
our critical infrastructure. We've got a ways to go, but we
really support--really, we're encouraged by what we're seeing
and really appreciate the support we're getting from Congress
for some of these important initiatives.
Mr. Keller. Thank you for that. And you mentioned
everything that the companies could be doing for this, and I
know they are going to do that because they need to. Other
than--and the importance of it.
And it is the job of the Federal Government to make sure
that Americans and that would be companies that Americans own
and rely on can produce this. So other than--other than giving
Putin a list of things that they shouldn't hack, you know,
other than the President giving a list, which the list should
be very short. Nothing that affects an American or any of our
allies should have been the list. I mean, it would have been a
really short list if I had put it out there.
So, in addition to giving Putin a list of things they can't
hack, what else has the administration done to make sure that
our adversaries know that we are not going to tolerate them any
kind of ransomware, any kind of cyber-attacks on our
infrastructure or, quite frankly, anything that is an American
interest around the globe?
Mr. Inglis. Congressman, I'll be happy to complement the
answer thus far, which I support.
I would say the administration, again, has been clear with
the Russians about what the consequences of failing to assist
in cleaning up this safe haven in their near abroad would be.
They are diplomatic, economic. They indicate also law
enforcement.
But again, we are not powerless if the Russians were to
fail to take their appropriate action. We brought a coalition
to bear such that that coalition will bring further pressure on
the Russians. We've done our own research necessary to
understand who these criminals are, and when and where
possible, we have caused them to be arrested in the various
countries they may travel to and extradited to the United
States.
We have followed the money flows and apprehended that money
when and wherever possible. We have used our intelligence
resources to assist the private sector in understanding what
the threats to them are and at the same time give them best
practices so that might up their game and become a harder
target.
The sum of all of those will make a determinative
difference. The Russians can help make that a better program,
but it's not a--it's not a completely weak program without the
Russian cooperation.
Mr. Keller. I understand the Russian cooperation and what
you are talking about. But if you followed this around and they
have been arrested and there has been some money recovered, I
think that ought to be money that goes back to the American
people and the people that were impacted by this.
I would just like to know what we have done--and maybe this
is--can't cover it in five minutes. But I would like to know
what we have done to make sure that we are certain that Putin
is going to make sure that these things don't happen, and he is
going to do everything he can to stop it. I don't know that we
have that confidence yet. And handing him a list of things,
quite frankly, the list should say nothing. You can't hack
anything, or we are going to hold you accountable.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, is now recognized.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chairwoman.
And I agree with my colleague, by the way, that the danger
of handing a list of proscribed cyber-attack items is that the
inference could be drawn everything else is fair game, and that
is a real risk.
Mr. Inglis, last month, the Department of Justice launched
the National Cryptocurrency Enforcement Team and the Civil
Cyber Fraud Initiative to marshal the Department's resources on
complex cyber and cryptocurrency investigations. Earlier this
year, the Department also created a Ransomware and Digital
Extortion Task Force.
In July, the National Security Council established a
Ransomware Task Force. We, of course, have a Cyber Division at
the FBI, and we have Mr. Wales as the Executive Director of
CISA. When you were before the Senate for your confirmation
hearing, you said that one of the primary purposes of your
position was to create coherence among Federal agencies with
respect to cybersecurity. Given the proliferation of various
entities in the Federal Government on cyber-related issues,
how--how big of a challenge is that coherence?
I worry about the traditional compartmentalization that
characterizes how the Federal Government responds to
everything.
Mr. Inglis. Sir, it's an excellent question and a question
that I think is on the minds of many when they look at the
complicated organizational arrangements that pertain in
cyberspace, no less complicated than the United States
Department of Defense, which has an Air Force, an Army, a Navy,
a Coast Guard, now a Space Force. It can be coherent if we use
those strengths, those diverse strengths in a way that they're
applied in a joint, combined fashion.
That's actually the task before us is to use each of those
deep and sharp strengths such that they actually
collaboratively, collectively, concurrently make the difference
that they should. That's our job. That's what we're actually
pursuing.
If you were to ask any one of those task forces whether
they understand what the other task forces are doing and how
they complement one another, I think you'd get a solid answer.
I would be happy to come back and talk at length about the
details underneath of all of those.
If I might address your earlier observation, which the
President, kind of having given Vladimir Putin a list. If you
were to ask any cyber expert within the United States, frankly,
and various other places, but within the United States how do
we describe critical functions, that person would likely say we
describe it in 16 ways. There are 16 critical infrastructures.
And therefore, if you were to say don't attack critical
infrastructure, turns out that there are 16 definitions. It's
the energy sector. It's the transportation sector, and so on
and so forth. That's simply a way broadly to say don't attack
anything critical.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, let me just say to--Mr. Inglis, I will
stipulate that last point. But with respect to your observation
about my question, let me just say the experience is at best
spotty within the Federal Government. You look at terrorism as
a challenge, and the coordination among Federal agencies, say,
prior to 9/11 not something to be proud of.
In fact, information was withheld. Information wasn't
shared. Intelligence wasn't shared. Cooperation was not a
characteristic of the culture not only within the Federal
Government, but between the FBI and other agencies of the
Federal Government and our local law enforcement.
Mr. Inglis. Sir, I do acknowledge the historical accuracy
of your observation. You are quite correct. We have had moments
when we failed to connect the dots or, worse, where we've
failed to combine our efforts to even form the dots. I think
what you're hearing from this panel today is that we understand
that we must integrate and collaborate such that we discover
and do things together that no one of us can do alone. That's
the challenge.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I will--I will observe that we had the
CEO of SolarWinds, Mr. Ramakrishna, before this committee
talking about the attack his company experienced that affected
a lot of Federal agencies. And his observation was having a
single entity to which all of us can refer will serve the
fundamental purpose of building speed and agility in this
process. Too much time is wasted in communicating across
agencies where information is very fragmented.
Mr. Inglis. Sir, we agree.
Mr. Connolly. OK.
Mr. Inglis. And to quote my good friend Jen Easterly, who's
not able to be with us today, we shouldn't need a Ph.D. in
government to get responsive, coherent service from the
government.
Mr. Connolly. Well said. Final observation, maybe to you,
Mr. Vorndran. Should companies or Federal agencies or state and
local governments pay a ransom? What is the guidance we give?
And if a ransom is ever to be paid, should it not be a last
resort, rather than the first response to the threat? Your
observation. And what policy guidance does FBI give, and then I
would yield back.
Mr. Vorndran. Sure. I appreciate the opportunity to get
this on the record. The FBI's official position is that we do
not recommend any company paying a ransom. However, we
understand that a company's decision to pay a ransom should be
based on their own business priorities. And if they choose to
pay the ransom, we would ask that they simply let us or CISA,
or the appropriate Federal law enforcement agency they're
working with at the time, know.
Because the quicker we're able to see the money, the better
the chance we have to trace it. So, our bottom line position is
we do not recommend paying ransom because it fuels a huge
criminal enterprise, but we do understand it's a business
decision, and we understand that that's a company's decision.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Biggs, is now recognized.
Mr. Biggs. I thank the chairwoman, and I thank the
witnesses for being here today.
So, some cybersecurity experts have said that diplomatic
pressure, economic sanctions, and criminal prosecutions are
insufficient to deter adversaries and that the administration
should use offensive cyber operations to degrade an adversary's
capabilities and create credible deterrents. I am wondering,
and I guess this is for each of you, is what offensive cyber
operations might be effective in deterring cyber-attacks on our
businesses and our government entities?
Director?
Mr. Inglis. Thank you for the question, sir.
I think taking a broader interpretation of what offense
looks like in cyberspace, it might not be what if you--one
would imagine in kinetic space, using all instruments of power,
trying to impose cost to perhaps stop, thwart, or apprehend,
right, the threat of the moment. We can use diplomatic power to
use other nations' authorities to arrest, extradite people.
Combine that with legal authority, we prosecute those people in
our own court. That, to the individual miscreant, is an
offensive maneuver.
We can essentially use our capabilities to find and arrest
money flows. We can use our capabilities to take down illicit
infrastructure. We can collaborate with the private sector to
thwart these attacks in situ as they come across the boundaries
that those various operators have.
As the law of conflict would say, and I avoid the term
``armed conflict.'' This is not an armed conflict. But as the
law of conflict or contention would say, the remedy must be
proportional to the need. And in this case, we have many
instruments of power at our disposal such that we can
understand what's happening to us, engage it at the earliest
possible moment, and bring these threats to heel.
Mr. Biggs. So, Director--I am sorry, I was going to give
you all a chance. I will try to get back to you. I just want to
ask, you mentioned a number of things that you thought would be
categorized as offensive in the cyber world.
How successful--how much have you engaged in that? How
successful have you been? And then--and then I will turn the
first question and those over to Mr. Vorndran and then Mr.
Wales.
Mr. Inglis. I think that we have applied all of those
instruments to have the powers of early discernment through
diplomacy, through legal means, through financial means, and
understanding in cyberspace what's transpiring and at those
moments when we understand a threat is being arrayed against
us, to interdict that at the earliest possible moment.
I would say that anecdotally over the last few weeks or
months, you have seen some evidence that those are beginning to
succeed against the nature of the threat, which is long in the
making. It's not unlike climate change, which is decades in the
making and, therefore, can't be turned around in a fortnight.
It's too soon to tell whether we will sustain that in a
concurrent, applied fashion to have the changes--to make the
changes necessary.
That being said, as important as that offensive component
is that you address and that I've attempted to explain, defense
is equally, if not more, important. Stopping these threats by
simply making them such that they may not succeed is as
important as any other because there's no nation in the world
that is more dependent upon infrastructure, digital
infrastructure, than we are. And therefore, we have to be
concerned that if we were to----
Mr. Biggs. Director, I thank you.
As you are answering the questions, Mr. Vorndran, I would
like you to elaborate on arrest, indictment, and also
interdiction and interception of flows of money that are
being--that you are undertaking, if you can.
Mr. Vorndran. Of course. I just want to go back to the
first question you asked, sir. One item to build on what
Director Inglis said is we heard a reference here to pre-9/11
and post 9/11. The ecosystem in cyber moves at a pace that far
outpaces what we saw post 9/11 and terrorism.
The reason I highlight that is because the public-private
collaboration and what private sector sees on their
infrastructure is infinitely high. And without that flow of
intelligence from private sector, it inhibits our ability to be
more proactive and be more offensive.
To your second question about, you know, the term
``following the money,'' we have virtual currency efforts in
the FBI. Secret Service has them. IRS has them. We are all
looking at those money flows. Treasury is heavily engaged in
sanctioning individuals and entities so that U.S. persons and
U.S. businesses can't partake in that.
So virtual currency remains a very, very key focus area for
us in terms of putting pressure on the threat.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
And this is for you, Mr. Vorndran. Earlier this year, the
Washington Post reported that the FBI refrained for almost
three weeks from helping to unlock computers of hundreds of
businesses and institutions hobbled by a major ransomware
attack, even though the Bureau had secretly obtained the
digital key needed to do so.
And I guess the question is do you believe there are steps
the FBI could have taken in that case to provide relief to the
victims of the ransomware attack without also compromising the
Bureau's efforts to disrupt the Russian-backed hackers there,
knowing that it was estimated that literally millions of
dollars were lost by the victims?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, my answer to that question is already on
the record. I'm happy to go through it again if you desire.
Mr. Biggs. Yes, I would.
Mr. Vorndran. So, and Director Inglis provided some
commentary as well. I think from our perspective, the question
is how do we do what's in the best long-term interest of the
public while also protecting the public in the short term. And
I compare it to if I had a loved one with a terminal disease.
If I could take a more long-term effort to sustain their life
for longer, right, knowing I have a more impactful outcome,
then I would probably play that hand versus a band-aid
solution.
So, in our efforts, right, we thought with our interagency
partners--and this decision was taken to a complete interagency
team where there was consensus--that it was best to play the
long game. I think it's really, really important to understand
that those decryptor keys that you're referring to were built
by criminals, right? They weren't built by us.
And so, taking a decryptor key built by a criminal and
simply deploying it to, in this example, Kaseya or their
downstream victims is not a good decision either and requires
multitudes of testing environments and time tied to those
testing environments to make sure that we're not inadvertently
introducing back doors or other malicious code onto U.S.
infrastructure.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Raskin,
you are now recognized.
Mr. Raskin. Madam Chair, thank you very much.
In July, Justice Department official Richard Downing
testified before the U.S. Senate that DOJ believes only one-
quarter of ransomware intrusions are reported. At this rate,
the government is missing crucial information that it could use
to help ransomware victims and deter future attacks.
But for victims who do want to report a ransomware attack,
the guidance on who to report to is not exactly clear or
efficiently organized. For example, if I am the victim and I
visit the FBI's website to report it, I am encouraged to take
one of three steps. I can report the ransomware attack to my
local FBI field office, submit a tip through the FBI's tip
portal, or report it to the FBI's Internet Crime Complaint
Center, or IC3.
Assistant Director Vorndran, how many FBI field offices are
there?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, there's 56.
Mr. Raskin. Fifty-six. So, if I am the victim of a
ransomware attack, there are potentially 58 different points of
entry to the FBI to report the attack, counting the online
portals. Now if I visit the website StopRansomware.gov, which
is supposed to be the one-stop ransomware resource, I am
advised that I can report not only to these 58 points within
the FBI, but also to CISA or the Secret Service, which has its
own network of field offices, too.
Director Inglis, let me ask you. I appreciate the
possibility that I might have multiple points of access, but
doesn't this sound potentially confusing and byzantine to a
ransomware victim to try to figure out where actually to go?
Mr. Inglis. Congressman Raskin, thank you for the question.
I admit that if those were independent entities, it would
be confusing. There would be too many opportunities, and you
wouldn't know that it got to the right place at the right time.
Our job on the Government side is to ensure that if you've
told one of them, you've told all of them. CISA, FBI, the
Secret Service routinely coordinate the information that they
receive, and we've established something called the Joint Cyber
Defense Collaborative where that information is synthesized and
pushed out to a much broader population.
Mr. Raskin. All right, good. Well, I want to pursue that
point.
When CISA receives a ransomware report from a victim, does
it automatically share that information with the FBI or the
Secret Service, Mr. Wales?
Mr. Wales. Yes. So, I would say that in almost all cases,
we're always going to work in partnership largely with the FBI
and also with the Secret Service. In almost every case where we
have conducted direct engagement with or notified a victim,
that is always coordinated ahead of time with the FBI. We
almost in all cases do that jointly to ensure that CISA's role
in terms of providing support and responding to the--helping to
understand what happened and share information, the FBI's
threat response role, that we can both support that company
through that engagement.
Mr. Raskin. In what cases would you not?
Mr. Wales. You know, I don't think there's any case where
we say we're not going to do it. I just want to leave myself a
little bit of flexibility that if something came in in a weird
way and one of our field personnel did not report it up
properly that it may not have happened. But that is not the
standard operating procedure that we operate under.
Mr. Raskin. OK. Assistant Director Vorndran, when the FBI
gets a ransomware report from a victim, does it automatically
share that information with CISA or the Secret Service?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I will double down on Mr. Wales'
statements. We have central coordinating entities between FBI
Headquarters Cyber Division and what is referred to as CISA
central to share all of that information. All of our threat
reporting and notifications flow from our field offices back
into that portal.
So certainly, our intention and we believe our practice
almost 100 percent of the time is cross-leveling the
coordination with CISA. And, but certainly, none of us are
failure proof. So, I'm sure there is one or two examples out
there we haven't gotten it exactly correct.
Mr. Raskin. Director Inglis, if a victim reports a
ransomware attack through any of the channels listed on the
StopRansomware website, does that guarantee that every agency
that needs to know about the attack is notified, or is it more
ad hoc? Does the collaboration, as just set forth by these
other two gentlemen, does that collaboration work
systematically and uniformly?
Mr. Inglis. As my colleagues have said, the design and the
intended operation is that having told one of them, that all of
them will then know and be able to respond with their unique
authorities.
Mr. Raskin. Right. I just am finding it curious that no one
wants to state categorically that it happens. So----
Mr. Inglis. Sir, I would say that the caveat here is that,
you know, we're kind of allowing for the fact that the system
is not perfect and, therefore, may be a situation or two where
it doesn't work. We will work to correct that and identify
those.
Mr. Raskin. I see. So, if it doesn't happen, that would be
an accidental thing. That would not be----
Mr. Inglis. That's correct.
Mr. Raskin [continuing]. As the product of a deliberate
policy?
Mr. Inglis. That's correct. There are no policies that
would fail to share, but the implementation is what we're then
cautioning might not be perfect.
Mr. Raskin. OK. So, if a ransomware victim thinks that he
or she has been the victim of a crime, they don't need to file
an independent report with the FBI, it is enough to report it
to CISA, for example. Is that right?
Mr. Inglis. That's correct, sir.
Mr. Raskin. OK. All right. Finally, Mr. Wales, is there any
specific reporting advice you can provide to a small business
owner suffering from a ransomware attack? What should they do?
Mr. Wales. Sir, we actually worked with the Multi-State
ISAC to release a ransomware guide last year. It was designed
for state and local governments, but it's very applicable to
small and medium-sized businesses. And it actually goes through
kind of a checklist what to do ahead of time, how do you better
protect yourself and prepare for ransomware incidents.
And then it goes through like my last memory is we added
maybe like 19 steps that you should undertake if you have a
ransomware incident, including kind of understanding what
happens, isolate your network to the extent you can, when you
should turn off devices, who you should call. Kind of works
through the steps as someone who has been a victim, what they
should do and how they should potentially engage with an
outside firm who can potentially help them, reach out to the
Government who could potentially offer some support.
That information is out there. It's on StopRansomware.gov.
We think it is well designed for the small and medium-sized
business.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Franklin, is recognized.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Vorndran, what is your estimate of the percentage of
cyber-attacks that are criminally motivated versus foreign
intelligence cyber operations?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I don't have a good answer to that
question today. I would be happy to take that back and get you
a more refined answer. All I can say is that between nation-
state actors and criminal attacks on U.S. infrastructure, both
are extremely prolific.
Mr. Franklin. Do you ever see or do you believe, in your
opinion, do you think there are nation-state actors that are
posing as criminals at times to probe our networks under the
guise of just seeking ransomware but actually have a more
nefarious intent?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, we can--this is more of a classified
discussion. But what I can say here is we would refer to that
as a blended threat. And so, there are some intelligence gaps
about whether intel service individuals are moonlighting as
criminals or state actors are hiring criminals to conduct
certain activity.
So those are some gaps. Certainly, happy to have a more
classified discussion with you if that's an interest to you.
Mr. Franklin. OK, thank you.
Do you think with the spike that we are seeing in
ransomware, is it more that people are more willing to report
it, or are there more attacks because crooks are seeing that it
is more profitable, it is more lucrative? Why the recent spike,
do you think?
Mr. Vorndran. So, our data--and again, I think it's
important to highlight that we only see--our estimates are
about 20 to 25 percent of the total intrusions, and I'm quite
sure Brandon would share approximately the same figure with
you. So, it's very hard to say increase/decrease.
What we can say, though, is in the last six months we have
not seen a decrease in the amount or frequency of reporting on
ransomware attacks. We attribute it to the simple fact that
it's incredibly lucrative for the criminals. That's partially
due to the valuation of virtual currency, but it's partially
due to the vulnerability of our systems and our infrastructure
here that makes it profitable in both ways.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you.
Director Inglis, the Colonial Pipeline attack caused major
disruption at the gas pumps. There was talk about--concern
about shutting down the energy grid. If something like that
were to happen, obviously there would be mass chaos. It is not
hard to think of other examples of attacking healthcare
systems, where we could see a significant loss of life.
I know this isn't completely within your purview, but you
also have a military background as well. In your view, when
would such an attack rise to an act of war?
Mr. Inglis. Typically, classically, the attack rises to an
act of war when it achieves the same degree of damage that a
kinetic weapon would achieve, the loss of health, safety, kind
of national security of a significant nature. That being said,
these are serious at any level and, therefore, requires that we
respond fully with the remedies that are proportionate to that
need.
We need to double down on resilience and robustness. We
need to proactively defend these spaces, and we need to find
and bring to justice the miscreants, the transgressors who
conduct these actions.
Mr. Franklin. And we talked earlier about the 16 critical
infrastructure areas, and it is one thing to reach out to a
foreign country like Russia and tell them ``pretty please,''
you know, ``please don't do these things,'' but should we be
engaging in treaties or some sort of formal documents with
other nations to establish those tripwires? You know, like a
Geneva Conventions or something of that nature?
Mr. Inglis. There was a global group of experts kind of
sponsored by the United Nations in the 2015 timeframe that
described norms that constitute reasonable expected behavior in
this space. The United States signed onto those.
Just a week and a half ago, the Vice President in Paris
announced that we would support the Paris Accords, which are a
similar articulation of what is reasonable and responsible
behavior in this space. They do not have the force, the effect
of treaties, but they clearly are recognized by like-minded
nations as the way one should behave in this space and what the
responsibilities of nations are in this space.
Mr. Franklin. So, something like that would provide us
cover and justification if violated. Then when we responded in
kind, then we would have kind of an international support?
Mr. Inglis. It has, for practical purposes, established
what we would describe then as reasonable and appropriate
behavior, and therefore, we are able to describe what is not.
Mr. Franklin. Mr. Wales spoke earlier in his testimony of
improving our incident reporting system. Should the definition
of ``major incident'' change so that Congress is better
informed when cyber-attacks occur against Federal agencies?
Mr. Inglis. I think that we need to have a standard
definition of what ``major incident'' constitutes such that we
can uniformly, regardless of where an event might take place,
inform the Congress, so those things that are truly major or,
in some cases, significant. To your point, if those decisions
are all made locally, then there's going to be a certain degree
of inherent unevenness.
If we're going to operate with unity of effort, unity of
purpose, we need to make sure that we have a common standard, a
common definition, and that when and where appropriate--and
there are various situations where that is entirely
appropriate--inform the Congress.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, is recognized.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
As ransomware threats continue to spike, our response has
been plagued by the challenge of hiring cybersecurity workers
into the Government. As of August, there was a shortage of
about 36,000 public sector cyber jobs across all levels of
Government and about 1,700 of these were vacancies at the
Department of Homeland Security.
Needless to say, it is essential for our Nation's
cybersecurity that we fill these positions and ensure our cyber
defense systems are operating at full capacity. The Department
of Homeland Security recently made a dent in these cyber
vacancies with a successful hiring initiative, which led to the
onboarding of 300 new cybersecurity professionals and the
extension of 500 additional offers.
Mr. Wales, what made the Department's cyber hiring
initiative so very successful?
Mr. Wales. Thank you, Congresswoman.
This is a high priority for both CISA and the broader
Department, and we've made hiring a really high priority for
everyone. So just in terms of the past year, in Fiscal Year
2021, we hired more than double the number of new employees
into the agency than we did in both Fiscal Year and Fiscal Year
combined. So, we are making--making real progress.
In addition, just yesterday we announced the launch of the
new Cyber Talent Management System, which used authorities that
Congress had granted us a number of years ago to create a new
system designed to hire cyber talent and give us additional
tools to bring in to recruit and retain the best and brightest
into the government when it comes to this space. We're really
looking forward to using that over the next year to
dramatically increase our ability to fill our ranks.
In addition, we are working hard to kind of broaden that
pipe, work with--work with different groups, Girls Who Code,
the Girl Scouts, just getting more people interested into this
space, aware of the opportunities and to highlight the
importance that this kind of work plays to our overall
security. And we're working hard to look at bringing new groups
to bear, whether that's working with community colleges and
historically black colleges and universities.
There's a lot of efforts underway to grow that pipe and
make sure that we can bring in the right diverse work force
that is expected to solve the hardest cyber challenges. But I
know Director Inglis has been working hard in the education and
training space as well and may have additional points.
Mr. Inglis. Congresswoman, I would simply add to that that,
as you've indicated, leadership matters in this regard. This is
not something that can be put on autopilot.
We need to revisit the definitions for these jobs to make
sure that we've properly described what those skills are. I
think we'll find that we opened some of these jobs to a much
broader population. We need to appeal to the broadest possible
population, use all methods, and then work as hard on retaining
these people as we do at getting them onboard in the first
place.
Ms. Kelly. So, the other thing that I always think about,
the difference between public and private, of course, is
compensation. It is extremely hard for the Federal Government
to compete with outside private corporations. So, one proposal
I put forward with Rep. Gonzales in the NDAA was creating a
Cyber Digital Reserve Corps to bring in private sector talent
to complete rotations at Federal agencies.
Director Inglis, how can the Federal Government overcome
this compensation discrepancy so we can compete with others and
get top talent?
Mr. Inglis. Congresswoman, I quite agree that money is an
important determinant when people select or kind of stay in
jobs, but so is job satisfaction. So, in that case, I think we
need to be competitive, but we're not going to pay the largest
salary. The Congress has given many tools to the Federal
Government that I think we can and should employ, and we need
to work as hard at applying those tools uniformly across the
government as we do at giving job satisfaction feedback to the
people who take these jobs such that they stay on the merits of
the sum of those factors.
Mr. Wales. Let me just add the new Cyber Talent Management
System that we rolled out yesterday does include the ability to
pay more competitive salaries, but as Director Inglis notes,
we're never going to be as competitive as the private sector.
But the opportunity to work in the government, the
opportunity to, one, serve your country and to do things in the
cybersecurity field that you cannot do anyplace else, public or
private, I think is an attractive opportunity for a lot of
professionals in this space, and it's incumbent upon us to
demonstrate that opportunity when we're engaging with audience
and prospective candidates for jobs here.
Ms. Kelly. My other question was going back about
attracting diversity, but you talked about that already. I
don't know if you have anything else that you want to add.
And Mr. Wales, I hope the people that you send out to
recruit have your--the passion that you just displayed about
it. So, hopefully, we can--if they are like you, we will be
able to get good people that want to work for the government,
but I didn't know if there was anything else you wanted to add
around the diversity piece?
Mr. Wales. The only thing I'll add is that increasing the
diversity of our work force is one of the highest priorities
for Director Easterly, and we are seeing the results of that in
the new employees, particularly at the junior employees. We are
growing that pipe of cyber professionals, and it's going to
represent this country well.
Thank you.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from New Mexico--the
gentlelady from New Mexico, Ms. Herrell, is recognized.
Ms. Herrell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I believe it is a
very important hearing. I mean vital that we confront the
threat of cyber-attacks on our government and critical
infrastructure like the food industry and, of course, energy.
Director Inglis, as you know, earlier this year JBS faced
ransomware attacks that halted production on the country's
second-largest processor of beef, pork, and poultry. JBS
supplies about 25 percent of the beef, about 20 percent of pork
and poultry to the United States.
Concentrated control heightens the potential for severe
disruption to our food supply, and it is vital that we mitigate
against future risks. I actually think it is dangerous, in and
of itself, to have 4 companies control 80 percent of the beef
processing industry, but what I want to ask you is, Director
Inglis, do you agree that such concentration of our food supply
creates an additional risk to our Nation from cyber-attacks?
Mr. Inglis. The concentration, of course, gives a
concentrated target to those who would hold that at risk.
That's not an unfair concentration if we make it sufficiently
resilient and robust that it's either impervious or it's
resilient, right, to those attacks.
And so, I think our first endeavor should be to take the
systems that we have to make them more resilient and robust.
That's a hardware problem, a software problem, a people issue,
a doctrinal issue. Does an adversary have to beat all of us to
beat one of us?
Make sure that we're then proactively defending those
supply chains and that we're responding with all the
instruments, to include government instruments, to any given
incident so that we can quickly restore those systems to their
proper function.
Ms. Herrell. Great. And I thank you for that because I
think--and you just actually answered my next question, which
briefly would have been, you know, what is the administration
doing to put protections in place so that we don't have a
future threat to especially our food supply chains.
The administration is also considering shutting down Line
5, an oil and natural gas liquids pipeline that carries and
transports fuels from Wisconsin to Michigan to Ontario. I think
this would be reckless and endanger Americans in the heart of
winter, causing a surge in prices for heating and oil. This is
an unnecessary danger to the American people, especially if we
consider what is at risk when we have the cyber-attacks.
Rather than thinking about shutting down a vital pipeline,
is the administration studying how to prevent future pipeline
shutdowns like the Colonial Pipeline, the ransomware attack
that occurred earlier this year?
Mr. Inglis. I'll start, and I'll be happy then to defer to
Deputy Director Wales, who I think there are some very specific
programs at DHS. And the answer is yes.
Looking at the various critical infrastructure sector
components to include pipelines, the government has stepped
forward to determine what are the nondiscretionary features in
hardware or software that are required to create defensible
architecture. More recently, we've articulated what those
should be for pipelines broadly, and I'll defer to Deputy
Director Wales.
Mr. Wales. Thank you.
As I mentioned earlier, there's a number of activities
underway specifically designed to address the cybersecurity
risks in the pipeline area. Some of that is in response to the
Colonial Pipeline incident. In its wake, the Transportation
Security Administration released two security directives
designed to improve the cybersecurity of critical pipelines
throughout this country. So that required them conducting more
detailed vulnerability assessments, so that required incident
reporting to the Federal Government so we can more quickly take
action in response.
In addition, on the natural gas pipeline side, there's a
number of activities underneath a White House ICS initiative
focused on industrial control systems. Those are the systems
that operate the pipeline between cyber and physical, and CISA
is a critical part of that.
There is certainly more work to do, and we recognize how
critical pipelines are to the economic security and national
security of this country, and it's why we're working in such
close partnership with both industry and our government
partners to provide more information, more expertise, conduct
our own assessments, and make sure that our pipelines are as
protected as possible.
Ms. Herrell. Great. And I really do appreciate that, and I
think Americans, you know, after seeing this happen earlier
this year, the importance of protecting our assets, whether it
is oil and gas or our food supplies--and you already kind of
touched on this, but I was going to ask what are we doing to
counter these attacks and how are we responding to protect our
Nation's energy sector? But you just basically answered that.
So, I do appreciate your responses, and I appreciate you
all being here. And Madam Chair, I will yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Wasserman Schultz, is recognized.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ransomware attacks on critical infrastructure threaten
essential services that Americans count on every day, whether
it is timely access to medical care, safe drinking water, or
affordable energy prices. In testimony two weeks ago, CISA
Director Easterly said that cyber-attacks on our critical
infrastructure pose a serious risk to--and I quote--``the
American way of life.'' And Florida is squarely in those
crosshairs.
Attacks were launched in hospitals in Central Florida,
leaving nurses and doctors with lost patient files. A hacker
tried to dangerously spike the levels of sodium hydroxide.
Thankfully, a savvy water treatment worker blocked it in time
from causing sickness and death.
In one prolific recent U.S. attack, hackers targeted
hundreds of schools, businesses, and government customers
served by Kaseya, which was a Miami-based company. And that
creates more than just a little economic stress. When Colonial
Pipeline systems were breached in May, gasoline prices
skyrocketed, and gas stations across the Southeast experienced
fuel shortages.
So, it appears that various actors target critical
infrastructure, including not only cyber criminals, but also
nation-states and their proxies. Director Inglis, these attacks
focus on high-stakes targets and large organizations that have
robust security systems, but our committee's investigation
found that even large organizations lacked initial points of
contact with the Federal Government.
Right now, we seem to have a patchwork of Federal agencies
that are focused on cyber threats. In your position, what are
you doing to clarify roles and make sure that state and local
governments and large nongovernmental organizations know who to
contact and how they should respond to a cyber threat?
Mr. Inglis. Yes, Congresswoman. Thanks for the question.
Appreciated the report that was issued by this committee
today and the recommendations, the findings and recommendations
in it, one of which was that it is essential that the Federal
Government be joined up and coherent as individual citizens or
organizations attempt to report or to seek service from that
government. My office, as I indicated, has four broad outcomes
that we should be held accountable for.
The first of those is Federal coherence. Not simply in how
we manage our own digital infrastructure, but how we support
and respond to support the defense of critical infrastructure.
Despite the fact the Federal Government is quite diverse, that
can be brought to bear as a strength if we're joined up, and
you report that incident to one of us such that all of us then
understand it and can bring all of our various authorities and
resources to bear. That's the goal, and that's what we should
be held accountable for.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But that doesn't really answer what
you are doing to clarify the roles and make sure that state and
local governments and large NGO's know who to contact and how
they should respond to a cyber-attack.
Mr. Inglis. So, let me give you some specifics then on
that. Since the office was created--and funded yesterday. But
since the office was created, I've worked very closely with the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA, to
ensure that they had the necessary inputs from the various
sector risk management agencies. Those are classically the
Federal entities that deal directly with the critical
infrastructure--Department of Energy, Department of Defense, so
on and so forth--such that if you reported at the interface of
one of those critical sectors to some part of government, CISA
would receive that.
In the same way, I have worked with CISA to ensure that as
they synthesized and got that big picture that that was then
disseminated out broadly, right, to all of the respective
organizations so that if the government knows something in any
particular place, the government knows it in every place. And
more importantly, that we push that proactively to the
beneficiaries.
That work is not complete, right? It is a very diverse and
it grew up as of various--as they said, of various and separate
stovepipes. But that's the work before us. That's what we've
been doing. I spend arguably half of my time on that issue
alone.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. I appreciate that
specificity.
I also want to followup on a response to Chairman
Connolly's question about the Federal Government's position on
ransom payments.
Assistant Director Vorndran, as you know, cyber insurance
policy will typically cover the costs associated with a
ransomware attack, like hiring incident response consultants,
bringing data system back online, and covering interruption
losses. But some policies can even cover ransom payments.
Given your stated position on ransom payments, what would
you recommend to local and state governments when they are
making a decision about whether to purchase cyber insurance
policies to cover losses related to an attack?
Mr. Vorndran. Thank you for the question. That's a
challenging space for me to venture into in my job and within
the organization I represent.
But what I would say is simply that those same local
governments need to understand their risk calculus and where
they are in their maturity of net defense and resilience and
how much time they would be able to take to legitimately bring
all their systems back online to have a functioning state or
local government. And based on the totality of that analysis,
that should drive whether they do or don't want to buy cyber
insurance.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, is
now recognized.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chair.
A lot of our discussion today, and rightfully so, has
focused on a number of the cyber-attacks against national, big
national interests, Colonial Pipelines, some of our insurance
companies, meat packing plants, and the like. I wanted to focus
a little bit on some of the rural counties.
A lot of the district I serve is rural. We have had at
least two communities affected by attacks against them,
Ingleside and Jackson County. And Jackson County, for example,
has a population of about 14,000. There is three incorporated
cities. May 28 of 2009, they experienced a cyber-attack by
hackers using the Ryuk ransomware. Servers were disconnected.
Data backups were compromised. The system shut down, and the
hackers demanded $362,000 in bitcoin, which for a rural
community like that is a lot of money.
They were able to--the state of Texas responded, and the
Texas military department cyber incident response team, along
with the Texas Department of Information Resources and It
contractors, were able to accomplish about what they say is six
months of work in about 15 days and clean and reimaged 85 old
machines, brought 31 back onboard. Anyway, they were able to
recover, but it was at a bit of a cost.
What tools or programs are currently available to these
municipalities to assess their current systems and develop and
implement plans to address vulnerabilities before they are
attacked?
Mr. Wales. Sure. So, I'll start. I mentioned earlier
there's a number of services and resources that are available
for our state and local communities, including rural counties.
A number of those are offered at no cost, either from CISA
directly or through the Multi-State ISAC that was designed and
set up under a cooperative grant from CISA to support the state
and local governments.
Some of that includes assessments. Some of that includes
actual technology that will detect and block activity on those
networks. And some incident response support, should they need
it.
I think Congress has also spoken, and with the recently
passed infrastructure bill, there will be additional resources
available. The state and local cybersecurity grant program that
was established by Congress in the infrastructure bill has a
specific amount of money that's designed to go to rural
communities. And so, it's designed to kind of get to some of
those challenging areas that you've identified and provide
additional capabilities that could help them protect
themselves.
In addition, the infrastructure bill established a Cyber
Response and Recovery Fund. It's starting small. This would be
the first time that we're going to be utilizing it, and it is a
way to help in the face of significant cyber incidents, a way
for the Federal Government to surge resources to respond and
recover from those--from those incidents.
And so, we are looking now about the standup of both of
those programs and identifying how exactly we will work with
our state and local colleagues to get those off the ground,
what will be the policy and parameters around getting that
funding available. But in the case of the grant program, it's
going to ride on FEMA's existing processes, and so they are
good about getting that money out to local communities, and
we're working in close partnership with them in its standup.
Mr. Cloud. OK, thank you.
Director Inglis, it has been mentioned already, but I would
like to submit for the record this article, ``Biden Tells Putin
Certain Cyber Attacks Should Be Off Limits.'' And just the
logic behind this and us listing 16 areas that are off limits
really does open up the door from a messaging standpoint that
everything else is on limits. Notably, these rural counties,
you know?
And I would just suggest, if you can take the message back
to the White House, that we should be having the message that
all cyber-attacks are off limits and that we need to be
standing strong on that, it would be certainly greatly
appreciated.
Mr. Vorndran, I wanted to ask you about our talent pipeline
because it seems to us that, you know, we are in competition
globally with other nation-states, and it is extremely
important that we have this talent pipeline and that we manage
the resources within our cyber entities and the FBI. Could you
speak to how we can develop the pipeline? And Mr. Wales, you
may need to speak to this as well.
But also, if I could just say this, I would submit this for
the record, too. ``AG Garland Refuses to Rescind Memo Asking
FBI to Probe School Board Threats.''
Now as we sit here and talk about real nation-state threats
and then we see news like this, and then we are asked to give
more resources, you all are coming here because you would like
more resources, which there is bipartisan support for, no
doubt. We need to firm up our cyber. It is a critical defense
mechanism for our Nation.
But when we see resources in our intelligence agency being
dedicated to probe--to investigate parents at school board
meetings, it really makes it hard to, you know, just blatantly
just give more money to these sort of resources. So, could you
speak to the talent pool and then using the resources of our
intelligence agency and cybersecurity apparatus?
Thank you.
Mr. Vorndran. Sure. I think I'm going to stay really
squarely focused on one topic. Within the Department of Justice
and with the FBI, we are different from DHS and CISA and
different from DOD and NSA, that we don't have a special pay
scale for our cyber talent. So, what DOD through NSA and what
DHS through CISA can pay someone who's 22 years old coming out
of college with a computer science degree far, far outpaces our
scale by approximately 50 percent. And that is a very, very
significant concern of ours moving forward.
Mr. Cloud. In the private industry, too.
Mr. Vorndran. Yep. We do believe that once we have people
in the door that we can retain them well, and our numbers
indicate that. Our retention rate is well over 99 percent, and
it has been well over 99 percent. But the key is how do we
attract that talent, especially the technical talent, and right
now, our biggest gap is the pay gap when we compare directly to
our counterparts in Federal Government.
Mr. Cloud. And to the question of resources being used to
investigate parents instead of going to other actual national
security threats?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, you know that I can't comment on that.
That's a memo that was issued by the Attorney General, and I'm
here to represent the FBI Cyber Division.
Mr. Cloud. So, is the FBI taking it seriously, the memo
from the AG or not?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I'm not in a position to answer that
question. I'm sorry. What I can tell you is that our Cyber
Division uses our resources very, very squarely on cyber
threats.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis, is recognized for five
minutes. You need to unmute, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis, we can't hear you. You need to unmute.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Madam.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
This hearing is focused on the need for the Federal
Government to marshal all of its resources to strengthen the
Nation's cyber defenses against ransomware attacks, led by
National Cyber Director Chris Inglis and CISA Director Jen
Easterly. But the success of our entire ransomware policy won't
be completely determined by decisionmakers in government
buildings. It will also be determined by decisions made in
company boardrooms, by businesses, or even our local school
boards.
Director Inglis, you have previously stated, and I quote,
``We need to increase awareness so that every citizen, every
person who experiences cyberspace has what is necessary to
cross the digital cyber street in the same way that we teach
children to cross actual streets.''
Of course, large corporations have entire departments
dedicated to IT, whereas small businesses and individuals
typically use off-the-shelf IT products and have minimal
expertise in cyber defense. Director Inglis, how important is
broad-based education and outreach to improving our Nation's
cyber defenses, and how can we effectively communicate this
need to individuals and organizations of all sizes?
Mr. Inglis. Congressman, thank you very much for the
question.
I stand by those previous remarks. I would say that it's
very important to get the people piece of this right. A
definition that I like of what cyberspace is, what
``cyberspace'' the noun is, of course it's technology. But it
is also people, not simply kind of people being served by
cyberspace, people are in cyberspace. The decisions they make
determine the operation of cyberspace. And then, finally,
doctrine. How do we get the roles and responsibilities right?
Two of those pieces, people and doctrine, depend
fundamentally upon people understanding how cyberspace works,
what their roles are in cyberspace, and who's doing what in
cyberspace, who's accountable to defend what under what
circumstances. That's not simply something that people who have
the word ``cyber'' or ``IT'' in their job title need to get
their head around, everyone. Everyone could be that strongest
link or that weakest link on the front lines of cyber.
How do we do that? Broadly, I think there needs to be some
sense of accountability of what individuals are accountable
for, organizations accountable for, the private sector, the
public sector. There's an increasing awareness of that. A
reduction in complacency of this is somebody else's problem,
that somebody else will handle what mistakes I make. We need to
each feel some degree of accountability, and training and
awareness at the earliest possible level.
I've suggested in that quote that you gave that we do that
in kindergarten, right? At the earliest possible moment that
someone is brought into contact with cyberspace, we need to
teach them the ins and outs of that inasmuch as we teach them
how to navigate a hot stove or a busy street.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology
Cybersecurity Framework provides five key functions that form
the backbone of good cybersecurity--identifying risk and
assets, protection of data and systems, detection of attacks,
response, and recovery. CISA Director Easterly previously
testified that 90 percent of successful cyber-attacks start
with a phishing email and that multifactor authentication would
reduce chances of successful attacks by 99 percent.
Mr. Wales, do you see organizations not investing enough
attention or money to guard against ransomware attacks, and if
so, please explain.
Mr. Wales. So, I think, as you would expect, the
implementation of sound cybersecurity practices will vary
significantly across industry. There are small businesses that
are going to be well protected, and there are large businesses
that are going to have--that are going to have significant
holes. We feel like it is our responsibility to help raise that
baseline of cybersecurity by highlighting the key things that
need to be done by everyone, get us to that right baseline of
cyber hygiene where things like multifactor authentication is
widely used, where privileged accounts, those that can actually
affect the operations of a network, are well protected and
limited in use, that people are keeping up with their patching,
identifying vulnerabilities.
We've continued to hit and promote these. As I mentioned in
my opening statement, we recently finished Cybersecurity
Awareness Month in October, and we were extremely focused on
trying to raise the awareness of the importance of multifactor
identification on all accounts, but in particular those
accounts with higher privileged access.
You know, it's not going to be enough. There are still
going to be companies who are not focused on this problem or
who will not focus on it until it's too late, until after
they're hit. And I think we need to do everything we can across
the U.S. Government and in partnership with the private sector
to raise the awareness, highlight the best practices that
should be used, highlight the bad practices that should be
avoided, and make sure, as Director Inglis notes, that the
right individuals and organizations are held accountable.
Mr. Davis. Let us say that I am a small business owner
without a dedicated IT staff. Where should I focus most of my
attention and resources to protect against ransomware attacks?
Is it prevention, or what should I do?
Chairwoman Maloney. Your mic, please. We can't hear you.
Mr. Wales. Congressman, we actually released on our
StopRansomware.gov website a list of what we call ``cyber
essentials.'' What are the first things you should do when
putting in place more effective cybersecurity?
I think, as you've highlighted, implementing multifactor
authentication at scale is among the first steps you should
take, but we've actually walked through a series of steps that
small and medium-sized businesses can and should do to make
sure that their level of cybersecurity is appropriate for the
risk that they're facing.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Chairwoman Maloney. All right. Thank you so much. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, is recognized.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Inglis, last year, when Congress was debating whether
or not to create your position, the National Cyber Director,
there were some concerns that we were just going to be creating
yet another layer of bureaucracy. So, if you can, help me
understand within the context of what we are talking about
today, ransomware, what role does your office play?
Mr. Inglis. Sir, thank you for the question. If I might put
that in the context of describing three roles, my role being
the one you asked about.
In the context of ransomware, my job would be to ensure
that the various instruments that the Federal Government can
bring to bear are deployed in a way that they are concurrent,
that they're useful, that they're complementary. Therefore, to
be proactive and concurrent foremost in mind.
We have talked at some length in this hearing about the
roles of sector risk management agencies like the Department of
Energy, the Department of Defense, about the roles of the FBI,
about the roles of CISA. My job is to ensure that those are
applied and they are applied in a way that's concurrent. And
looking back at the government, you don't need a Ph.D. in
government to essentially deal with the government.
The second broad role that I would then describe is the
role of the National Security Council, which outside of
cyberspace is accountable to use all the instruments of power
that this Nation can bring to bear--diplomacy, intelligence,
military resources, financial resources, sanctions that might
be applied--to bring about the proper conditions in all
domains, not least of which is cyberspace. And so that role is
also important.
And then the third role is those discrete, individual roles
of CISA, the FBI, sector risk management agencies, all of whom
need to within their lanes do what they do, again, in a way
that's complementary, concurrent, coherent such that the sum of
those parts is much greater than its arithmetic sum.
Mr. Hice. So, it sounds like the buck stops with you
insofar as ransomware is concerned for every agency of the
Federal Government. Would you or do you set Federal policy?
Mr. Inglis. The buck does stop with me in terms of the
performance of the Federal Government. I'm not entirely kind of
capable of setting the Federal policy, often which is dictated
by law or existing statute. But to the extent that we need to
adjust the various roles and responsibilities and
relationships, I'm the accountable person.
Mr. Hice. OK. So, as it would relate to whether or not,
just as an example, we are going to withhold encryption keys
from victims, as it appears the FBI has done, what role or
policy would you have in that decision?
Mr. Inglis. I should be involved in that decision. I
wasn't, of course, on scene at the moment that that particular
decision that we refer to in this hearing was made.
But I should be--I should be at the table for that
decision. There are other factors that come into play in terms
of making a determination about a decision of that sort, but I
should have a huge influence on that.
Mr. Hice. OK, let us talk about those other factors. What
other variables go into a decision of that nature?
Mr. Inglis. So, let us take that incident again. I wasn't
there. So, I will just kind of observe from the distance that I
enjoyed.
Mr. Hice. Well, the buck now stops with you. So, what kind
of variables would go into making that kind of decision with
you at the helm?
Mr. Inglis. Two. There are two variables. The one that is
not variable or at issue is a desire by the Federal Government
to achieve the greatest, broadest possible disruption, right,
of the threat that's being held against the United States or
its citizens.
The variables in that are how timely and how broad, right,
can you be in the application of that disruption? If you're
timely in the extreme, meaning that you disclose the moment you
understand some insight into what the actors are doing, then
you might give them the opportunity to escape kind of with
their ill-gotten gains and to recover and to repeat that
experience on another day. You might not know enough about the
nature of what they've done such that you can disrupt it more
broadly.
If you wait too long, such that you take it down in a
strategic way, you've allowed too many victims to fall kind of
victim to that. So, the alignment has to be made between
timeliness and breadth, but there's no question that disruption
is the goal.
Mr. Hice. OK. That doesn't really answer the question in
terms of variables when it comes to making a decision about
withholding encryption keys. You are talking in broad
principles. If you would, I appreciate if you could give me a
more detailed answer in writing.
Mr. Vorndran, I want to go to you now. The FBI certainly
has had some credibility issues in the past years, recent
years, but overall, I believe Americans look at the FBI as a
source of confidence as it relates to the cyber area. And yet
this past weekend, at least as reported and appears to be
accurate, that thousands of spam emails masquerading as FBI
were sent to state and local officials warning them of a phony
cyber-attack.
So, can you explain to me now how this event does not raise
somehow more questions regarding the veracity, the veracity,
the accuracy of FBI alerts in the future?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I'm not sure I understand your question,
but let me do my best to answer. Certainly, this weekend, you
know, what has been----
Mr. Hice. Let me clarify the question because I don't want
you beating around the bush. I want to hear a direct answer as
much as possible.
The question has to do with the phony emails that went out
from the FBI warning of a phony cyber-attack to state and local
officials. That being done, how can the accuracy of future
emails from the FBI be depended upon from state and local? How
are they going to know what is real and what is not real if
your own cyber has been hacked?
I just want to make sure we are protecting state and local
officials, how they know what is coming from the FBI is
accuracy if what we saw last week, this past weekend happens
again?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the gentleman may answer the question.
Mr. Vorndran. Sure, no problem. Sir, that is an isolated
incident that you're referring to that happened this weekend.
We know specifically how it occurred. We also know that no FBI
data, no personally identifiable information was compromised.
That software application and hardware, associated hardware
was taken immediately offline. So, we consider the incident
contained, and we don't think it'll impact any future
communications coming out of that email server.
Mr. Hice. I yield, Madam Chair, but that did not answer the
question as to how people can rely upon the FBI's information
in the future, totally evading our question, and I would like
an answer.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from New York, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, is recognized.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman.
Director Easterly, your team looked some of the excess
death data during the ransomware attack on University of
Vermont's health network. I was frankly quite surprised by the
conclusion of that case study that ransomware attacks on
hospitals are correlated significantly with loss of patient
life.
Now, briefly, how is it that these ransomware attacks have
that kind of impact?
Mr. Wales. Congresswoman, that study looked broadly at
excess deaths during COVID, during the COVID pandemic, largely
looking at what happens when hospitals are overwhelmed with ICU
patients suffering from COVID. What were the number of excess
deaths from other--from other types of needed hospitalizations
or ICU admittances? So, there were excess deaths from things
like heart attacks and cancer, et cetera.
We were highlighting during the course of that study that
ransomware incidents have the potential to exacerbate the
strain on hospitals and result in additional excess deaths, and
that is why it is incumbent upon hospital administrators to
make sure that they have the right level of cybersecurity in
place and they are aware of the potential for significant--
they're prepared for what might happen should their hospitals
be overwhelmed by cyber or other disruptions.
And it is why we are working so hard to kind of highlight
the results from that work and, additionally, what we can do to
offer additional assistance to hospitals across the country as
we've been doing over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you.
And you know, as I understand it, the victims of ransomware
attacks, including institutions like hospitals, are often
reluctant to admit that they were targeted, and sometimes they
just pay this ransom and try to essentially not report it. But
just to confirm, and again, very briefly, Director Vorndran,
paying ransoms to cyber criminals instead of reporting it out
and working with the government does not necessarily guarantee
that that data will be decrypted or that their systems will be
secure. Correct?
Mr. Vorndran. That's correct. There are no guarantees that
if any corporation, organization, or entity pays ransom that it
will necessarily be decrypted. We have use cases between us and
CISA where the decryption keys provided by the actors have not
worked.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Mm-hmm. And Director Easterly, currently
the House is seeking to pass the Build Back Better Act. Now,
among other things, this bill includes more than $400 million
for your agency, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency. Now in concrete terms, can you help communicate to us
and to the public what that $400 million would allow your
agency to do, and what kind of capacity and what sort of
implementation does that buy, per se?
Mr. Wales. Sure. So, Congresswoman, there's a number of
provisions in there that deal with cybersecurity beyond CISA,
but I'll focus on the provisions that deal with our agency and
the additional funding that it would potentially provide. And I
think there's a number of initiatives there that go to a series
of concerns that have been raised by members during the course
of this hearing, particularly related to the security of our
critical infrastructure and the industrial control systems that
enable our infrastructure to operate.
There is money in there that will help us expand our
ability to monitor and detect activities that are actually
happening on critical infrastructure networks and take quicker
action in response. There is money in there for research and
development focused on the critical infrastructure domain and
the industrial control systems to identify new and emerging
ways in which we can detect and protect those critical assets.
There is funding in there for expanded training and
education that go to a number of the topics related to work
force that we've hit on. So, I think that there is a series of
provisions that will certainly help bolster our ability to
provide support to the cybersecurity of this country.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from North Carolina--
gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Foxx, is recognized.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.
I thank our witnesses for being here today, and I have a
question for Executive Director Wales and Director Ingles--
Inglis. Pardon me, Inglis.
We know that ransomware attacks can be devastating. To
further complicate the effects of an attack, healthcare
entities face additional requirements because their data can
include protected health information that is covered by HIPAA.
Entities covered by HIPAA are required to report a breach
of protected health information within 60 days of the discovery
of the breach. However, it can sometimes take several weeks of
forensic investigation after a ransomware attack to discover if
protected health information was compromised.
There is pending legislation that may require the reporting
of a network breach to the Department of Homeland Security.
Since healthcare entities often need time to discover the
protected health information was compromised, are there plans
to address the interagency communication so that the Health and
Human Services Office of Civil Rights 60-day countdown does not
begin when the ransomware payment is reported to the Department
of Homeland Security, but rather once the healthcare entity has
determined that a breach of protected health information has
occurred?
Mr. Wales. Ma'am, obviously, there's a number of different
versions of the cyber incident reporting legislation that are
moving around. They will have somewhat different
responsibilities for the degree of regulatory harmonization
that may be required because, obviously, there's a number of
other regulators that require incident reporting from our
critical infrastructure and the financial sector and the energy
sector and others.
Part of that legislation that we've seen would require CISA
to work with those agencies if we are implementing our
regulation. Part of it would require once information is
reported in to them, it be further reported to us within 24
hours once they get that information. But it's a little too
hard to say in terms of what will be the final passage of the
bill.
We're still working closely with relevant congressional
committees on that legislation, but I can assure you that our
goal, working with Director Inglis and others, will be to
ensure the maximum harmonization of those various regulatory
requirements. But that will take some time to work through.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you.
Mr. Inglis, do you want to add anything?
Mr. Inglis. I would simply add, additive to the comments
made, is that I think most of these bills have a rulemaking
period such that the bill is not implemented immediately upon
passage, but after some months, in some cases as much as two
years afterwards, after there is a kind of full consideration
of the concern that you raised and others.
Ms. Foxx. Thanks.
Mr. Wales, attracting qualified workers is a challenge
facing every sector in America. With regard to cybersecurity,
are there enough qualified workers for you to hire at CISA?
Mr. Wales. You know, that question is kind of hard. We're
not hiring them in a vacuum. We're hiring them in an
environment where there is intense competition for top
cybersecurity talent, and we are doing a lot to try to recruit
and retain the cyber work force that we want.
And I touched upon some of those issues earlier, but I do
think it is essential for the Nation that we grow the pipeline
of people who are focused in this area. It is not going to be
enough to just look at the people who are available today. We
need to think about what the needs are going to be in the
future, and to do that, we are going to need more people who
are interested and focused on this area, willing to devote
themselves to the cybersecurity field and get involved.
And whether that's at the Federal Government level, a state
and local government, or in the private sector, in academia, in
the research and development community, in security research
community, we need people in all of those areas. And so, we
really need to grow that pipeline. We've got initiatives to do
it, but it's going to take really a whole of nation effort to
make sure that we have the talent required.
Ms. Foxx. Well, Chairman Scott and I are trying to work on
the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, and if you have
specific suggestions, I am sure we would be happy to have them.
Director Inglis, cybersecurity is not an issue that people
often think about until there is a problem. Does society need
to treat cybersecurity with more urgency, or should
strengthening cybersecurity be the role of the private sector
and the government rather than citizens?
Mr. Inglis. Thank you for the question. It's a wonderful
question.
I don't think that cybersecurity, at the end of the day,
can be completely shopped out to kind of a group of experts who
build, operate, and defend the infrastructure independent of
the people who actually are served by the infrastructure. As
I'd indicated earlier, people are not simply served by
cyberspace, they're a part of cyberspace.
Individual choices that are made by ordinary users who
depend upon it to conduct their livelihoods or their personal
affairs or businesses, those choices are actually reflected in
the weaknesses or the strengths of cyberspace. Therefore,
everyone must be involved, and we need broadly a campaign for
awareness and some degree of awareness and training that then
equips people so that they can fulfill the roles that they need
to as individuals, organizations, or sectors.
Ms. Foxx. Well, again, I would invite you, if you have some
suggestions on how we can enhance our national cybersecurity
that you don't have a chance to talk about today, I hope you
will share those things with us.
Mr. Inglis. I would welcome the opportunity to engage you
and your staff.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms.
Tlaib, is recognized.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Thank you all so much for being with us.
If you work at an organization that is successfully hit
with ransomware attack, this is an example of the kind of
ransom note you might find on your computer system. This is a
ransom note left, I believe, by a cyber-criminal group called
REvil that is behind some of the most prominent ransomware
attacks of the past few years, including those on software
provider Kaseya and the meat marketing process, JBS Foods.
This note reportedly was part of Kaseya's attack and was
deployed against some of their customers. There is a lot of
information, as you all can see on here, on this page. But I
want to focus on the line that says you have two days. Right
under that deadline, it says you pay, you know, $5 million
ransom, and it says, quote, ``If you do not pay on time, the
price will be double.''
So, Mr. Wales, you know, this is fairly a common ransom
tactic used by attackers, put pressure on its victims to pay
quickly. Correct?
Mr. Wales. I think my colleague from the FBI can probably
describe this in a little bit more detail, but that is
generally, yes. I mean, this is what cyber criminals are going
to do to try to extort money out of victims.
Ms. Tlaib. And so, does the FBI--would you like to comment
in regards to that? Because I think the timeline and like the
counting down----
Mr. Vorndran. Sure. I appreciate the question and
appreciate the opportunity.
Certainly, to Brandon's point, we would agree with that.
You know, the bottom line is, it is an extortion tactic that is
heavily leveraged based on time. We have unique data in our
holdings based on the number of these that we worked that show
how long we can potentially negotiate and what type of
reductions, and that's information that we're happy to share
with victims should they get hit by a certain ransomware
variant.
Ms. Tlaib. You know, Assistant Director and Mr. Wales, I
mean, part of that threatening is not just a deadline and
doubling, but they also threaten to like leak the stolen data,
make news of the attack public, or destroy the key to
pressure--make victims pay, right? So, you know, Assistant
Director, in your view, I mean, should companies pay the ransom
immediately?
Mr. Vorndran. Let me split that question into two, right?
Ransomware groups are moving to a double extortion model where
they exfil data, and then they hold it, and then they encrypt.
The exfil data is used as additional leverage for a double
extortion option for them, to hold additional leverage over the
company or the affected organization.
So, our position on paying ransoms has remained the same,
which is this. We do not recommend paying the ransom because it
fuels the criminal enterprise, but we do understand that it's a
business decision for any corporation or entity about whether
to move forward with paying that ransom. The only thing that we
would collectively ask, as the Federal Government, is that we
be notified as soon as possible when that ransom is paid so we
can do our best to track the money.
Ms. Tlaib. Director Inglis, one of the things that I find
here in Congress in the three years I have been here is there
seems to be always emphasis on new laws and criminalizing,
right, when we already, I believe, have some strong legislation
now on these types of attacks and criminal activity. Do you
think that it is really about resources and more funding and
investment in enforcement, or do we really do need new
legislation to try to attack this?
Mr. Inglis. Thank you for the question.
I think that your question goes to the heart of the matter,
which is that we need a comprehensive approach. We need to
double down on investing in resilience and robustness across
technology, people, making sure they have the right skills, and
doctrine, making sure we've got the right roles and
responsibilities.
Do we, in fact, make it such that a transgressor needs to
get past all of us to get at one of us? We need to make sure
that we double down on the proactive defense of these systems
to detect an anomaly at the earliest possible moment, which
then if we fail in those first two pieces, which should have a
determinative effect, we're left with responding to an incident
and perhaps chasing, finding the criminal, bringing them to
justice.
But if we only did that third bit, right, we would find
ourselves in an impossible tail chase. So, we have to do all
three of those.
Ms. Tlaib. And you know, Director Inglis, I mean, one of
the things that I know happens even in the kind of local
government in trying to enforce that, is there--is there a way
to measure, you know, OK, we invested this much in your
department or division, and the result became--you know, are we
able to really track that? That the result of investing, you
know, in Build Back Better, what we have is millions of dollars
investment in combatting this issue. How are we going to be
able to measure like it is actually working so that colleagues
can see that we need to do more in this way instead of just
continuing----
Mr. Inglis. Yes, that's a great--that's a great question,
too.
During my time in the private sector, I was often asked the
question of how much money do you need to properly defend this
organization, cyber defend this organization, which is
typically not the best first question. The best first question
is do I understand what the role that digital infrastructure
plays in my business? Is that an appropriate role? Am I taking
risks that I don't want to actually spend time and money to
secure because it's not a risk that I think is worthwhile?
Have I balanced, right, my risks such that I've done the
necessary preparation? It's resilient and robust. Am I actually
following what the system is actually doing such that only that
last bit of then can I detect an anomaly, some transgressor
inside the system?
You have to first then think about what the purpose of the
system is, have you balanced your investments across that? If
you've done both of those things, then you can ask do I need
further dollars to buy down risk attendant to something that I
have determined is an essential risk, and I've determined I
haven't been able to secure through resilience, proactive
defense, or pursuit.
Ms. Tlaib. Well, thank you so much. Very insightful.
I yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
First question, this is for Mr. Inglis. As I understand it,
there was recently a cyber incident in an important part of
government, and it took your agency quite a while to become
aware of it. It wasn't reported to your agency for quite a
while. Is there any reason why agencies are apparently afraid
or hesitant to share information with you, or without--could
you give me a general, your general opinion of that incident?
Mr. Inglis. Yes. So, if I recall the incident that you
refer to happened in late July. I think that we came forward to
the Congress, the Federal Government came forward to the
Congress in mid-August to describe the nature of that incident,
what we were doing about that. Is that the one, sir?
Mr. Grothman. I believe so, and I believe your agency was
not made aware right away either.
Mr. Inglis. We were not. But my agency didn't come into
being until I showed up on the 12th of July. So almost
coincident with the incident that ultimately was revealed as
being, we believed, significant. And I think there's a couple
of challenges here.
One is that there are hundreds of things that happen in a
system every day that might be constituted as anomalous. It's
not something you would have expected. It's something that may,
in the end, simply be a simple anomaly, a bit flipped the wrong
way. They're not all cyber events that rise to the level of
significant or major.
And therefore, it's almost impossible instantaneously to
determine what's major, what's not. Those often take time. A
transgressor doesn't always reveal, right, their methods on
that first day. So long story made short, it might legitimately
take two or three weeks.
The challenge, though, in that particular incident was that
you had an agency that determined that something had happened.
It had understood that this was in the context of a lot of
other events taking place and determined on its own merits that
this didn't meet the kind of level of major or something that
should be reported.
Quantitatively, right, the statistics that they cited were
appropriate, and therefore, it was a reasonable decision
locally. But looking more broadly across the Federal
enterprise, what we determined when we became aware of that in
the middle of August was that this was an incident that could
have happened in other places. We need to take that signature
and check those other places, which we did, and it was
something that in the longer term, the longer scheme, required
an investment to make sure that we prevented this from
happening again.
My long story made short is that the context matters
greatly. And the fact that it took 2, 2 1/2 weeks to get to me
is not something I find terribly surprising. We need to be
quicker on the draw. We need to reduce noise to kind of
information that matters. We need to even--we make it even and
perhaps level set across various agencies and departments that
we come to the same repeatable, defensible answer day after day
after day. That's the scheme that we're implementing at this
moment.
Mr. Grothman. I was just a little bit concerned that they
didn't report to you quicker.
Next question. You know you can tell by the discussion here
today that people talk about China or Russia or North Korea,
Iran. I guess without identifying those countries, because I
can imagine why you wouldn't want to, do you feel that is a
comprehensive list of countries you have to worry about here,
or are there other countries that you believe should be of
concern as well?
Mr. Inglis. I think we have a pretty clear understanding of
which nations hold us at risk in and through cyberspace, if
that's the question, sir.
Mr. Grothman. OK. And do you feel that is a comprehensive
list?
Mr. Inglis. I think that we know what that list is, and the
names that you mentioned are on that list.
Mr. Grothman. OK. And presumably, other countries as well?
I guess that is the question.
Mr. Inglis. The good news is there are few. The bad news is
there are more than one.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Should we be concerned that al-Qaeda or
ISIS would be planning an attack like that? Do you feel they
have the means to do it?
Mr. Inglis. I would say that there are any number of
entities or organizations or nation-states in the world that
have the ability to hold cyberspace, cyber infrastructure at
risk. We've been discussing this morning a variety of
individuals who operate in the safe havens near Russia that
have held us at risk. And so, I would say that al-Qaeda, ISIS,
anyone who places time and attention on the development of
cyber methods could hold us at risk. We don't at the moment
discern that that is at this time a risk from them.
Mr. Grothman. OK. And that would include countries adjacent
to or I guess Afghanistan is right now kind of a little bit of
a hodge-podge. But would you say that, say, the successor
governments or groups operating in Afghanistan would perhaps be
a problem?
Mr. Inglis. I'm worried about any collection of individuals
that would have a low cost of entry and some ability to develop
talent that could hold us at risk. Again, we have been
describing this morning a number of individuals who have formed
themselves into a syndicate who held this Nation and other
nations at risk using the scourge of ransomware. We are not
powerless to prevent that if we increase the resilience and the
robustness of our systems and we proactively and
collaboratively defend those systems.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. And the gentleman from
California, Mr. DeSaulnier, is recognized.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
having this hearing.
Thanks for the witnesses for your testimony.
I wanted to talk a little bit about healthcare
organizations and specifically hospitals. A recent report
surveyed 600 healthcare organizations and found that as many as
40 percent of them were targets of these types of attacks. And
at least in one instance, there was a loss of life, an infant
lost their life. Extended stays in hospitals are a normal
response to surveys because of these attacks and an
undetermined as yet cost to our healthcare system.
Mr. Wales, maybe you could talk to us a little bit about
why healthcare systems, and hospitals specifically, are so
vulnerable?
Mr. Wales. Sure, Congressman. You know, we've had one of
our senior health analysts described hospitals and a number of
other sectors as target rich and resource poor. And ones that
are the focus of adversaries because they believe that they
have a soft underbelly and that in the case of ransomware that
they would be willing to pay to get that hospital back up and
running very quickly.
On the other hand, they don't necessarily have the
resources and capabilities to devote to enhancing the
cybersecurity matching the degree of risk that they are facing.
That is why I think that we've been trying over the course of
the COVID-19 pandemic to try to make sure that as hospitals
became increasingly fragile, being overwhelmed with COVID
patients, that we were able to kind of surge cybersecurity
support to those entities, get them loaded into some of the
free services we offer.
But frankly, that's only scratching the surface. There is a
lot more that we need to do to make sure that hospitals are as
protected as they need, given the potential for disruptions
there to have really significant consequences on both the
communities as well as the patients within those hospitals. You
know, this is an area where there's a lot more work that's
needed. I'm not here to pretend that what we've done is nearly
enough. This is going to be a constant focus for our agency in
the years ahead to match the level of risk that's out there.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Well, I would love to work with you more,
and I am sure there are many people in the Congress who would
like to work with you more. Having had a healthcare experience
and having been in an ICU for a long time, this infrastructure
is obviously really important, and there should be a sense of
urgency, as you say, coming out of COVID, both for the clients,
the patients, but also for the staff.
Assistant Director Vorndran, could you tell us about
specific organizations that are targeting our healthcare
industry and hospitals that you are aware of?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, if I understand your question correctly,
you mean which ransomware variant groups are targeting
healthcare? Is that accurate?
Mr. DeSaulnier. Yes, that is the question.
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, it's a little bit of a difficult
question to ask because these criminal groups really go after
targets of opportunity where they can find vulnerabilities. So,
to Mr. Wales's commentary, certainly there may be common
vulnerabilities in the healthcare network that any number of
the 101 ransomware groups that we track could target.
But I think it's important to recognize that it's really
the calculus of where can the criminals find the best
vulnerability and the best access, and certainly that is
prevalent in the healthcare industry, but it's also prevalent
in many, many other critical infrastructure industries as well.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Specific to this industry, though, are
there--we have got laws, HIPAA, protecting both patients and
doctors, both Federal level and the state level providers. Are
there things unique to this industry that we could help, be
helpful with so that hospitals and healthcare organizations can
provide you with the information but not feel as if they are
becoming susceptible to some other privacy issue, sir, or
litigation? Director Inglis or Director Vorndran?
Mr. Vorndran. I'll start, sir. This is Bryan Vorndran.
So, within the FBI, we have a concerted effort to engage
the healthcare industry, and really, the focus of that
engagement is sharing tactics, techniques, and procedures of
these ransomware criminal groups, but also specific indicators
of compromise that they can build into their net defense
posture. We work very, very closely on those lines of effort
with CISA on a very routine basis to make sure that we get to
the hospital communities at large.
Regarding your questions about HIPAA, where HIPAA and other
PII really come into play is during an incident response
framework, and there is concern, certainly HIPAA, PII across
multiple industries, of willingness of those affected entities
to share inadvertently PII. And one of the biggest
recommendations we could pass along is to have those
organizations, in this case, the hospital or healthcare
industry, work through in a moment of crisis how would they be
able to inform CISA or the FBI or the other relevant Federal
Government entities as quickly as possible by lowering the
barriers on PII and HIPAA.
Mr. DeSaulnier. I really appreciate that. I look forward to
working with any of you and with the committee to make sure
that we can protect this important part of our culture of the
healthcare system.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Sessions, is recognized.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairman, thank you very much, and
thank you to this hearing. I think it is well worth our time,
and important questions are being asked.
I want to ask the entire panel, but General, I will
probably focus on perhaps you first. I would like to move down
the pathway that Mr. DeSaulnier was moving, and that is what I
would call lessons learned.
Can you tell me how many prosecutions, Federal prosecutions
have occurred in the last five years on these issues of
cybersecurity?
Mr. Inglis. Sir, I don't have that information at my
disposal at the moment. I'd be happy to take that question for
the record or defer to Assistant Director Vorndran.
Mr. Sessions. Director?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I can't answer that question with great
fidelity. I can certainly take it back and get you a very
precise answer. But it's a threat that we've worked on
continuously for five years and would have accurate data to
support it.
Mr. Sessions. Yes. Well, the reason why I asked the
question is, just like Mr. DeSaulnier said, we are interested
in what are lessons that are learned from the investigations
that you do, and we are interested in knowing how best--there
was a question that was asked earlier about new laws, but I
think we ought to know the effectiveness of what we are doing.
We are spending a lot of time, a lot of resources. It is a
national priority that we are engaged in.
Which one of you should I look for getting that answer
from?
Mr. Inglis. I'd be happy to take the lead on that, sir.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you, sir. We will write you a letter to
help you. Being up here is a whole lot of fun, but we will
followup and write you a letter requesting that information. We
will include the chairwoman in that request.
So, for any one of you, you could probably dissect the
marketplace problems into about 15 different areas. I put it--I
am going to put it simply today in one or two ways, and that is
malware, which is, you know, this malicious use of the
computers. The other might be computer-induced or someone broke
in necessarily maybe from an employee or found out about
something.
But as it relates to an employer and related to how the
employer has protected their own data and their employees, are
you finding or what would the discussion be of company, what I
would call a company-induced breach? In other words, not
related to something else. Somebody was not doing the right
thing. Someone had a breach of their employee who did this. How
would you respond to that to let us know about the size or
scope of that threat?
Mr. Vorndran. So preliminary estimates or the best data we
have that drives our estimates are that 90 percent of cyber
breaches on user, end-user equipment or infrastructure for a
company are induced by human error. But I think where we see an
intersection is between what we would call an insider threat
and the information the insider has access to that's trying to
sell to a nation-state or somebody trying to get economic gain,
and the overlap between that set of information, intellectual
property, whatever have you, and what hackers are also going
after.
And we see a core intersection between insider threat,
hacker breaches, going after the same thing. We've seen it in
COVID research, advanced defibrillators, aerospace engineering
designs by subject for human penetrations, corruption is
surfacing across a gamut. So, we do see a very, very keen
intersection right there.
Mr. Sessions. So, in other words, your investigators, once
they were able to effectively get their handle around the
problem and look at how things happened, you are finding that
employees and systems within companies many times has a large
breach. So, one of the questions I would like to ask, General,
is then and then if you have this information about how many
people then were prosecuted what I would call on an internal
basis by their company, one of the questions why we ask this--
and one of my colleagues previously asked--is, are there new
laws?
Years ago, we were really concerned with making sure that
someone could report their information without being held
liable necessarily. In other words, to share information about
the things that were happening, which would help everybody. But
in this case, if a major part of or, as you allude to, some
part of the failure is with an employee, for us to know more
about those employees.
Did they come from a certain pool, perhaps a school, MBA
program where they had been involved? Perhaps an area of the
country. Perhaps on something, whatever your investigation
might be. If you could give us any clue about at least----
Mr. Inglis. I would be happy to take that question and
provide a fulsome response. I would say that the 90 percent
figure that Assistant Director Vorndran cited is one that I
cite as well, but the vast majority of those people don't
intend to make those mistakes. They simply make them, right?
They're not well equipped to make an appropriate choice at the
moment. They might click on a link thinking it's one thing.
It's provided by someone who's phishing them, and so on and so
forth.
Mr. Sessions. Yes.
Mr. Inglis. And so, we can give you very great clarity
about the percentage of things attributable to a human being
and those that were malicious in their intent.
Mr. Sessions. Yes, and I think that is important. I am not
an athlete. I am a football player, and I threw interceptions
that I didn't mean to. But I had to correct my behavior in some
circumstances to understand what happened when I threw the
pass. And I think if business understands more clearly the huge
part that their employees play, and I know we talk about it in
the private sector a lot and in the government a lot. But I
think that focus off that activity would help me.
And I appreciate you being here, each of you. This is a
serious attempt. I will tell you--it is just a byline--but in
1985, when I was in New Jersey at what might be in old Bell
Labs, I was on the original Bell Labs team that invented what
might be ISP and our broadband, what became broadband.
And we began gathering data and information that would be
in a switch, which would then gather data and information about
how this data stream would be included in the Bureau. My father
was the director at the time, and the Bureau was very concerned
about what was being built in as information that could be
gleaned on both sides of that not only from a perpetrator, but
also from a company to gather information about that.
And I might ask--not now--but I might ask at some point for
you, Assistant Director, about your viewpoint of gathering data
and information, whether that has stayed up with time that
would aid and help not just law enforcement, but the managing
companies in their effort.
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, I'd be happy to have that conversation
with you at any time.
Mr. Sessions. Great. Thank you very much.
Madam Chairman, thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, and
we are moving on. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this very
important committee meeting today and hearing on this very
important subject.
I introduced the Cybersecurity Opportunity Act with Senator
Ossoff to fund a cybersecurity grant education program at
historically black colleges and universities and minority-
serving institutions. This legislation would promote
cybersecurity education and research through grants to HBCUs
and MSIs and help build a more diverse workplace.
Mr. Inglis, Mr. Wales, and Mr. Vorndran, how valuable is it
to bring diversity into the cybersecurity work force?
Mr. Inglis. I think diversity is essential in the
cybersecurity work force. A diverse work force brings every
perspective, cognitive diversity, as well as experiential
diversity to the table in a way that that team is much harder
to beat than any other team. And so, I think it's very
important for us to make investments of that sort.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Mr. Wales?
Mr. Wales. Yes, to echo Director Inglis, I think
cybersecurity is often thought of as largely a technical
problem. What we have often said is that it's really a problem-
solving challenge, and we need people who are effective at
solving problems. And the more people and the more diversity we
have looking at those problems, the better we're going to be at
solving them and bringing to bear the right solutions to the
significant risks and challenges that we face in this area.
And so, we are working hard. As I mentioned, this is one of
the top priorities for Director Easterly at CISA is to expand
our diversity, our work with HBCUs and minority-serving
institutions. And bringing in, reaching out to communities that
have never been priorities for engagement in the cybersecurity
sphere is among our highest priorities, and really happy to
work with you on the legislation that you discussed.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir. Mr. Vorndran?
Mr. Vorndran. Sir, thanks for the question.
I'm going to broaden your question just a bit and just say
for the FBI and for Director Wray, diversity across the
entirety of the organization is a number-one priority for all
of us. Certainly, that cuts into cyber and the need to
diversify. But to echo what Director Inglis and Mr. Wales said,
diversity, gender, ethnicity, it just makes us better because
it accounts for every different viewpoint that's represented in
our society.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Inglis, according to an article published by the
Association of American Medical Colleges, about a third of
healthcare organizations globally reported being hit by
ransomware in 2020. While the inconveniences of cyber-attacks
such as the one on the Colonial Pipeline were felt in many
homes, our family members' and friends' lives are at risk when
hospitals go offline.
With so much reliance on the internet in general, are
hospitals generally prepared to meet the challenges to patient
care that arise from ransomware attacks?
Mr. Inglis. Thank you very much for the question,
Congressman. I don't have the data at hand to indicate how many
of those were successful. Again, we know about 25 percent
broadly of attacks that take place. We don't know about the
other 75 percent.
That being said, I think that every critical sector of the
hospitals being kind of in the center of one very important
critical sector I think can do a better job of improving
resilience and robustness, kind of mounting a proactive
defense, and ultimately ensuring that they access all resources
to include governmental resources, right, to help in that
defense or in the response.
As I think was indicated earlier, it often is a target rich
environment, a resource poor environment. So, we need to make
sure that the hospitals have the necessary resources to make
those investments and to properly defend those assets.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Inglis, in that same article, it was disclosed that
rural hospitals are more vulnerable to cyber-attacks than those
located in urban or suburban areas. How are--How is your office
addressing the need for cybersecurity resources such as
training and software in smaller rural hospitals?
Mr. Inglis. Sir, if I might kind of defer that question to
Deputy Director Brandon Wales, who addressed this earlier, and
I think quite thoughtfully so.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Wales. It is the real challenge to make sure that we
get out to the organizations that are most urgent need of our
support, and I think we're trying to do this at a number of
different levels. A lot of it starts at working at the state
level with the state authorities that we can help bring down
supports they may have into the local communities, identify
those places that most need support, and be a conduit back.
There are some states that have things called cyber
navigators that are cybersecurity experts provided by the state
to support local communities as they're building their
cybersecurity posture. We've deployed cybersecurity state
coordinators from CISA to be a linkage back to the Federal
Government, back to CISA, and make sure that our products and
services are being used in communities at the state and local
level throughout the country.
In addition, the most recent infrastructure bill included a
cybersecurity grant program that could help many public
hospitals throughout the country particularly because it has
certain provisions that require certain support to go out to
rural communities as part of that grant program. So, we think
that it could be an important steppingstone to begin to provide
some of those resources that those communities need to begin to
put in place the baseline cybersecurity that we would want for
such a critical infrastructure to have.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has----
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Clyde, is recognized.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Director Inglis, it is a pleasure to see you again, and
Assistant Director Vorndran and Executive Director Wales, thank
you for being here today to share your insights on the threats
of ransomware that it poses to our security. I would also like
to wish CISA a happy third birthday.
Director Ingels--or Director Inglis rather, I would offer
you this question, and then I would like a followup from Mr.
Vorndran. I believe that a country's defense is best summed up
in its offense, in its offensive capabilities. So, without a
strong offense, I think our Nation will lack the ability to
deter and respond to attacks conducted by both state and non-
state actors.
Can you briefly highlight what capabilities are at the
government's disposal to properly respond and eliminate those
threats, and if you believe that you cannot discuss those
capabilities to the extent you would like to in this hearing,
would you be willing to come back and hold a classified hearing
to help my colleagues and I better understand those
capabilities?
Mr. Inglis. I would certainly be pleased to come back in a
classified hearing and describe these things more fulsomely.
But I would say that in cyberspace, as much as cyberspace can
impact any instrument of power, we should, in return, be able
to use any instrument of power to affect cyberspace.
So, our offense, as it were, is not simply our ability to
do things in and through cyberspace, but to apply legal
remedies, financial remedies, diplomatic remedies, private
sector remedies that have authorities on their own
infrastructure, to bring all that to bear in a concurrent
fulsome way such that we impose cost on adversaries, that would
be, I think, a proper and fulsome offense. Again, offense must
be an extension of the defense. Defense needs to be kind of
equally important to us.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you. Mr. Vorndran, could you comment on
that, too, please?
Mr. Vorndran. Of course, sir. I'm going to take your
question a little bit of a different direction, but still get
to the point. When we talk offense, I understand what you're
saying, but I think a lot of times in this discussion we miss
sometimes how big of a role investigation plays in helping
provide that defense, making sure that our victim entities in
this country are in good shape.
You know, for every one victim, there is usually a dozen or
100 more being affected by the same malware strain. In a recent
critical infrastructure compromise, we were able to get agents
out to the scene immediately and identify a zero-day
vulnerability. We immediately pivoted, using our investigative
tools. We found other zero-days in critical infrastructure,
worked with CISA, and were able to patch all of those when the
patch became available. Those other critical infrastructure
companies never would have known they were potentially
vulnerable victims.
We had a situation with a hospital recently where we were
able to get to a hospital within hours and share indicators of
compromise that allowed them to eradicate an adversary from
their network in real time.
So, we--I appreciate the question about offense. I would
want to be part of that classified briefing with Director
Inglis, but I think it's really important. There's a hybrid
space in here between true defense and true offense that our
field-deployed force is filling extremely well on a day in and
day out basis.
Mr. Clyde. Well, thank you. I think that cyber-attacks are
one of the most dangerous ones where outside entities can
pierce our defenses and affect our civilians that don't have
the defensive capabilities.
Also, Assistant Director Vorndran, in your testimony here,
you say that DOJ also has extensive experience in navigating
complex privacy and civil liberty issues that will inevitably
rise from new requirements and would prove to be invaluable in
helping to set the standards that strike the right balance to
ensure that incident report information is collected, stored,
and shared appropriately.
What is not mentioned is ensuring that civil liberties are
protected. Would you speak to the importance of protecting
these civil liberties and the commitment of the FBI and the DOJ
to do just that, please?
Thank you.
Mr. Vorndran. Sure. Any new incident reporting legislation,
the FBI and Department of Justice's position has always been
the same. We want full and immediate access to any data that's
reported to the U.S. Government because we are a decentralized
organization, and we can get people onsite almost immediately.
We're also very, very attentive and understanding to civil
liberties, personally identifiable information, and everything
that's derivative of that, and we would be willing to work
within confines of a bipartisan bill to make sure that those
elements are clearly protected, to make sure everybody is in a
good space.
Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you. I appreciate that commitment.
And I have got just a few seconds left for Director Wales.
Director Easterly recently had the opportunity to discuss how
the Federal Government's hiring process has hindered CISA's
ability to recruit the work force it needs to safeguard our
Nation's important entities. She highlighted how the Federal
Government has 20 steps to hiring someone, and the process
takes about 200 days. In comparison, the private sector's
hiring process typically takes about 60 days.
Can you provide the committee with some recommendations on
how we can streamline the hiring process so that CISA can be
better staffed so it can more effectively carry out its
mission?
Mr. Wales. Sure, sir. That's a great question.
This is an area that is of intense focus for our entire
agency right now. We have worked over the past year to reduce
the time by about 15 percent. I think it went from about 240
down to 200 days on average to hire a person, but that's still
obviously too long.
We are looking at an end-to-end review to understand what
do we have the ability internally to change, how can we
streamline it without any requirements for new legislation, but
we're happy to come back to you and talk about what we've
identified and if there are additional tools that we need in
order to streamline it further than we can do internally.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much, and I yield back, Madam
Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you, and I join you in your
request for a classified briefing. Democrats have also
expressed concern in wanting to investigate this further.
But before I close, I want to offer Mr. Grothman an
opportunity to offer a closing statement.
Mr. Grothman. I would like to thank you for having the
hearing.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. Grothman. I thought it was a good bipartisan hearing
without the partisan rancor that you sometimes have.
I would like to thank our guests for being here. This is a
very important topic, and failure is really not an option. I
mean, there are some agencies out there they can probably fool
around and our country will continue on, but you guys cannot
fail.
And I hope that you make dealing with cybersecurity pressed
threats your number-one priority. There were some indications
from some of your comments that that might not be your number-
one goal, but it has got to be your number-one goal.
I share in the request for a private meeting sometime, and
again, I thank the chairman for keeping such a cordial hearing
going one more time.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank, first and foremost, all of our
witnesses for appearing today, including Mr. Wales, who
appeared on very short notice. Thank you.
Today's hearing advanced several important goals. The
hearing highlighted key findings the committee released today
from our investigation into major ransom payments made by U.S.
companies to cyber criminals. The FBI confirmed today that
these payments only fuel more criminal attacks.
Today's witnesses also agreed with the committee's findings
that we need to do more to enhance coordination among Federal
agencies in responding to these attacks. Mr. Inglis, whose role
as National Cyber Director was championed by this committee,
will be crucial to that effort. His office finally received
permanent funding yesterday when President Biden signed the
bipartisan infrastructure bill, and I am looking forward to his
continued leadership.
Today's hearing also demonstrated the significant strides
that the Biden-Harris administration has already taken to
tackle ransomware head on, including by helping the private
sector to prevent attacks, prosecuting attackers, and working
with our allies to fight back against this global challenge.
Finally, today's witnesses made clear that the time for
Congress to act is now. We need to disrupt ransomware
incentives, and we need to require incident reporting so that
the Federal Government has full visibility into every attack. I
urge all my colleagues to support this critical bipartisan
legislation.
To all of the witnesses, I thank you for your service, and
I look forward to working with you to strengthen our Nation's
cyber defense.
With that, I would like to just end by saying and in
closing that I want to commend all of my colleagues and the
panelists for participating today in this important
conversation.
With that, and without objection, all members have five
legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials
and to submit additional written questions for the witnesses to
the chair, which will be forwarded to the witnesses for their
response. I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
you are able.
This hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:08 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
