- INVISIBLE WOUNDS: PREVENTING SUICIDE IN OUR NATION'S MILITARY AND VETERAN COMMUNITIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INVISIBLE WOUNDS: PREVENTING SUICIDE IN
OUR NATION'S MILITARY AND VETERAN COMMUNITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 17, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-53

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-260 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Daniel Rebnord, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk
Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on National Security

Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts, Chairman
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin, Ranking
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,          Minority Member
Georgia                          Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Jackie Speier, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 17, 2021................................     1

Witnesses

Ms. Alyssa M. Hundrup, Director, Health Care, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Brigadier General Jack Hammond, Executive Director, Home Base
Oral Statement...................................................     8
Dr. Carla Stumpf-Patton, Senior Director, Postvention Programs,
Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors
Oral Statement...................................................    11
Staff Sergeant (ret.) Johnny Jones, Board of Directors, Boot
Campaign
Oral Statement...................................................    13

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

No additional documents were entered into the record for this
hearing.

INVISIBLE WOUNDS: PREVENTING SUICIDE IN
OUR NATION'S MILITARY AND VETERAN COMMUNITIES

----------

Wednesday, November 17, 2021

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Subcommittee on National Security
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, and via Zoom. Hon.
Stephen F. Lynch (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Lynch, Welch, Johnson, DeSaulnier,
Mfume, Wasserman Schultz, Speier, Grothman, and Higgins.
Also present: Representative Maloney.
Mr. Lynch. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good morning, everyone. Continuing in the spirit of
Veterans Day, which we celebrated last week, I'd like to again
thank our nearly 18 million veterans and their families for
their distinguished military service and sacrifice on behalf of
our Nation.
And keeping faith with our Nation's obligation to our
Active military personnel and all those who are veterans,
today's hearing will examine the devastating suicide crisis
that continues to affect the health and well-being of America's
Active military and veteran communities.
Since 2001, the suicide rate among our Nation's veterans
has risen by 57 percent, and, on average, more than 6,300
veterans have died by suicide each year. The more than 65,000
veterans that have died by suicide since 2010 exceeds the total
number of combat deaths from the Vietnam War and the U.S. wars
in Iraq and Afghanistan combined.
According to recent data from the Department of Veterans
Affairs, the suicide rate among veterans in 2019 was 52.3
percent higher than for nonveteran adults.
Moreover, Active Duty suicide rates have increased across
every single service branch since 2011. In its most recent
annual suicide report, the Department of Defense reported an
Active Duty suicide rate of 28.7 suicides per 100,000
servicemembers in 2020, the highest rate reported by the
Department since it began compiling such data in 2008.
Last year alone, 580 servicemembers died by suicide,
including Active personnel, National Guard, and Reserve.
The suicide epidemic among our military and veteran
communities is an enduring public health crisis that also
carries profound implications for U.S. national security.
As detailed by Brown University in one of its recent
``Costs of War'' reports, our men and women in uniform have
been operating at a persistently high operational tempo since
the commencement of the global war on terrorism in 2001. The
unyielding pace of deployment has significantly strained U.S.
military readiness, intensified the pressure on military
personnel and their families, and exacerbated the mental health
challenges already facing our military and veteran communities.
To their credit, both the VA and DOD have prioritized the
military and veteran suicide crisis within their respective
organizations. The VA is increasingly using a public health
approach to suicide prevention that employs evidence-based,
clinical intervention strategies while also promoting
partnerships with community and mental health organizations.
And, within the last year, DOD has implemented several pilot
programs designed to identify suicide warning signs on social
media, encourage servicemembers to seek mental health services,
and to promote the safe storage and handling of firearms,
medications, and other lethal means.
I look forward to discussing the recommendations issued by
the Government Accountability Office detailing improvements
that both agencies can make to enhance their suicide prevention
and outreach programs.
I'm also very pleased that earlier this month President
Biden released a new comprehensive national strategy on, quote,
``Reducing Military and Veteran Suicide.'' The strategy
outlines a governmentwide cross-section and data base approach
to addressing the public health and national security crisis.
In particular, the Biden strategy seeks to expand the use
of data to target suicide risk factors, advance suicide
research and evaluation, promote skills development to lessen
the risk of suicide, and ensure access to high-quality mental
healthcare.
President Biden's new strategy also recognizes the
important work of community-based organizations and other
private-sector stakeholders to prevent and reduce military and
veteran suicide.
In the city of Boston, where I live and which I am proud to
represent, Home Base, an innovative, family based clinic
established in 2009 through a partnership between the Boston
Red Sox Foundation, the Massachusetts General Hospital, and
Harvard University provides critical, life-saving care to
servicemembers, veterans, and military family members as they
heal from traumatic brain injury, post-traumatic stress, and
other invisible wounds.
I'm extremely grateful to Home Base's executive director,
Brigadier General Jack Hammond, for testifying before our
subcommittee in person today about their important work.
I'd also like to thank Dr. Carla Stumpf Patton from the
Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors, or TAPS, and Staff
Sergeant Johnny Jones from the Boot Campaign for testifying
before our subcommittee today.
As well, I know you both are deeply and personally invested
in this issue, and we all look forward to hearing your views
and perspectives.
I thank all of you for your service and your sacrifice on
behalf of our Nation.
I will now yield to the subcommittee ranking member, the
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, for his opening
remarks.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing to address the public health and national security
crisis that is veteran and military mental health and suicide.
I want to personally thank Mr. Jones and Mr. Hammond for
serving our country and continuing to fight and work on this
issue. I also want to thank Dr. Stumpf Patton for her tireless
work on this issue.
Before we get started, I want to play a voicemail Mr. Jones
sent us from a veteran he references in his testimony. As you
will hear in Mr. Jones's testimony, our government failed this
veteran, and he unfortunately is no longer with us because of
that failure.
We must not discuss this issue in the abstract. This can be
difficult to hear, so if you need to mute or leave, please do
so now.
[Audio clip begins.]
Sergeant McDonald. Hi, brother. What's up? It's me. Just
give me a call. I need some help, man. Like, the VA told me,
you know, they take it by a case-by-case basis. And they're
telling me to try to find a local facility and go in on my own
dime and my own insurance. And they said, after I find out
about if my insurance will pay for it or whatever, they told me
to contact them back. But, like, basically, them outsourcing
it, I guess, like, they don't want to spend the money on it or
whatever else. But I was just seeing, like, what steps you
think I need to take, because, you know, they're telling me one
thing, and then my insurance, like, it ain't gonna cover more
than, like, five or six days. And I just wanted to see what you
wanted me to do. Dad thinks I can--have to start contacting
newspapers, TV, everything else. But I just want to get your
take on it, brother. All right, call me back.
[Audio clip ends.]
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
To all the veterans, servicemembers, or military families
that may be listening, if you or a loved one needs assistance,
we encourage you to reach out to one of the many services
available. You can call them at 1-800-273-8255 or text them at
838255 or chat at their website.
I'd also ask that each of the nonprofits here today submit
their contact information for the record or start their
testimony with it.
Thank you.
We are here today to discuss the heartbreaking and largely
preventable crisis of veteran and military suicides. In 2019,
6,261 veterans died by suicide, 580 servicemembers, and 202
family members. That accounts for 15 percent, about one in six,
of all suicides in America.
Those who choose to fight for our collective freedom should
not return home to strife and turmoil and struggle without
options for help. This must be a multi-agency and private-
sector effort.
The Department of Defense needs to do more for those
actively serving. They need to prepare servicemembers for
discharge. The Department of Veterans Affairs needs to provide
more services, and they need to actively identify vets who are
in trouble. And the private sector, primarily nonprofits, need
to continue to step up and fill the void by providing services
on the ground to the vets and their families. We all need to
step up.
The GAO recently released two reports, one regarding DOD
and one regarding the VA. It does not appear that either the
DOD or the VA have completed any of the recommendations made by
GAO. I wish they were here to testify--quite frankly, they
should be here to testify--because, otherwise, you really
can't--there are so many questions that only they would be able
to answer.
Additionally, the DOD Inspector General found that the DOD
did not screen for suicide risk or provide uninterrupted mental
healthcare to transitioning servicemembers, as required by
Federal and DOD guidance.
Mr. Chairman, the DOD and VA have failed to protect our
servicemembers from the tragedy of suicide. I hope we have a
hearing on this topic with the DOD and VA as soon as possible.
This topic is especially important considering the recent
images from the Biden administration's withdrawal from
Afghanistan. It's vital we remind veterans, particularly that
fought in Afghanistan, that they served their country with
honor and worked within the rules of engagement, operating
their best, and their actions had demonstrable positive effects
on the people of Afghanistan. In fact, because of the resolve
of these vets and the determination of Americans, American
allies even got evacuated.
Finally, it's important to focus on positives and hope--the
VA calls these ``anchors for hope.'' Suicides dropped 399 in
2019, making it the lowest single total since 2017. The
reduction of 399 was the largest ever in a single year, so
that's good news. There was a 13-percent decrease in deaths by
suicide among women, the largest decrease in 17 years.
Well, I'd like to thank the witnesses for being here today,
and I look forward to hearing from you.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, I'd like to recognize the chairwoman for the
full committee, Chairwoman Carolyn Maloney, for an opening
statement.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Chairman Lynch, for holding this
critically important hearing and for your unwavering commitment
to our military servicemembers, veterans, and their families.
In the 20 years since 9/11, almost 3 million soldiers,
sailors, airmen, and marines have answered the call to serve
our Nation overseas. Tragically, more than 7,000 servicemembers
have made the ultimate sacrifice fighting terrorism in
Afghanistan, Iraq, and around the world.
Tens of thousands more have returned home with both visible
and invisible wounds of war. Too often, these servicemembers
and veterans fight their own battles that the rest of us cannot
see. Sadly, many of these battles end in suicide.
While we may never fully understand why any servicemember
or veteran chooses to take their own life, we know that certain
risk factors can make that tragic outcome more likely. Post-
traumatic stress, clinical depression, and other mental health
struggles can contribute to feelings of loneliness or
helplessness. So can economic insecurity, a lack of access to
healthcare or good-paying jobs, and other daily stressors and
challenges that we all may confront at some points in our
lives.
We also cannot escape the fact that firearms are the most
common method that servicemembers and veterans use to take
their own lives, and they do so at a much higher rate than the
general population.
I applaud President Biden for taking key steps to address
this tragedy, including releasing a new strategy earlier this
month for reducing military and veteran suicide. This plan
adopts a whole-of-government approach to addressing the public
health and risk factors that contribute to suicide, while also
increasing access to clinical care and improving lethal means,
education, and safety.
This is an important framework for reducing military
suicides, but it must be implemented in coordination with
nongovernment veteran and community organizations. I am pleased
that we have representatives here from three organizations to
talk about how they are working with DOD and the VA to achieve
this objective.
Finally, just as we honor, respect, and care for those
military families who have lost a loved one in combat, we owe
the same duty of care to those who have lost a family member
due to suicide. According to the CDC, family members that have
lost a loved one to suicide can experience anxiety, depression,
post-traumatic disorder, and can be at heightened risk of
suicide themselves.
Chairman Lynch, you have movingly said before that when a
young man or woman puts on the uniform of the United States
military, they become our children. So, too, are the families
of our Nation's servicemembers and veterans our family, and we
have a solemn moral obligation to care for them.
This is a very personal issue to me. My brother served our
country in Vietnam, and he came home a changed man. He
struggled for years after his military service, and he later
took his own life. That was years ago, but the pain of my
brother's passing is still with me today.
So, Chairman Lynch, thank you for holding this important
hearing. I am hopeful that we can make meaningful progress
today in protecting those who have served our country and their
families.
I'd like to thank all of our witnesses for testifying
before our committee.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlelady yields back.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses.
Today we're joined by Ms. Alyssa Hundrup, who is the
Director of Health Care with the Government Accountability
Office.
We're also joined by Brigadier General Jack Hammond.
Brigadier General Hammond is a retired U.S. Army officer and a
veteran of both Iraq and Afghanistan, serving in the Army for
more than three decades. He has led at every level of command,
from platoon to brigade, during peace and war.
In 2012, General Hammond was invited to lead Home Base,
which is a unique partnership between the Boston Red Sox and
Massachusetts General Hospital. Home Base established the
Nation's first private-sector center of excellence for the
mental health and brain injury impacting our wounded veterans
and their families. This clinical program was designed to
leverage the faculty and deep clinical resources of
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School in
order to deliver the best possible clinical care in the country
for our veterans and families at no cost to them.
Home Base has reimagined what is possible in the treatment
of these complex injuries and developed new and innovative
solutions, saving thousands of lives, and caring for more than
25,000 veterans and their families through the funding support
from a grateful Nation.
Next, we are joined by Dr. Carla Stumpf Patton, who is
senior director for postvention programs at the Tragedy
Assistance Program for Survivors, or TAPS, which provides care,
resources, and a support system to military families who have
lost a loved one.
And, finally, we are joined by retired Staff Sergeant
Johnny Jones, a veteran of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq,
who now works on the board of the Boot Campaign, which works to
connect veterans and servicemembers with access to health and
wellness resources. Staff Sergeant Jones is appearing remotely
before us today.
Thank you all for attending. We look forward to your
testimony.
It is the custom of this subcommittee to swear all
witnesses. Would you all please stand and raise your right hand
so we can swear you in?
And, Mr. Jones, will you be unmuted so we can swear you in
remotely?
Staff Sergeant Jones. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you're
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Staff Sergeant Jones. I do.
Mr. Lynch. Let the record show that the witnesses have all
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you. Please be seated.
Without objection, your written statements will be made
part of the record.
With that, Ms. Hundrup, you are now recognized for five
minutes for your testimony. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF ALYSSA M. HUNDRUP, DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE TEAM,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Hundrup. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member Grothman, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
be here today to discuss our work on DOD and VA's efforts to
help prevent suicides among the military and veterans.
Suicide is a devastating public health problem that has
been a persistent and growing issue for our servicemembers and
veterans. As noted, the latest report from DOD shows an
increase in military suicide rates in 2020, with an increase of
over 40 percent in the last six years. Similarly for veterans,
the most recent data from 2019 shows a suicide rate almost two
times higher for veterans than nonveterans.
My testimony today includes information from three recent
reports we issued examining various DOD and VA prevention
efforts. Specifically, since September 2020, we have made three
recommendations to DOD and six to VA to improve their efforts.
Both agencies have taken initial steps to implement most of our
recommendations, and we will continue to monitor their actions
to fully address them.
First, regarding DOD, in our April report, we looked at
DOD's nonclinical suicide prevention efforts. We found that DOD
and the military services have implemented a number of
initiatives aimed at reducing the risk of suicide in the
military population, such as through specific trainings and
educational efforts. And, in 2020, DOD's Defense Suicide
Prevention Office, or DSPO, published a framework for assessing
these efforts collectively.
However, DSPO's framework does not provide DOD with
information on the effectiveness of its individual initiatives.
Given unique risk factors the military population faces, such
as higher likelihood of experiencing trauma, it is imperative
that DOD also ensure that each of its individual efforts are
fully assessed to understand how well they are working, and we
recommended that DSPO collaborate with the military services to
develop a process to do just that.
DOD agreed with our recommendation and, in June, reported
that it is beginning discussions with the services on how to
standardize an evaluation approach.
Second, regarding VA, we recently looked at VA's use of
suicide prevention teams. These teams are used at local
facilities to implement VA's Suicide Prevention Program, which
includes various activities such as tracking and reporting on
veterans at high risk for suicide and conducting trainings.
VA has added a number of new initiatives to be implemented
by these teams. However, the addition of these many initiatives
has led to a considerable increase in the team's workload,
which, in turn, has led to burnout and turnover at some
facilities.
VA officials said they're developing new guidance for their
Suicide Prevention Program, but the agency has not conducted a
comprehensive evaluation of the effects of the program's
growth, and it is using a staffing model that does not account
for the increasing workload resulting from the many new
initiatives.
We believe these shortcomings could put the suicide
prevention teams, and ultimately the care they provide to the
veterans they serve, at risk of falling short of the program's
goal to reduce the incidence of suicide among veterans.
We made recommendations to strengthen VA's use of and
staffing for its suicide prevention teams. VA agreed with these
and has since outlined a number of actions it is taking.
Finally, in 2020, we issued a report that found VA had not
taken enough steps to develop a full understanding of the
prevalence and nature of suicides taking place on its campuses,
including making use of all relevant information it collects
about these deaths in order to prevent future cases.
We recommended that VA more accurately identify all on-
campus suicides as well as expand the information it analyzes.
We believe such analyses could, in turn, help prevent future
suicides.
In closing, suicide is a tragic issue that needs
significant attention and action. DOD and VA have both
emphasized the importance of suicide prevention and have
several efforts underway. It is critical that they now fully
address our recommendations and ensure the quality and
effectiveness of their efforts so they can take every step
possible to help prevent suicide among servicemembers and
veterans.
This concludes my prepared remarks. I would now be happy to
answer any questions that you may have.
Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much.
General Hammond, you're now recognized for a five-minute
summation of your testimony.
General Hammond, can you make sure your mic is on and that
it is close to you?
There you go. Thank you, sir.

STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL JACK HAMMOND, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, HOME BASE

General Hammond. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member Grothman,
and members of the subcommittee, I greatly appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you today on this national tragedy of
military and veteran suicide.
Home Base can be reached at HomeBase.org.
This is an issue of profound importance and is deeply
important to me. In speaking with my good friend and Medal of
Honor recipient Staff Sergeant Ryan Pitts, he describes this as
the number-one threat facing our veterans from this generation.
I hope to provide you with an alternative perspective on
the challenge, one that is based on my personal experience with
PTSD, experience leading troops in combat on multiple
deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan, and, of course, my decade
of work assisting veterans who desperately want to put the
pieces of their lives that were broken on the battlefield back
together. When they lose hope for a day without pain or their
ability to move forward, then they give up and take their
lives. We are in a race against time to reclaim that hope.
There is an implied trust made between our warriors in this
Nation that if they are injured, wounded, or killed, we as a
Nation have their backs and we will be there to provide them
with the care they need, and if they die, we'll care for their
families. Ladies and gentlemen, we are failing in this mission.
Three million men and women from two generations of
Americans answered the call and deployed to war. They followed
the footsteps of our previous generations who came before them
and did not question the challenge. They did their job and kept
the rest of us safe from harm, asking only to be made whole
when they return home.
This is clearly a difficult task, but a veteran will tell
you that getting into a canvas-door Humvee with no body armor
and driving into Fallujah while people are shooting at you and
trying to blow you up is also quite difficult. But they did it.
This country was bred to accomplish impossible things from
its birth to the Moonshot, but sometimes we forget this. Time
is not our friend, and each day we waste is costing lives of
brave Americans, who leave behind a wake of destruction with
their broken families.
For the past decade, as the chairman mentioned, I've had
the honor to lead an organization that has reimagined what is
possible with veteran care. More than 25,000 folks have been
treated by the incredible, talented clinicians at Home Base,
all at no cost. And Home Base does draw its faculty from Mass
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and the Mass General
Brigham system, demonstrating what is possible.
Home Base launched a groundbreaking, two-week, intensive
clinical program for PTSD and traumatic brain injury six years
ago in partnership with the Wounded Warrior Project and three
academic medical centers across the country. This program
compresses two years of therapy into 14 days. And every two
weeks, 24 veterans are flown to Home Base for this care.
Three years later, we modified the clinical program for the
surviving spouses of military and veteran suicide, in
partnership with our good friend at TAPS.
In 2019, the Naval Special Warfare Medical Command
requested a pilot program for traumatic brain injury to address
the complex medical needs specifically for these unique
warriors. More than 200 Navy Seals, Green Berets, and Delta
Force members and other SOF troops have completed this unique
program, and 300 more are currently on the waitlist for this
care. Seventy percent of these men are on Active Duty, and,
remarkably, 97 percent of them return to full duty.
In 2015, we expanded our work to the five counties of
southwest Florida, first creating a wellness program and then
building clinical capacity with two local hospital systems in
order to improve access to high-quality clinical care. These
clinicians were flown to Boston and trained in evidence-based
treatment, and then funds were raised to support 50 percent of
their salary to deliver care to our veterans at no cost.
Additional partnerships are currently underway with Tampa
General Hospital and the Florida legislature to expand this
further. And, most recently, we have met with leaders from
Navajo Nation and Governor Ducey of Arizona to grow clinical
access, capabilities, and capacity for veterans and families in
the Tribal lands and in Arizona.
This work to grow clinical capacity began in Massachusetts
through a statewide suicide prevention program that partnered
125 police departments, the VFW, VSOs, and we trained 75
clinicians across the state in underserved communities. We also
trained first responders and veteran service officers to
recognize veterans exhibiting at-risk behavior.
We can do the difficult things, and with a limited budget
resource, we've successfully piloted many of the key elements
contained in the White House strategy.
I believe that the strategy is spot-on, but the most
crucial element of the plan is to improve access to high-
quality, evidence-based care. However, the six agencies tasked
with this have been given a year to develop a plan, and this
could mean a three-year delay in implementation, at the cost of
another 18,000 lives.
We know how to grow clinical capability. Home Base has
accomplished this on a shoestring budget and improved access to
high-quality care in multiple states across the country, to
include our work with the Navajo Nation. What we need now are
actionable plans and funding strategies for each of the
priorities in the White House strategy. An 80-percent solution
today is much better than a 100-percent solution that never
becomes a reality.
My second recommendation is to engage our private-sector
hospital systems and academic medical centers. The VA has been
in this fight alone, and it is an insurmountable task. They
need to look at funding tools used by elements like the
National Institutes for Health in its fight to cure illnesses,
rare disease, and injury.
Dr. Richard Stone from the VA testified last year that only
6 of the 20 veterans who die by suicide each day had received
VA care within the past two years. This means that those 14
received care in the private sector, and that is where we need
to recalibrate our focus a bit.
Congress has provided billions of dollars to improve access
to private care, but many of these efforts continue to fail
because of an inability to create funding mechanisms to pay for
that care.
Home Base has met all the requirements to be a VA Choice
Provider, was approved as a VA Community Care Partner, but has
never received an official referral for care or reimbursement,
despite the fact that we've received hundreds of informal
referrals from VA providers.
Home Base has delivered high-quality care for more than
25,000 veterans at a cost of $165 million from a grateful
Nation. The National Institutes for Health, by contrast,
routinely support extramural care through grants, contracts,
and cooperative agreements. We need to implement these tools
and train and fund clinical care for veterans at the point
where it is needed, in many of our community-based health
centers. Each of our systems can play a role in the strategy,
but a vision without resources is a hallucination.
My final recommendation is for the DOD, and it has to take
a more aggressive approach toward suicide prevention in a
proactive manner. This work can begin and follow the pathway
established by the Special Operations Command through their
universal mental health plan and the Preservation of the Force
Program.
We must do better to get upstream of these injuries. And,
last year, I was asked to join a group of doctors and
researchers from Harvard and provide the Army leadership with
actionable recommendations to reduce soldier suicide. An
amazing team of experts from Harvard and MGH volunteered to
serve on this: Dr. Jordan Smoller, Dr. Matt Nock, Dr. Greg
Fricchione, and Dr. Ron Kessler, clinical researchers who
routinely advise both the World Health Organization and NIH on
these same issues.
They developed a plan that leverages and advances on
machine-learning-based prediction algorithms to identify
soldiers at greatest risk for suicide. They are then matched up
with the most optimum, individualized prevention plans
available.
This two-pronged strategy first focuses on enhanced risk
assessment that will identify those at the greatest risk for
suicide. Studies have shown that clinicians perform no better
than chance at predicting suicide. This two-pronged approach
also focuses on an enhanced risk assessment tool that will
identify who is at greatest risk.
And then a second component of this plan will be to
implement a risk assessment, mitigation, and maintenance tool
using the data from a decision support tool that is developed
that will provide data-driven solutions to match at-risk
veterans with suicide prevention strategies that meet the
particular needs of the individual at that time.
This entire effort can be accomplished by using existing
DOD resources, and it will provide DOD with the greatest
predictive modeling capability in the world.
The DOD and VA have both done incredible work to stem the
tide of veteran and military suicide, but without engaging the
full resources of a grateful Nation, which has demonstrated
their support by raising billions of dollars in private funds
to care for our veterans, we are attempting to accomplish this
task with one arm tied behind our back.
All the while, 20 veterans each day lose hope for a day
without pain and take their lives. This leaves many families
asking the question, how their veterans could survive the
rigors of combat but not peace when they returned home.
I look forward to answering any questions you have. And I'm
grateful for the opportunity to speak with you and the
attention you're paying to this important matter.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, General.
Dr. Stump Patton, you're now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARLA STUMPF PATTON, ED.D., LMHC, SENIOR DIRECTOR,
POSTVENTION PROGRAMS, TRAGEDY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR SURVIVORS

Ms. Stumpf Patton. Chairman Lynch, Ranking Member Grothman,
and distinguished committee members, the Tragedy Assistance
Program for Survivors thanks you for the opportunity to testify
on behalf of the 100,000 military and veteran survivors that
TAPS supports, including the nearly 19,000 who have lost a
military loved one to suicide.
My name is Dr. Carla Stumpf Patton, and I serve as the
senior director for TAPS' suicide prevention programs. I'm a
surviving spouse of a Marine Corps drill instructor, Sergeant
Richard Stumpf, who died by suicide at the age of 24 on October
31st, 1994.
I was pregnant full-term with our first child, who was born
several days later when I was rushed to the hospital during the
funeral. The devastating tragedy propelled me to find ways to
survive and eventually dedicating my professional career to
suicide prevention and postvention efforts for 27 years.
To do so, I earned multiple degrees in the fields of
psychology and mental health and completed my doctoral
dissertation on military families bereaved by suicide. By
trade, I'm a licensed psychotherapist and subject-matter expert
in the fields of trauma, suicide, and bereavement.
I am remarried to a Marine who also lost his military
dependent spouse to suicide, wherein our two blended military
families have experienced this tragedy on multiple levels.
This statement is a representation of the countless
individuals, our loved ones, who died by suicide after
prevention efforts failed. The emotional crisis they were
experiencing did not simply disappear with their suicide but,
rather, is often transferred and absorbed by those coping with
the death.
Postvention for survivors is imperative to reduce risk and
increase prevention, as those who have been impacted must be
offered the same care and services offered to the servicemember
or veteran prior to their death. It is of equal vital
importance that we also include military dependents in
prevention initiatives, as the death of a family member can
have detrimental effects on the servicemember or veteran.
Postvention must be a critical component of any comprehensive
suicide prevention strategy.
Based on best practices, the TAPS Suicide Postvention
Department developed the field-leading TAPS Suicide Postvention
Model. This decreases isolation as well as risk for mental
health issues, such as suicide, addiction, anxiety, and
depression, and, therefore, increases social connection, peer
support, and growth that all promote healing following a
suicide death.
TAPS is the only organization formally working with
military families coping with a suicide loss, thus contributing
to life-saving prevention with information gleaned from our
postvention work.
When reflecting on suicide deaths, we often find that
military culture does not incorporate mental healthcare as a
vital part of wellness and readiness. A significant concern is
that prevention initiatives often fail to address what TAPS
families have identified as a missing component: that military
operations lack the time, attention, and significance needed to
tend to mental healthcare, wherein daily readiness often fails
to incorporate mental fitness and where access to mental
healthcare can be challenging.
Through years of advocacy toward reducing stigma
surrounding suicide in the military, TAPS recognizes the most
alarming concern being that of the fear of how seeking mental
healthcare could negatively impact career development and
advancement opportunities.
Many survivors, myself included, share how either they or
their loved ones were afraid to discuss or disclose to anyone
about such struggles, where far too often there had been
tremendous psychological and/or physical suffering that became
contributors to the suicide.
Suicide prevention requires a holistic public health
approach. Messaging must instill hope and be encouraging. In
many cases, suicide is preventable, not inevitable. People must
know that the help is available, that it works, and with it
comes the possibility to stabilize during an emotional crisis
and eventually go on to live a healthy, fulfilling life. The
overwhelming majority of people who struggle with thoughts of
suicide do not go on to die by suicide but, instead, access the
resources and learn the skills needed to cope in safe ways.
This all cannot stem from a single approach but, rather,
must consider long-term prevention strategies and comprehensive
crisis responses, including postvention care. Also vital to a
public health approach is increasing the education that anyone,
all of us, can participate in suicide awareness and prevention
efforts.
On behalf of TAPS and the survivor community that I
represent, I am grateful for the opportunity to testify today
and look forward to answering any questions that you may have.
Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Doctor.
Staff Sergeant Jones, you are now recognized for five
minutes for your testimony. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF STAFF SERGEANT (RET.) JOHNNY JONES, BOARD OF
DIRECTORS, BOOT CAMPAIGN

Staff Sergeant Jones. Thank you all for having me here
today. It's an honor to testify before the subcommittee in
honor of my friend Sergeant Christopher McDonald.
The issue of veteran suicide has become a trendy topic.
Awareness, it seems, is the cheapest currency for the problem,
so deeply misunderstood that we continue to lose lives at an
astonishingly consistent rate.
As an eight-year Marine Corps veteran with combat
deployments to both Iraq and Afghanistan, the latter of which
took both of my legs above the knee in August 2010, this trend
stormed into my own life the Friday before St. Patrick's Day in
2012, when my high school best friend, Marine Sergeant
Christopher McDonald, took his own life.
At the time, I was working as a fellow for the House
Veterans' Affairs Committee. My friend Chris was four years
removed from a combat deployment where he suffered both
physical and mental health injuries. He was prescribed 180 5-
milligram tablets of hydrocodone a month for a hip injury he
had suffered in Iraq in 2008 but received no treatment for his
mental trauma.
Chris was the epitome of hard work and discipline. His
father, our middle school football coach and high school
technology teacher, is a Marine Corps combat veteran from
Desert Storm. And whether it was football, baseball, or
academics, Chris gave everything 110 percent and could not
accept failure.
The months prior to Chris's suicide, he became extremely
addicted to opioids and began to lie, cheat, and steal from his
closest friends and family to supply his destructive habit.
Finally, at Christmas in 2011, his parents, his roommate at the
time, our mutual best friend and Army veteran, and I
intervened. We submitted a written affidavit to the local
authorities that he was a danger to himself and others, and he
was taken to a mandatory 72-hour detox hold. Afterward, Chris
admitted his problems and asked us all for help.
Unfortunately, help wasn't what the VA offered. Not real
help. He was told his case wasn't severe enough for in-patient
rehabilitation. He came to me, desperate. And, even working in
Congress, or maybe especially working in Congress, I felt
helpless to save my best friend's life.
Ultimately, he decided taking his own life was the only way
to ensure he no longer hurt or let down those he loved. But as
anyone who's lost a loved one to suicide knows, that couldn't
be further from the truth. This one act of finality hurts the
innocent every day for the rest of their lives.
We can't stand by and allow those who serve to think this
is the only option. Today, I work with many nonprofit groups to
identify, assess, treat and/or facilitate treatment for
veterans struggling with post-traumatic stress, traumatic brain
injury, addiction, chronic pain, and insomnia.
Veterans are turning to organizations like Boot Campaign,
Boulder Crest Foundation, Brain Treatment Foundation, the
Shepherd Center's SHARE Program, Camp Southern Ground--and let
me add, the organizations that are also testifying today have a
great reputation and are those organizations as well--and
veterans turn to others to find quick, individualized, and
nontraditional treatment protocols developed independently from
the catacombs of bureaucracy and antiquated, one-size-fits-all
methods that currently plague our VA.
I'm not a physician, a psychologist, or a psychiatrist. I
don't have a doctorate or masters in any field, much less
mental health or medical treatment. But I challenge you to find
someone with more passion and concern on this topic. I have
dedicated the last decade of my life to understanding this
issue in its entirety, not just through the lens of some
awareness campaign or appeasement initiative.
With that experience and with the help of some of the
aforementioned organizations, working on this issue every
single day, I've identified the following areas I feel are
either overlooked, oversimplified, or misunderstood altogether.
First, the role of prior-to-service trauma and trauma not
directly caused by military or combat experience. Many, if not
most, veterans who legitimately claim what is commonly known as
post-traumatic stress, sometimes disorder, experienced trauma
as a child. Many others experienced trauma from life, like
infidelity, guilt from not being close to a dying relative, not
seeing their children grow up, financial stress, and other
everyday American experiences that can contribute and sometimes
cause the deterioration of mental health.
Second, the DOD must take responsibility for vetting,
treating, and transitioning veterans. The VA gets all the
blame, and it is clear, more must be done to improve how we
treat veterans. But to have a paradigm shift in this issue, we
must look at root causes.
We spend 3 to 12 months training a civilian to be a
servicemember, we train them for six months to deploy, and we
spend years grooming them for their next promotion. But when it
comes time to leave the military--for many, facing their first
experience with civilian life as an adult--we spend two weeks
or less training them in this transition.
As someone who has seen the worst horrors war has to offer,
I can honestly and earnestly say that transitioning out of the
Marine Corps was the single most traumatic and least-trained-
for experience in my entire military career.
And, last, we must acknowledge and assist the good work
that is being done by nonprofit organizations and private
healthcare providers. The VA and the Federal Government at
large move slow. Sometimes that's by design, and sometimes
ulterior or even partisan motives are at work. I'm not here to
demonize the VA or complain about how things get done in
government, but I can tell you that there are treatment
protocols and outreach successes being made by these
organizations that are absolutely saving lives. Many of these
organizations need grants and financial resources, while others
merely need a seat at the table and access to data to expand
the reach of their success and save more lives. We won't solve
this problem with a government-only solution.
I want to thank you all for this opportunity. I know
government often seems like nothing more than a team sport,
but, for this issue, I commend you all for leaving your
partisan politics at the door and standing ready to do your job
with integrity and selfless concern for America's heroes.
As a veteran and a grateful American, please consider me a
resource and a dedicated soldier in this fight against our
third war and most deadly war over the past two decades. It is
our responsibility to do everything we can to save our military
servicemembers from the enemy within, a war fought here at
home, fought in our homes and among our friends and family.
And, with that, thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Sergeant. Thank you for your
testimony and your perspective and for the good work you
continue to do.
Before moving to questions, I understand that
Representative Tlaib, a member of the full committee, has asked
to be waived on to the hearing so she can submit a statement
and questions for the record.
So, without objection, the gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms.
Tlaib, shall be permitted to join the subcommittee and be
recognized to submit her questions.
Mr. Lynch. I now recognize myself for five minutes for
questions.
First of all, I want to say thank you to all of our
witnesses. You enrich this whole process, and you help us
grapple with this difficult issue. And thank you for your work,
your service within government and within the military, but
also thank you for your continued service outside of that on
behalf of veterans and Active military.
General Hammond, we have a dual system here that we've all
talked about. One is, the VA provides services to veterans, and
then we've got DOD for Active military. I want to talk about
the situation with the VA right now that the good sergeant just
raised.
So I'm blessed in my district, I've got three VA hospitals.
I've got one in Brockton, one in West Roxbury, one in Jamaica
Plain. Yet, when I read the data on the suicide report, so many
of the veterans who are victims of suicide are not
participating in the VA system, they are not registered, or
they're not getting their mental healthcare from the VA. So
there's a disconnect.
And look, my VAs do a great job, but if someone is not
coming in the door, then there's that disconnect, right? You
can't help somebody who doesn't enroll and participate in the
VA.
So there's a disconnect there that--I believe, listening to
what Boot Campaign is doing and what your organization is doing
and what TAPS is doing, it seems to me that, in a way, you're
filling that gap, you're curing that disconnect.
Can you talk about that? And, Dr. Stump Patton, I think you
have a similar perspective on how that works and how that fills
that gap. But, General Hammond, why don't you have a crack at
it?
General Hammond. Yes, sir. Thank you.
So one of the things that oftentimes gets lost in
translation is, throughout the last 100 years, 15-20 percent of
our veterans receive care from the VA. When they come home from
war, they begin their lives, they get jobs, they have
insurance, and they go that way. And, oftentimes, there was
always a hesitance to receive care, because it was like a zero-
sum-game mentality, where the veterans didn't want to take some
of that care from somebody who might need it worse, because
``I've already got my Blue Cross.'' So, if you've got a good
health system, you're part of that, you don't think to go into
that system. And it's not a reflection of the VA; it's just a
fact of life.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
General Hammond. In 2001, when this all started, there were
25 million veterans in the country, and only 3.9 received care
from the VA. That's a significantly small percent. That's grown
a bit, but we've also lost--from 25 million, as you mentioned
earlier, we're down to 18 million, and in the next 20 years
we'll be down to about 12 million.
So we can't keep making a 550-percent increase in the VA
budget to try and grow it at a time when the veteran population
is shrinking. We have to think smarter, how to sustain this and
how to give the best possible care under the rubric of the VA
but by reaching out to community-based health centers and
hospitals that are willing to do the work.
They just need the resources, and we need to figure out a
way to get those resources to those community-based health
centers where veterans live, where they go for care routinely.
Mr. Lynch. All right.
Dr. Stumpf Patton, any perspective on that, on filling that
gap between the VA and the people who need the services?
Ms. Stumpf Patton. I think working collaboratively is a
very powerful point. Suicide is a very complex, widespread
problem that cannot be, you know, answered or responded to with
any one single agency or organization. So, when we're all
speaking the same language, when we're all on the same page,
working in tandem, we present, you know, a united front.
And I think the military Reserves members, family members,
the military community need to know that they are not only
valued, but there needs to be a message that this care is there
for them, that they should want to seek care and know that
they're going to be in the trusted hands of people who are
there to serve them, rather than feeling a mistrust and not
choosing to go to the systems that are theirs, you know, to be
there to serve them.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
And, Sergeant Jones, you touched on this very issue in your
opening testimony. Any perspectives on that, on how we might--
and how Boot Campaign actually fills that gap on behalf of the
veterans that you serve?
Staff Sergeant Jones. There's really two issues at--and
thank you for the question. There's really two issues at once
here. One is, how do we look at those dealing with suicidal
thoughts that are already veterans, that have already left and
disconnected and now we're trying to reengage them.
The second part of your question, really, and the answer
is, the solution is, to never have them be disengaged to begin
with. And that goes back to the DOD and their responsibility to
properly assess veterans leaving the military from every aspect
that causes mental health issues, from finance to family
situations, the whole nine yards, so that, as they transition
out, that line of communication is already there.
One of these issues is, how do we address the population we
already have? But it'd be irresponsible to acknowledge that
problem and not look back and say, how can we preemptively stop
that problem from persisting as those leave the military.
And, statistically, you're going to have more veterans come
to the VA after a war than during a war, because they're going
to finally say, ``You know what? I've got problems, and there's
not a mission in front of me that I feel obligated to, so I'm
going to go ahead and get out and get treatment.''
And so now is the time that start looking at this.
Obviously, any day before today would've been great, but now is
a very important time.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much.
My time has expired.
I now yield to my friend, the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman, for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you so much.
My first brief question--you know, we're given some papers
before we come here, and there's a graph here showing veteran
deaths by suicide from 2001 to 2019. We're around 6,000 in
2001.
Does anybody know where we were 20 years before that? I
kind of wish that graph went further. How many suicides in,
like, 1980, 1990? Nobody knows?
OK. That's the type of thing I think the VA would know, and
that's why I kind of wish they were here, because it would give
us greater perspective.
My next quick question--and this is something I don't know
what to make of. I think referencing the same graph, in 2001,
it says 20.2 percent of the people who committed suicide in
this country were veterans. In 2019, that was down to 13.7
percent. So that's a significant drop of veterans compared to
the rest of society.
Can anybody comment as to why that is, make any
observations on it?
General Hammond. I would just offer this: that, No. 1, when
we look at our veteran population and our military population,
it's drawn from the top 30th percentile of the American
population. As of today, roughly 70 percent of young Americans
of military age do not meet the minimum requirements to join
the military and become a private in the United States Army
based on physical, mental, legal, and moral issues. And so we
start with a very high, healthy, mentally healthy, physically
healthy population that's been screened, not extensively but
screened to the point where 70 percent don't meet that
requirement.
So we're starting off with a good group, and then we work
on resiliency issues. And, traditionally, in peacetime, that's
worked. When we add the complexity of combat, the transition
issues, and all these other pieces, that's when we see these
rises.
And, starting in Vietnam, we started seeing increases in
suicide with the Vietnam generation during the war. And you
look at the treatment they received, and we start looking at
bad transitions when you leave the military, questioning your
service. We're starting to see some of that----
Mr. Grothman. OK.
General Hammond [continuing]. With this generation,
because, you know, there's been this dichotomy----
Mr. Grothman. OK.
General Hammond [continuing]. Where a lot of folks want to
support the troops, but----
Mr. Grothman. Yes.
General Hammond [continuing]. It's been pretty vocal about
getting out of Afghanistan, getting out of Iraq, whether it was
worth it. And when you question your service and sacrifice, it
does play with your mind a bit.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. Well, the question was actually why are
things getting proportionally better.
But, Mr. Jones, your testimony highlights three
recommendations. I want to ask you about two.
First, the DOD needs to take more responsibility in this
space. And a DOD IG report recently said that Department of
Defense failed to screen for suicide risk for transitioning
servicemembers. How does the IG finding make you feel?
Staff Sergeant Jones. It's unsurprising. The biggest
problem--I mean, even when you lose your legs and can leave the
military, the number-one problem is the VA and DOD's inability
to communicate with one another. I don't know what this root
cause is, other than the VA is incredibly resistant to
transitioning lines of communication and platforms and things
of that nature.
When I worked for the House Veterans' Affairs Committee,
the Improvised Disability Evaluation System, which, I mean,
simply allowed the VA and DOD to assess your injuries at the
same time, was borderline controversial, because there was
agreement on doing it but no agreement on how to do it.
And so it's very difficult to get the DOD and the VA to
communicate. And so it's much--very difficult to get the DOD to
assume responsibility for something that probably most in the
DOD see as a VA problem.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
You also said that the VA needs to do more work closely
with nonprofits. Last year, President Trump signed a bill, S.
785, that gave the VA additional resources to do that. Has the
VA done so? And, if not, what do they have to do?
Staff Sergeant Jones. That's a good question. I've spoken
with a gentleman named Ken Falke, who started Boulder Crest
Retreat and the Warrior PATHH transition program. He testified
before Congress on behalf of that bill. I spoke with him about
that bill, and the frustration was just through the roof with
him.
What we do at Boot Campaign is largely detached, actually,
from the VA. We really don't have an opportunity to work with
the VA because--if I were going to put this in layman's terms,
I would say the government would rather spend money on a study
to find out something doesn't work than spend money on
something that anecdotally very much is working but doesn't
want to spend a million dollars to study it, or doesn't have
the scientific recognition from a traditional medicine
community to get that type of data.
I understand the necessity to be responsible, especially
fiscally responsible, but we have organizations that get good
work done every day, that literally save and change lives, and
because they haven't done some expensive research packet or
study, they have less of an opportunity to get Federal grants.
And I think that's the problem.
I think that the government is overlooking nontraditional
treatment. And, to an extent, I understand why the VA leans
into what is, you know, acceptable in the medical community but
maybe not so much what is actually working today, with
technology and other things that just haven't been around for a
very long time.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Could I--just in general, like I said, when it comes to
inadequacies of the VA, it would be nice if they were here.
Do you feel, Mr. Jones--or I will also ask Dr. Stumpf
Patton--should we have the VA here today, the VA and the DOD,
do you think?
Staff Sergeant Jones. Absolutely.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Ms. Stumpf Patton. Yes, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Four for four. Good.
OK. That's enough. Thank you for the time.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the chairwoman for the full
committee, Mrs. Maloney, for five minutes.
I think we're having trouble with the technology there.
We will recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Speier, for five minutes.
Welcome.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And thank you all for your presentations this morning.
I am deeply concerned about the level and increase of
suicides among our servicemembers and our veterans. And I chair
the Military Personnel Subcommittee, and, in the NDAA this
year, I have language in there that will require an independent
review committee to look at the three highest incidence of
suicides at three installations, to look at why it's happening
at those locations and what we need to do.
Let me start with you, General Hammond. To what extent does
the OPTEMPO impact the likelihood of suicide ideation?
General Hammond. I think as we saw back in the early
2000's, that OPTEMPO where soldiers, marines, airmen, and
sailors deployed for a year, sometimes 18 months, came home for
six months, redeployed, we did see a spike in that.
We also saw the impact on their families. And you can't
discount that because we look at the external stressors. So not
only do you have the challenge of going and putting yourself in
harm's way, but you know that you're placing your family in a
very difficult situation. And sometimes there are those
external stressors, to include food insecurity, housing
insecurity, with a family behind for 12 to 18 months.
So I think the OPTEMPO certainly played a big role in this,
as did the type of battle that was fought in that asymmetric
environment, where it was not on a linear battlefield, and
greater numbers were exposed to combat action. And when I say
that, there was no safe place in Iraq or Afghanistan. You could
be in what we consider support troops that normally are well
behind the lines and aren't exposed to danger, and every one of
those bases was rocketed, shot with mortars, or had insider
threats that were constantly on someone's mind. And so you had
high stress and anxiety that many of these young men and women
came back with----
Ms. Speier. Thank you, General.
General Hammond [continuing]. In addition to the traumatic
injuries.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
I'd like to go to Dr. Stumpf Patton.
In your testimony, you said that ``the military has no room
in its schedule for mental health care . . . there is not
enough downtime to care for mental health in the military.
Daily readiness does not incorporate mental wellness.''
There's also a reference in, I believe, one of the reports
that one-third of our servicemembers are afraid to seek mental
health services because they fear it will affect their
promotion.
Can you speak to the OPTEMPO, the stigma, what we need to
do to address that?
And I'd also like our representative from GAO to do so as
well.
Ms. Stumpf Patton. Thank you. I think that's a very
important question.
I would say, what we are doing here is a perfect example of
that. We have to talk about this openly, directly. We cannot be
afraid to talk about suicide. Prevention really starts in being
proactive before a crisis ensues, before somebody is in an
emotional crisis. So we need to be aware of what we're looking
for. We need to be comfortable with having those conversations
with one another and promoting the idea that help exists.
I just want--can you just rephrase one more time the
question that you had? I'm sorry, I just lost my train of
thought.
Ms. Speier. It was about the stigma associated with----
Ms. Stumpf Patton. OK. And so, by doing so--that's the
point--by doing so, we therefore are already reducing some of
the stigma around help-seeking that is so critical.
I know for myself and countless survivors that we represent
and work with at TAPS, that stigma is often one of the largest
barriers when it comes to seeking care, of how that is going to
impact one's career through, you know, advancements and
promotions, how they might be considered and viewed among their
counterparts.
I think ultimately what we need to do is, addressing the
mental wellness here is just as critical as we would look at
physical fitness, which is--you know, we acknowledge that that
is critical to being ready for operations. So when we look at
that equally, that if somebody were suffering from any type of
other medical injury or illness, we would treat that with
emergency care, that when left unaddressed that could be----
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Doctor. I just want to get----
Ms. Stumpf Patton. OK.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. Ms. Hundrup to be able to respond
as well.
Ms. Hundrup. Thank you. I would just add very quickly that
we have seen in our work as well as our research that stigma
certainly is an issue, in terms of the concern about having
career implications.
In terms of finding ways to overcome that, I think that,
clearly, access, ready access, to mental healthcare is going to
be very important. And we've seen anecdotally that even just
doing things like allowing telehealth or allowing care that can
be in a private setting--you know, we've heard that sometimes
just going into the office, and they have to wear the uniform,
and they're concerned about perhaps seeing others, that there
might be perceptions of negativity there.
So I think we have to get creative in thinking about ready
access to that mental healthcare and how to do that in a way
that's comfortable and appropriate and, of course, of quality.
Ms. Speier. I totally concur.
I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Higgins, for five minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. And I thank my veteran brothers and sisters for being
with us today.
We should discuss, as a committee, from our heart, exactly
what is impacting our veterans across the country. I've buried
many friends. You know, a lot of veterans move into police
work. It's sort of a natural transition, especially if you have
combat experience and, you know, you have certain skills that
have been honed through the years in the military. It's a
common thing, to find that your tactical police officers across
the country are prior military. And a lot of cops commit
suicide. When they do so, it's considered a veteran suicide,
because a lot of the cops that commit suicide had been
veterans.
So PTSD is a very real dynamic and in my own history. And
my heart goes out to my brothers and sisters across the country
and the world that suffer.
I think we have to be courageous as a committee and deal
with a couple of things that we're facing right now that's
going to exacerbate what we have already experienced as a
Nation regarding PTSD within our veteran populations: the
disgraceful retreat from Afghanistan, turning the Afghanistan
theater over to the Taliban and arming them with scores of
billions of dollars of American weapons systems, abandoning
Americans and American allies.
You know, many of my friends that are veterans, you know,
they're very discouraged about that. And this has injured them,
I think, on a very deep level. They're asking why--you know,
why did they risk their lives? Why were they maimed? Why were
they left with the endless horrors and nightmares of war? This
is a significant question.
And I'm going to turn the floor over to my veteran brother,
Staff Sergeant Jones.
As a veteran of the war in Afghanistan, I'm going to give
you the floor, sir. You have a couple of minutes. I ask you to
just take a deep breath. I'm going to give you the remainder of
my time so that you can--you just speak to America from your
heart and reflect upon our retreat from Afghanistan and what
impact you would feel as an Afghanistan veteran and how you
think it would impact our veteran brothers and sisters across
the country.
I give you the floor, good sir. And thank you for your
service.
Staff Sergeant Jones. Yes, sir. Thank you.
I have to give an honest opinion on this. What happened in
Afghanistan shook me. I've buried two dozen Marine EOD techs
that come from the job that I came from in the last six or
seven years--I guess over the last 10 or 11 years, longer than
I remember, I guess--and each one of them hurt. Afghanistan was
the first time that servicemembers I didn't know hurt almost as
bad. Maybe it's just age and maturity, or maybe it was the,
obviously, looking on and seeing, man, this didn't have to
happen.
But I'll be honest, it was a straw on the camel's back. It
was not a definitive moment for me. As someone who lost my legs
above the knee and several dozen friends in 2010, I've seen
this coming for a long time, quite honestly. I've seen four, if
not five, administrations in a row play the partisan politics
of war, rather than the strategic advantage of what we should
or shouldn't do. It's my belief we haven't spent 20 years
fighting a war; we've spent 10 two-year wars. Because, for some
reason, Presidential elections and midterms really shape how,
in my opinion, Members of Congress view the war and want to
talk about it publicly.
And that's not to point a finger. It's just to say, if
that's the only time it's being talked about, then I'm led to
believe that's the only time it matters. And then our defense
strategy is playing second fiddle to, you know, the age-old
questions of will this get me reelected or will it stop me from
getting reelected.
That's the frustrated Marine in me talking. I don't mean
any disrespect to anyone. That's the feeling I have as a
private citizen and an American who sits and watches--you know,
I was a part of the push in al Anbar, I was a part of the push
in Helmand. I fought in two surges under President Obama and
felt like we were incredibly successful for both of them--and I
guess the al Anbar surge actually was in 2008, so President
Bush and President Obama--and then immediately watched both of
those successes essentially be squandered.
When I got to Afghanistan in 2010, President Obama had
already told the world that we were going to retreat less than
a year later, in 2011. And so we understood in that moment that
the Taliban would bide their time and focus on a few key areas,
one of them which I was fighting in, so fighting got much worse
for me.
I don't believe, you know, that's a partisan thing because
I saw two Presidents do it. I saw President Trump announce a
retreat from Afghanistan, and then I saw President Biden do it.
And so I think that veterans sitting at home are just left
with not a lot of faith in the leadership, both from our
military and our government, when it comes to fulfilling their
side of this commitment, which is, if I go die or my brother
dies, we're going to make sure it's for a purpose. And so
that's the tough part.
I understand in my personal life and in the connections and
conversations I have that there's more at play. But if you ask
me, what are veterans feeling at home, a lot of veterans are
sitting there going, ``Yes, well, that's about what I expected
to happen, because that's about how it's been going for a
while.'' And that was kind of the sentiment in the veteran
community.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you for sharing your heart. And God
bless you, brother. You know, you are free to speak your mind
in my office at any time.
Across the aisle, in my colleagues' offices, I know their
hearts are poured out and dedicated to our veterans. This is
not a Republican or a Democrat concern.
And I very much thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for holding this hearing today. And I look forward to working
with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to seek
resolution for our veteran brothers and sisters.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields.
The chair now recognizes the full committee chairwoman, the
gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney, for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As they leave the structured life of the military,
servicemembers and their families can lose a sense of purpose
and belonging as well as the tight-knit support system that
they had with their brothers and sisters in uniform. The
transition period from Active Duty to veteran status can be one
of the most vulnerable times for servicemembers. Some studies
have found that the risk of suicide is two to three times
higher for transitioning servicemembers.
While the Department of Defense and VA have programs for
servicemembers, too often these efforts fail to catch all of
the servicemembers that are in need of the mental healthcare.
The IG explained that these assessments are increasing over
time. Very few have this help that they need.
And I just would like to ask General Hammond, why is it
important for transitioning servicemembers to have access to
continuous mental healthcare?
General Hammond. Thank you, ma'am. That's a great question.
And, really, I believe the issue is, that is when they're at
their most vulnerable.
These men and women have served on high-performing teams,
in their minds, in some cases, saving the world, right? That's
what we tell them, that they're there, they have a sense of
duty and purpose. And when this gets taken away from them, that
identity, they hurt, and then they're in this state of flux.
And when they leave the military and then suddenly they go
from project-managing million-dollar construction projects with
little or no training, serving as the equivalent to the Secret
Service guard for the President of Iraq or Afghanistan, they
have all of these important positions and they're on this
amazing high-performing team, and then suddenly they're
unemployed, underemployed, living back with their parents,
feeling not so great, then they start to have some of these
mental health issues start to weigh on them.
And if they don't receive the care they need at that
moment, they can start going down the drain, literally. They'll
start putting on weight, they'll start self-medicating, and
then these problems get worse and worse. And then they kind of
retract further, and we see them withdraw from their friends
and their family, and the situation gets worse. And when they
lose all hope, that's that pivotal moment when they make that
really horrible decision.
And so that transition to get them moved from the military
experience, that life, into a purpose-driven life, dealing with
their medical and mental health issues, and then embracing some
type of community or having a community embrace them, those
three elements are key to a successful transition.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, the IG also found that DOD was failing
to provide uninterrupted care in part because it has, quote,
``inconsistent processes for and oversight of suicide risk
screening and mental health assessments for transitioning
servicemembers.''
Ms. Hundrup, I know you can't speak for the DOD IG, but why
is it important for the Defense Department and the VA to have
consistent procedures and up-to-date policies for providing
mental healthcare to transitioning servicemembers?
Ms. Hundrup. Yes, thank you. I think, certainly, the IG's
recent findings shed light and bring, certainly, the troubling
findings to start a clear demonstration of the need for
consistent execution. I think, you know, they highlight what is
called for, in terms of mental health screenings for all
transitioning servicemembers as well as a warm hand-off.
But what they don't have is a way to consistently execute
that, so--which, you know, I think the IG's findings would show
that what they do have captures, certainly, some segments of
the population in the military, which is very important. But,
for example, not having a consistent screening process, their
current physical separation exam does not include mental health
screenings.
Now, they have indicated that they're developing a new one
that will hopefully address this. But then they need to have
consistent execution so that they're able to reach all military
members.
Mrs. Maloney. Is this an area GAO may be interested in
examining further for the Oversight Committee?
Ms. Hundrup. We would certainly be happy to work with your
staff regarding potential work. As noted, of course, the
transition is such a key time, and we do think, you know,
continued collaboration and really examining how DOD and VA are
doing that is certainly an area we would be happy to work with
you on. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney. And, in closing, the men and women who serve
in our Armed Forces have the--when they leave the military,
their battles with their, what I would call, invisible wounds
of war do not end. So it is our duty to ensure they continue
receiving the care that they need and don't be forgotten, that
they don't fall through the cracks.
My time has expired, and I yield back. And thank you,
Chairman, for this important hearing and focusing on this
important need. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The gentlelady yields back.
I did see Mr. Welch earlier, but he is not visible on the
screen, so we are going to ask the gentleman from Georgia--Mr.
Johnson, you are now recognized for five minutes. Welcome.
[No response.]
Mr. Lynch. I now see Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
this.
You know, I want to ask General Hammond: Your description
of what the transition is was so compelling. You know, it's
these young people, a lot of Vermonters, that had no idea how
smart they were, they had no idea how qualified they were, they
had no idea how brave they were, and suddenly they're, as you
say, running these extraordinarily important operations, where
the life and death of their comrades depends on them doing
their job well.
And you used that term, ``purpose-driven.'' And I'll ask
your reaction on this, but whenever I talk to folks who have
served--and I have not; I'm grateful to all of you have--what
they say they're fighting for is oftentimes to save the person
next to them. And they have this bond that only they can have.
And then they come back, you know, to Winooski, Vermont, or to
Brattleboro, Vermont, and all of us who've been living our
daily lives have no idea of what it is they've been through.
And I just wonder if you could comment on, what do you
think some of us in the community can do to just acknowledge
this extraordinary transition that folks have to undergo when
they get back?
General Hammond. Thank you, sir. And that's a big issue. As
my colleagues at Mass General point out, in general, people are
mammals, and mammals are pack animals, and we do find comfort
when we're with our tribe, as they call it. And Sebastian
Junger wrote an amazing book called ``Tribe'' that highlights
the importance of that connectivity. And when that gets broken,
it causes significant impact for our warriors.
And, as we look at this, we've seen communities where our
veterans and warriors are embraced. Any opportunity that we can
pull folks together is a benefit. So, at Home Base, one of
things we do are these things called Adventure Series events,
where all sorts of people--and we have ski trips up in Vermont,
New Hampshire, skating on Frog Pond in Boston. Whatever it is,
it's designed to pull people together and----
Mr. Welch. That's great.
General Hammond [continuing]. Allow them to engage with
people with a shared experience.
Mr. Welch. So the connectivity is really essential, to
reestablish it. Well, thank you so much.
And, Dr. Stumpf Patton, your written testimony was quite
eloquent, and I want to thank you for that. But one of the
things you said is you felt completely alone, with no direction
on surviving your devastating loss.
Can you discuss some of the reasons you found it difficult
to find help after and support after the terrible loss of your
husband?
Ms. Stumpf Patton. Thank you, sir, for asking that
question.
I will say, as a reminder, my loss was quite--you know,
quite a few years ago, in 1994. And, at that point, there were
no resources. There was no crisis line. There were no suicide
prevention coordinators within the VA. This was not being
addressed. It was something that was really kind of swept under
the carpet and surrounded by a lot of stigma.
And so it was very isolating. I was very alone. That was
something that personally compelled me to try and find that
support and, eventually, to try to be a part of that support.
I know what I instinctively needed for myself and my
family. I didn't know what it was called at the time. And what
that was is ``postvention,'' the care and the services and the
support that we give to those who have been impacted by a
suicide loss. And that is our primary focus and what we do at
TAPS, in providing that postvention care.
This is critical when we are addressing suicide prevention
because survivors are a very high-risk population, given the
graphic and oftentimes traumatic loss that they have endured by
suicide loss.
So, you know, when we're talking about suicide prevention,
that postvention aspect is something that we must look at in
how we treat a suicide when it has occurred, how we talk about
it, how we support all of those who have been impacted,
including comrades and brothers and sisters in arms. They are
survivors. They have lost their fellow servicemembers and
veterans to suicide. And I believe that is a missing piece that
we are not looking at, around the grief and loss issues of our
servicemembers and veterans who are struggling with those
losses, specifically if they have lost somebody to suicide, and
could be vulnerable themselves.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. Understood. Thank you very,
very much.
I yield back.
Mr. DeSaulnier. [Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Welch.
We now recognize Mr. Johnson from Colorado for five
minutes--Georgia.
Mr. Johnson, the floor is yours.
Mr. Johnson. Oh, do you mean Mr. Johnson from Georgia?
Mr. DeSaulnier. Yes. It's yours.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Sorry about that.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. That's quite OK.
Almost 10 years ago, I, along with other Members of
Congress, sent a letter to the Senate and House Armed Services
Committees to ensure that the high rate of suicides among
servicemembers was addressed in the NDAA.
Despite the attention and actions of Congress, the VA, and
the private sector, servicemember suicides continue to
increase. Almost three times as many Active Duty servicemembers
and veterans of the global war on terror have died by suicide
than those killed in military operations during the same
period.
Dr. Stumpf Patton, thank you for your work in ensuring that
the families of servicemembers who fall victim to suicide are
not left behind.
To survive a loved one's suicide is a unique grieving
process. In what ways can Congress provide families with more
resources that they could use in the aftermath of a loved one's
suicide?
Ms. Stumpf Patton. Thank you so much for pointing that out,
that important question.
What we do at TAPS in providing the postvention support for
survivors is critical at saving lives for this high-risk
population. I think supporting one another, supporting
nonprofits and other organizations and agencies who tirelessly
do this work behind the scenes to be able to sustain the
difficult work that we do. Survivors tell us what they need.
We also know that, when they are connected to care, when
they are connected to peer support, not only is it lifesaving,
but this is instrumental in stabilizing them after their grief
and getting them the resources that they need so that they can
find a healthy journey and readjusting to their life through
the grief of their loved one.
I would also say, one of the most critical things that we
need to address is that, in addition to the grief of loss these
family members and loved ones often are enduring, there's an
added element of trauma that is oftentimes overlooked. And so
survivors and those who have been impacted and coping with a
loss by suicide are oftentimes either coping with symptoms of
trauma or developing post-traumatic stress, which oftentimes is
going to need additional treatment.
And TAPS is an honored partner to have worked with Home
Base, where we have developed such a program so that the trauma
piece is not being overlooked. And we know that to be
lifesaving for our survivors who have been struggling with
that.
Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
General Hammond, mental toughness is of utmost importance
in the military, as detailed on every branch's website and in
articles on military.com, which gives steps on how to improve
mental toughness.
Can you talk about how the culture of mental toughness in
the military and the stigma that accompanies mental health
evaluation and treatment can discourage servicemembers and
veterans from seeking mental health assistance during a crisis?
General Hammond. Yes. Thank you for that question.
I would tell you that their mental toughness and the
resilience they buildup to be self-reliant problem-solvers that
can play hurt, technically, is what saves them on the
battlefields. And it's extremely important in that aspect. It's
also the exact same issue that causes them the greatest amount
of pain when they return home and they're suffering from these
invisible wounds.
We'll be quick to point out that there's two types of
injuries. You're either hurt or you're injured, when you're in
the military, when you're on a mission. And if you're hurt, you
suck it up, as you mentioned, you push through it. If you're
injured, you require a medevac.
And for the mental health injuries, because there's no
physical aspect to it and everybody else seems to be
continuing, it leaves people feeling ``less than'' if they need
help. And that's the crux of the issue. Getting them to
understand and admit that they've got an injury that you just
can't see and they need clinical care is a long pole in the
tent.
And through our work with our special operations team
members, which are arguably some of the toughest people in the
country, we've seen 200 warriors come through our ComBHaT
Program, which is our Comprehensive Brain Health and Treatment
Program. And, as we do our diagnostic evaluation, they're
coming there primarily for brain injury issues and
musculoskeletal injuries. Out of the 200, I would say 99
percent of them do not have PTSD, according to them in self-
reporting, and almost 100 percent of them have it in their
exfil report, where we give them their diagnosis.
And the interesting question is, ``Well, I told you I don't
have it,'' and the doctors will say, ``Well, I didn't ask you
this time, and if you trust my judgment on these other issues,
you'll trust it on this.'' Their response is unbelievable:
Immediately, they say, ``All right, what do I do about it?''
Because, deep down, they knew they had these injuries; they
just don't want to say it out loud.
And, to your point, getting them to demonstrate the
courage--and I can tell you from personal experience, the
toughest step I took was walking into a clinic to get help. I
would've rather went gone on another patrol in Fallujah before
I did that. But based on the care and based on the impact, it
enabled me to return back to Afghanistan healthy enough to do
my duty.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you for your service.
And thank you, Mr. Chair, for holding this very important
hearing. And, with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Lynch. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Wasserman Schultz, for five minutes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I have the privilege--and I appreciate you
holding this hearing today--I have the privilege of chairing
the Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related
Agencies Appropriations Subcommittee. And that's the committee
in the Congress that touches the lives of our servicemembers
throughout their entire lifecycle. And it's the only committee
that has that jurisdiction.
One of our top priorities as chair has been strengthening
mental healthcare for our country's veterans and their
families. For Fiscal Year 2022, our bill made significant
targeted investments to improve veterans' mental health,
including a record level of $599 million specifically for
suicide prevention outreach programs, like supporting the
Veterans Crisis Line, enhancing community-based efforts, and
implementing proven clinical strategies.
With suicide rates among Active military and veteran
communities at crisis levels, we'll continue to be devoted to
funding programs and services that can intervene and save
lives.
And I have a couple of questions focused on mental health
and wanted to first start with General Hammond.
General Hammond, you have worked with both Active Duty
servicemembers and veterans throughout your career. Would you
agree that the military should train soldiers to strengthen
their mental health and resilience in the same way that they
train for physical strength and endurance?
General Hammond. I would agree with that 100 percent.
As we look at our physical health--when I came in the Army,
we ran in boots, we didn't stretch, and we did all of these
things that can hurt yourself. And somebody had the brains to
stay: Stop doing that, stretch before you work out, and you
will last longer, your knees will last longer, et cetera. Now,
soldiers would never consider starting their physical training
without all these stretching exercises, because it works.
We've done it with all these other things. There isn't a
piece of equipment the military operates, whether it's our 40-
year-old helicopters and tanks that work great because we have
a great maintenance program--we do a pre-maintenance and post-
maintenance on everything. But, when it comes to mental health,
when we return from deployment, we'll get asked a question,
``Do you have any mental health issues?'', and if you raise
your hand and say yes, you go on medical hold, which is a real
disincentive for somebody who's been away from home for a year
to do that.
Getting out in front of this and working--and I would tell
you, the special operations community has embraced this, and
they are working this mental-health-strengthening thing where
they work on block breathing and all these issues to work on--
stress reduction, anxiety reduction--which enables them to do
their job much better. So preventive maintenance is really what
it comes down to for good health and readiness, is the key.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I couldn't agree more. And as a
softball player, I can tell you, when I didn't stretch before a
game, I pulled a hamstring, and it caused me problems for
months. So it only stands to reason that we should be also
making sure that we're focused on mental health just as much as
physical strength and endurance.
Can you elaborate a little bit more on what types of
programs and services we could implement in military units and
at DOD and the VA to strengthen the mental health of our
servicemembers and our veterans?
General Hammond. Yes, ma'am. I would say, I'd start off
with that first tool I talked about, that team at Harvard I
worked with, especially on the suicide prevention: the risk
assessment. You know, right up front when they first join the
military, determining who's at risk. And the researchers I
talked to from Harvard explained to me that 90 percent of our
suicides come from about a 30 percent high-risk group that they
can identify using machine learning and AI. And so we can focus
those deep, deep resources for folks that need that level of
care for high-risk.
But the universal care that they have started in the
comprehensive programs that the special operators use now
ensure the readiness of these warriors. And if you look at
their operation tempo over the past 20 years, especially the
last 10, the operators we see have 15 to 20 combat deployments,
which is remarkable. And to do that, they've got to manage that
stress level. And when they don't do that, we see the outcomes
of the 20 a day and the 300-percent increase in operator
suicide from 2017 to 2018.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
And talking about the much higher risk of our younger
servicemembers, I want to just ask Dr. Stumpf Patton, why are
our younger servicemembers and veterans among the highest risk
for suicide, would you say?
Ms. Stumpf Patton. Oh, gosh. You know, let me just
respectfully say that, when we're speaking about suicide, when
it's your loved one, it's an ``n'' of one, or a population of
one. You know, every case is somewhat different.
Each age demographic is going to have, I think, its unique
challenges and risk factors. Sometimes with younger
servicemembers, they might not have the long-term experience,
the life experiences, some of the wisdom. Maybe they have not
developed some of the coping skills that maybe older
servicemembers have. But, you know, other senior servicemembers
could have other risk factors as well.
I mean, my husband's case, he was 24 years old at the time
of his death. So he was a sergeant and kind of on the lower end
of the spectrum, you know, beginning his career, about six
years into it. He did have previous stressors in his life. He
was a combat veteran from the Gulf War, went into a very highly
stressful position as a drill instructor in the Marine Corps.
We were a young military couple with a baby on the way. I
thought, you know, we were working on our dreams, you know, had
a house and a life together. Meanwhile, he was dealing with an
extremely stressful job.
I don't think he had the coping skills at that point. He
also didn't trust the system about asking for the care that he
needed, as far as being honest about some of the struggles that
he was dealing with. He was coping in very maladaptive ways and
turning toward things, you know, such as alcohol, probably to
self-medicate with some of those stressors of life and being,
you know, a young person within a marriage and developing a
family and combining with that trying to balance a military
career.
But, ultimately, that really speaks to suicide, again, as a
very complex phenomenon that has multiple factors that can
contribute to that, which ultimately can kind of vary and be
very unique in a case-by-case basis.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you. And I'm so sorry for your
loss.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you again for allowing us the
opportunity to really dive deeply into this multidimensional,
multifaceted problem of suicide and how we can prevent it.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentlelady. And I thank her for her
work on this issue as well.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California by
way of Chelmsford, Massachusetts. You're now recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Yes, I'm a proud native of the great
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you, and I do want to thank the ranking member, as well, and
the panelists.
I am fortunate to chair the subcommittee of Education and
Labor called ``HELP''--Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions.
And we've had really wonderful discussions about behavioral
health, stress, depression, and suicide that have been
bipartisan, ``wonderful'' in the sense that all of us,
Republicans and Democrats, are focused, I think, very
appropriately on the extraordinary discovery that we're living
in about neuroscience, how our brain works and how we struggle
with that.
And as a survivor of suicide, I have strong feelings about
this. Almost 32 years ago in April, my dad, who was a Marine
combat veteran in World War II, took his life. He's buried in
Arlington. I have been in therapy since then, and I came to
accepting that and embracing the humanity of it without being
self-indulgent, I think.
And when my story got told by accident to my constituents,
I found--first, I thought, in horror, that--I was filled with
shame and stigma. My dad, a proud Marine--if there was TiVo
when he was alive, we would have watched ``Flying
Leathernecks'' every day.
But dealing with that stigma and shame. And I'm so grateful
that, in my lifetime, we've seen this opening up, that this is
part of humanity. And the way we avoid it is not to try to
repress it as a culture but to accept it, not that it has to
happen, but we can address it.
So, Dr. Stumpf Patton, I wanted to ask you, in your
experience both personally and professionally, and
understanding, to some degree, the grieving process, although
my dad was 68--so, as painful as that has been, I can't imagine
losing one of my sons to this--how do we deal with the
generational and family support, now that we can identify these
things, where we change that and get people the support?
And I sense a real acceptance and joy in the fact that we
are identifying these things. But when I talk to people at UCSF
in the area that I represent, San Francisco, and their
neuroscientists--all this discovery, but the deployment of that
knowledge so we can avoid what happened to you, to my family,
as soon as possible.
So there's this sort of dichotomy, as I look at this, as
I'm really encouraged by the progress we've made, but a sense
of urgency that if we could deploy this knowledge accurately
and more quickly to family members, support groups like yours,
get you the resources, we could save so many lives. And then we
could break the generational inheritance that too often are
mistakes for thousands of years we have inherited and passed
on.
First, Doctor, and maybe the General could respond to that
observation.
Ms. Stumpf Patton. Thank you, sir, so much for
acknowledging that. And I also honor the loss, and I commend
you for speaking about that openly.
I think that, again, is a first step here in this
conversation. When we share that, it opens up the dialog,
which, therefore, reduces the stigma. And in cases with
suicide, the silence that often surrounds the stigma is what
prevents people from seeking the care. It's an obstacle, and,
ultimately, it can be fatal.
And so talking about that really is the first step. Coming
from an era, as you can understand, when it was not talked
about, and seeing this transpire and grow over the years, I was
and still am an eternal optimist about the fact that we are in
a new window of time, that this is on the forefront, that we
are talking about it, that the military community is addressing
it directly, that we are here today. For me, this is
monumental, that we are sitting here and we are addressing this
topic to save lives. It is possible.
And I think it's important that we send that message of
hope, that this doesn't have to be inevitable. You know, people
are not broken and beyond repair. The help exists. It works.
And we can save lives in doing so.
I think when it comes to postvention, we know the sooner,
the better. If we can get to people in the hours, days, and
weeks, the sooner we can get to them after a suicide--and this
speaks even specifically within a military unit. When we can
stabilize that and address those issues, we know that
drastically reduces the risks of those people who have been
impacted by that suicide where they, therefore, could be
vulnerable and at risk themselves.
It also sends the message that they are not alone, they do
not have to go through this by themselves, which that, in
itself, combats suicide because it reduces that isolation, and
it promotes that sense of belongingness and connection that can
save lives.
And I will turn it back to you.
General Hammond. I think one of the greatest challenges
this generation has is the prevalence of veteran suicide,
military suicide. I don't know a veteran of Iraq or Afghanistan
that doesn't personally know someone who's taken their life,
and usually it's two or three. And there's not another career
path that anybody could make that claim on such a broad scale.
Our work with TAPS is some of the most meaningful work we
do at Home Base. And we consider the primarily women, the
spouses, that have come in and the parents to be some of the
most injured people we deal with, far more than any Navy Seal
or Green Beret. Many of the women that have come to us from
TAPS have witnessed a suicide, and you can imagine what that's
like, at the kitchen table, with your children present. And
we've talked to them about the fact that children as young as
eight years old are now demonstrating ideations because of the
trauma they've been exposed to.
So, without treatment plans and programs for this, we're
going to lose this next generation of folks because we can't
intervene fast enough. And so we work very closely with TAPS to
try and innovate and develop new types of programs, but the
scale is not there yet to take care of everybody that needs it.
I think the normalization of this has been incredible over
the last 20 years. Most combat vets I know, especially that
were in line units, whether they're Marine regiments, infantry
battalions, they now have these buddy systems on Facebook where
they watch closely when somebody starts talking about something
that's a trigger. And guys will get in a car and drive to a
house, they'll drive three states over, to go intervene if they
don't pick up the phone.
And so there's no stigma; it's anger about, ``Don't you do
it.'' And we do see that effect that we spoke about a moment
ago, that it can be contagious. You know, we see it in a unit
where there's not a postvention, and then suddenly there's two
or three more. And, frankly, I've lost more soldiers to suicide
than I did in three combat commands. So it is prevalent, and it
can cascade.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. This is really terrific. I think I see real hope
here. And I see an opportunity that I hear from my colleagues
on both sides that we can be really supportive and
transformative so that other families won't have to go through
this.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. I thank him for his
participation as well.
Before we close, I would like to offer to the ranking
member an opportunity if he had any closing thoughts.
Mr. Grothman. Could I ask one more question of Mr. Jones?
Mr. Lynch. Please.
Mr. Grothman. Mr. Jones, are you still on here?
Staff Sergeant Jones. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. OK. You gave us an anecdote before concerning
an over-prescription of painkillers. And I think we've made a
lot of progress on that in the civilian sector.
Do you feel there are problems there in the military, where
they maybe haven't caught up on the amount of painkillers you
could prescribe? Like I said, I believe in the last four or
five years we've made so much progress. But could you comment
on where you think the military is on that?
Staff Sergeant Jones. My friend--first of all, real quick,
multiple members of this committee have asked about stigma, and
I just wanted to, if I could, touch on that real quickly.
Mr. Grothman. Sure.
Staff Sergeant Jones. As the one person on this panel that
I know--the General may have, but I was a troop, a low-ranking
enlisted--stigma, that's a cultural problem, not an
administrative problem per se. And what I mean by that is,
you're not going to solve that problem with a PowerPoint and a
policy. You're going to solve that problem by going where you
make leaders and engraining it into leaders to treat their
troops in a way that they can communicate with their troops
about problems.
It's a one-on-one conversation, not a classroom
conversation. That removes that stigma and gives servicemembers
the opportunity to be honest about what they're going through
with people around them.
It's cultural. And it's the hard way, not the easy way.
It's not the ``let's write a policy and make a PowerPoint that
everyone gets once a year.'' It's a ``when we make leaders, we
instruct those leaders on how to communicate with their
troops'' and do things, just like the General was saying, where
we change the perspective from ``I can play hurt'' to ``I can
play a heck of a lot better fully healthy.''
And back to your question about painkillers, the anecdote I
gave, the friend I had was being prescribed by the VA. I can't
really speak in this moment how the DOD prescribes painkillers
because I didn't even consider it an option when I was in the
military. I didn't even know that was even something I could
get.
But with the VA, the problem there that my friend had, and
it still persists, is the lack of communication between a
physician in the VA assigned to mental health and the primary
care manager for that servicemember.
I belong to a VA in Atlanta. I've had so many different
primary care physicians at the VA that I couldn't name them. I
finally found one that I trusted and believed in, and when I
went in for a monthly checkup last month, I was notified she's
no longer there. And so, all that trust I built with that
physician, she's not there anymore. If I went to a physician
out in town, they've been there for 30 years.
And so that type of trust, communication, and that primary
care physician understanding everything that veteran is dealing
with, that's the problem, because that primary care physician
would be in charge of issuing me pain medication, and that's
the person that would know I'm also seeking mental health or
dealing with mental health issues.
I went to the VA when I first moved to Georgia, and the
doctor literally sat there at the computer and asked me these
questions like, ``Have you thought about killing yourself?'' He
never even looked away from the screen or introduced himself to
me. I don't know anyone in this world that feels comfortable
revealing that information to someone who has yet to introduce
themselves or even look them in the eye.
These are cultural problems. They're not something you just
simply solve with a change in policy. It's a full education and
cultural shift.
And that's why I'm such an advocate for what is usually a
much more intimate interaction with nonprofit organizations and
private healthcare providers that want to work in concert with
government entities like the VA, not aside from. They're being
forced to work on their own. They want to work in concert with.
And I think that it's the responsibility of you all to help
make that happen.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back.
I just have a couple of quick questions, and one of them
actually fits nicely--it's a nice segue from the Sergeant's
comments. And that is, Ms. Hundrup, the Government
Accountability Office, have we looked at that issue where we
try to encourage collaboration between the VA, let's say, and
some of the community organizations, whether it's the Home Base
program or TAPS or even--in my district, we have a lot of
community health centers that are aware of who the people are.
And so it might serve us to, you know, make that connection.
Has the GAO looked at any of that?
Ms. Hundrup. I will just mention, we do have current work
underway that's looking at VA suicide prevention and mental
health agreements. That is something that's currently ongoing
that we do anticipate issuing in early 2022.
But I do think, given the complexity of the issue and the
fact that there's not a single solution or a single entity,
that looking at the partnerships and the possibility for VA and
DOD to partner further with states, locals, the important folks
at the table today, and the nonprofits, the community, it is
truly not one single entity that is going to solve this.
So I think that is an area that, you know, understanding
where there could be some synergies and additional attention
would certainly be warranted.
Mr. Lynch. That's great. Thank you. I look forward to
following up on that.
The other question I had was really a followup to Ms.
Speier's question. I notice she didn't ask you this, but, you
know, as the chair of this committee and as ranking member in
times when my Republican colleagues were in the chair, I've had
the luck, I guess, to visit Iraq and Afghanistan between 30 and
40 times and deal with some of the issues that some of our men
and women in uniform are dealing with.
And I don't know, it may be anecdotal, but I had always had
a custom of asking every servicemember that I got to sit with--
and there were thousands--I said, how many tours have you done
so far?
And I remember, one of my most recent visits was during the
withdrawal process in Camp Leatherneck in Afghanistan. And I
was with a small group of about--it was a rifle company, maybe
20 or 30 young Marines. And I asked them, how many here are on
your first tour? And maybe two or three hands went up. And
then, how many are on your second tour, how many are--I got all
the way up to seven tours of duties before I ran out of
Marines, right?
And it just seems to me that that OPTEMPO, that wear-and-
tear--do we have any data? Have we looked at that? And I've
asked others in the past if we've got data to show any
correlation between the frequency that we ask these men and
women to serve, pulling them away from their families--and you
can only imagine the conversation telling your spouse that
you're going on your third deployment or fourth deployment and
what that means at home and the sacrifice that your family
embraces.
So do we have any data to reflect a correlation or, you
know, what the connection might be there?
Ms. Hundrup. We certainly know that's a risk factor, one of
many risk factors. I am not aware of specific data on that, but
that's a great question. And that could be something to target
to our colleagues at DOD and VA, to see what information they
have. And if that is a gap, that is perhaps an important area
to be looking at.
Mr. Lynch. OK. Thank you.
Well, in closing, to our Active military and veterans, as
the ranking member said at the outset, let me say as well, you
are not alone. If you're struggling or need help, please reach
out. If you or someone you know is experiencing a mental health
crisis or contemplating suicide, the National Suicide
Prevention Lifeline is available 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. At any time you can call 1-800-274-8255 and dial 1 or
text 838255. Again, that number is 1-800-274-8255 and then dial
1, or you can text 838255.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for their remarks
today. And we are grateful for your continued service.
I want to commend my colleagues for participating in this
important conversation, both Republicans and Democrats.
And, with that, without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses to the chair, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response.
And I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
you are able.
Mr. Lynch. This hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:55 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
