- HURRICANE IDA AND BEYOND: READINESS, RECOVERY, AND RESILIENCE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HURRICANE IDA AND BEYOND:
READINESS, RECOVERY,
AND RESILIENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 5, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-45

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available at: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-900 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

Russ Anello, Staff Director
Krista Boyd, Team Lead
Elisa LaNier, Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on October 5, 2021..................................     1

Witnesses

The Honorable Deanne Criswell, Administrator, Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Oral Statement...............................................     5

Opening statements and the prepared statements for the witnesses
are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository
at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

The documents entered into the record during this hearing are
listed below.

* Articles about FEMA's work in south Louisiana; submitted by
Rep. Higgins.

* Testimony of Constituents Post-Hurricane Ida Experience;
submitted by Rep. Ocasio-Cortez.

The documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

HURRICANE IDA AND BEYOND:
READINESS, RECOVERY,
AND RESILIENCE

----------

Tuesday, October 5, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Carolyn B. Maloney [chairwoman of the committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Connolly, Raskin,
Khanna, Mfume, Ocasio-Cortez, Tlaib, Porter, Bush, Wasserman
Schultz, Welch, Johnson, Sarbanes, Kelly, DeSaulnier, Pressley,
Comer, Grothman, Cloud, Higgins, Norman, Keller, Mace,
Franklin, LaTurner, Fallon, Herrell, and Donalds.
Also present: Representative Carter (waived on).
Chairwoman Maloney. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
The committee is holding this hearing to address the
serious and growing crisis posed by natural disaster and
extreme weather events driven by climate change. Between August
29 and September 1, Hurricane Ida devastated the U.S. from the
Louisiana coast to New Jersey, and my home state of New York.
This deadly hurricane resulted in over 100 deaths, including 13
in New York City.
In New York and New Jersey, more than 1,000 miles from
where the storm first made landfall, catastrophic flooding
trapped people and flooded basement apartments and stranded
vehicles. In Louisiana, Hurricane Ida took down the electric
grid, knocking out all eight transmission lines that deliver
power to New Orleans and downing more than 30,000 utility
poles, nearly twice as many as Hurricane Katrina. More than 1
million people were left without power. Some are still without
power more than a month later.
The unprecedented destruction unleashed by Hurricane Ida is
part of a growing trend that the Federal Government cannot
ignore. From record-breaking fires in the west, to devastating
hurricanes in the south, to rising sea levels that threaten 40
percent of America's population near our coastlines, the
destructive impact of climate change is rapidly escalating, and
the cost of ignoring this problem is growing.
During the first half of 2021, the United States
experienced eight climate disasters, with losses totaling more
than $1 billion. Initial estimates put losses from Hurricane
Ida at between $53-and $64 billion. The Government
Accountability Office had climate change on its high risk since
2013, in part because of concerns about the increasing cost of
disaster response and recovery efforts.
Today we are honored to be joined by FEMA administrator,
Deanne Criswell. Thank you so much for being here,
Administrator Criswell. I know you and your team are working
around the clock to respond to the ongoing recovery efforts and
other pressing issues. Your testimony is crucial today because
there are thousands of people in New York, New Jersey,
Louisiana, and Maryland, and other impacted communities who are
desperate for information about how to get help, and when they
will get help. That includes understanding what steps FEMA is
taking to speed up the installation of temporary roofs on
damaged homes in Louisiana, and to work with vulnerable
populations to make sure their applications are complete and
approved quickly.
I am also interested in hearing about FEMA's efforts to
address inequities in disaster readiness and recovery.
Vulnerable populations like renters, people of color, people
experiencing homelessness, and undocumented immigrants, are
more likely to suffer the consequences of extreme weather
events, yet, they often face the biggest barriers to getting
help.
The Biden administration is taking important steps to make
it easier for disaster survivors to receive assistance,
including waiving the requirement that survivors have a deed or
other form of proof of home ownership to receive assistance.
FEMA has also taken steps to assist vulnerable populations
by developing fact sheets tailored to renters, undocumented
immigrants, and non-English speakers.
These are important steps, but more needs to be done. It is
crucial that we invest in climate resilience and post-disaster
assistance to advance racial and economic justice so that we do
not leave behind our most vulnerable communities.
Administrator Criswell, I also would like to hear from you
today about how we can improve efforts to build climate
resilient communities. One critical step the administration
could take is to improve Federal data on the full extent of
climate change on our communities. By leveraging data across
the public and private sectors, we can better understand the
future risks of flooding to communities and take action to keep
people out of harm's way.
Congress also must act. Today, I reintroduced the Federal
Agency Climate Prep Act. This bill will ensure that communities
have a say in how Federal agencies implement their climate
action plans, which is crucially making sure our taxpayer
dollars are put to work where they are most needed. Last week,
I was proud to support the $28 billion for victims of Hurricane
Ida that Congress approved, but I was disappointed that 175 of
my Republican colleagues voted against this bill, including
many members whose constituents are in dire need of the
emergency funding approved by Democrats.
I am hopeful that as extreme weather becomes more frequent
and more deadly, we can agree on a bipartisan basis that
impacted Americans deserve our help.
But recovery funds are not enough. Congress also needs to
make long-term investments to stop global warming before it is
too late. That is why I call on my colleagues to support
President Biden's Build Back Better Act. This transformational
bill will make essential investments to solve the climate
crisis, while also upgrading our infrastructure so that we can
better prepare for future disasters.
In the long run, these investments will save money by
reducing the extraordinary costs from natural disasters and
extreme weather caused by climate change.
I now recognize my distinguished ranking member, Mr. Comer,
for an opening statement.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, and I want to
thank the witness, FEMA Administrator Criswell, for her
willingness to appear before the committee.
I am pleasantly surprised that the Democrats have finally
called a witness from the Biden administration to testify
before this committee. Maybe the Lugar Center will upgrade the
F grade the committee was given earlier this year.
Now, while I appreciate FEMA Administrator Criswell's
testimony and look forward to hearing more about the Agency's
efforts to assist Americans impacted by hurricanes and other
natural disasters, it is critical to mention who from the Biden
administration that the Democrats on this committee have
refused to call to testify. Chairwoman Maloney, when will
Democrats call Department of Homeland Secretary Mayorkas to
discuss the crisis along our southern border, or Secretary of
Defense Austin to explain the debacle that has been the
Afghanistan withdrawals? Or someone to address the growing
inflation created by the Biden administration that has gotten
so bad that even stores like the Dollar Tree are raising prices
on American consumers?
In fact, Chairwoman Maloney, I've sent three letters this
year urging committee Democrats to call a hearing to examine
the Biden border crisis. Since January 2021, thousands of
illegal immigrants, including unaccompanied minors, have
crossed the southern border. There's an ongoing security,
humanitarian, and public health crisis with no end in sight,
and no clear policy to address this issue from the Biden
administration.
As I've outlined in my letters to Chairwoman Maloney, one
of the most troubling issues at the border is the number of
unaccompanied children entering the border and currently in
U.S. custody. Today, thousands of unaccompanied children are in
U.S. custody. The Biden border crisis became so dire in March
of this year that the administration was forced to activate
FEMA to support the response for unaccompanied children. Over a
period of 90 days, FEMA supported DHS and HHS to get
unaccompanied children out of DHS custody and into HHS
placements. That FEMA, the Agency charged with the mission of
assisting American citizens in recovery from disasters had to
be activated, further illustrates the extent of the crisis
created by the Biden administration's disastrous policies.
Administrator Criswell, I hope that you can address my
concern today with regard to the activation of FEMA to use
critical resources reserved for American citizens faced with
natural disaster to respond to crisis created by this
administration at the border with regard to unaccompanied
children.
Chairwoman Maloney, I would like for the FEMA administrator
and members of this committee to hear directly from Mr. Higgins
with regard to issues he and his constituents have faced with
FEMA's response to natural disaster recovery in Louisiana. I
understand there's still people waiting on critical assistance
from FEMA, and we look forward to getting answers about that.
I will now yield the balance of my time to the gentleman
from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, to give an opening statement.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the gentleman and ranking member, and
I thank Chairwoman Maloney for holding today's hearing. And
thank you, Mr. Comer, for giving me a few moments to speak.
While this hearing is focused on Hurricane Ida, I would be
remiss to not speak on the ongoing hurricane recovery in
southwest Louisiana. Just over a year ago southwest Louisiana
was ravaged by brutal Hurricanes Laura and Delta back to back,
only to be followed by severe weather from winter storms and
major flood events. Southwest Louisiana is appreciative of the
$1.6 billion that FEMA and other agencies have delivered to
help with immediate response costs, but this is insufficient
for what is needed in the long-term recovery. Hurricanes Laura
and Delta alone have been estimated to cost $16 billion in
damage to the region, meaning that we have delivered thus far
about 1/10 of what's estimated the costs of Laura and Delta.
Even with the passage of last week's continuing resolution,
these funds are over a year late, and fall short of the
necessary Federal response. The entire Louisiana delegation,
including our Governor, has written 14 letters to the
administration and congressional leaders to get the funding out
the door, yet the political realities have injured the lives of
southwest Louisiana citizens for over 400 days.
In closing, I would hope, Madam Chair, that although we can
recognize intellectually, we may struggle as a body to address
what's been referred to as extreme weather, perhaps the
chairwoman would agree to work with myself, my office, and
Republican members of the committee to deal with the extreme
bureaucracy we face. We can certainly address that whereby
response to natural disasters across the country that affect
Americans, and at one time or another, in a very negative way,
that we could work together to streamline the bureaucracy and
red tape that we face as citizenry attempting to recover.
And, Madam Chair, I yield. And Ranking Member, Mr. Comer,
thank you for yielding me time.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
I want to briefly respond and address the claim from my
good friend that the committee is not conducting oversight. We
have today the administrator, Deanne Criswell, who did an
incredible job in a job similar to this one in the city of New
York to answer all of your questions. She has been to New
Jersey and other sites to work with people and respond with
FEMA.
And the truth is that this committee is actively engaged in
waste, fraud, and abuse. The committee has a joint
investigation with the Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus
Crisis into the Emergent BioSolutions, a firm that received
huge vaccine contracts but had to destroy millions of doses due
to deficiencies in its manufacturing; our bipartisan
investigation into the F-35 joint strike force fighter helped
push Lockheed Martin to return $70 million to the Department of
Defense's F-35 program to compensate for defective spare parts.
Again, in waste, fraud, and abuse, this committee helped create
the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee, and the
Committee of Inspector General overseeing the trillions of
dollars in response to the pandemic, IG saved roughly $17 for
every $1 spent, and we have not shied away from constructive
oversight of the Biden administration. In the last 2 weeks, we
conducted oversight of the treatment of Haitian asylum seekers,
held a classifying briefing, which was the request of the
minority, on Afghanistan, and sent a bipartisan letter on the
FBI's handling of ransomware attacks. Our oversight record
stands in strong contrast to Republicans who turned a blind eye
to four years of outrageous abuses by the former President.
With that, I would like to get back to the critical
importance of today's hearing. First, I would like to introduce
our witnesses. Today we are privileged to hear from the
Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Deanne Criswell. The witness will be unmuted so we can swear
her in.
Please raise your right hand.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Ms. Criswell. I do.
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witness
answered in the affirmative. Thank you. And without objection,
your written testimony will be made part of the record.
With that, Administrator Criswell, you are now recognized
for your opening testimony. Thank you for being here. Thank you
for your public service in New York prior to coming to the
Federal Government. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF HON. DEANNE CRISWELL, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

Ms. Criswell. Good morning.
And thank you, Chair Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, and
members of the committee. I thank you for the opportunity to
testify about our response and recovery efforts following
Hurricane Ida, as well as the longer-term investments we must
make to increase our Nation's resilience in the face of climate
change.
Climate change affects every single American. It is the
biggest crisis facing our Nation, and it is making natural
disasters more frequent, more intense, and more destructive.
Mitigating the effects of climate change is one of my top
priorities for FEMA. And Hurricane Ida has demonstrated the
challenges presented by our changing climate, the benefits of
mitigation investments, and the importance of equity in our
response and recovery.
Fueled in part by warmer than normal waters in the Gulf of
Mexico, Hurricane Ida's wind speeds intensified from 85 to 150
miles per hour in less than 24 hours. This Category 4 storm
became the fifth strongest hurricane to ever make landfall in
the continental United States.
Storms normally break apart quickly when they make
landfall, but Ida remained a Category 4 storm for four hours,
and Ida's impacts have affected states and communities from the
Gulf of Mexico to the Northeast. Ida left a million people in
Louisiana and Mississippi without power at a time of sweltering
heat.
After transitioning and accelerating to a post-tropical
cyclone, Ida caused widespread flooding in the northeastern
United States, breaking multiple rainfall records, and causing
catastrophic floods in New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
Hurricane Ida caused over 100 direct fatalities, and my heart
goes out to all of the families who lost loved ones.
For all its severe impacts, Hurricane Ida was also notable
in other ways.
First, the storm came ashore 16 years to the day after
Hurricane Katrina made landfall and caused widespread flooding
in New Orleans; but this time, the levees in New Orleans held,
reflecting significant investments made in the aftermath of
Katrina to strengthen the levee system.
Second, FEMA was well prepared for Ida. Thanks to
congressional action in the 16 years since Katrina, we have
authorities that give us the flexibility and the ability to
lean in much quicker than we have in the past to bring the full
force of the Federal family into position so we can respond
quickly.
We pre-positioned millions of liters of water, millions of
meals, specialized response teams, and numerous resources from
our Federal community to deploy based on the immediate needs
after the storm had passed. At FEMA, we say that disaster
response is locally executed, state-managed, and federally
supported, and I am proud of how well we supported our state
and local partners in responding to this storm. This was
particularly true given the special challenges involved in
responding to a disaster amid the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Third, as this storm hit the United States, FEMA was ready
to implement important policy changes to help underserved
communities, which are often disproportionately impacted by
disasters, to obtain individual assistance to the full extent
that they are eligible for it. Previously homeowners may have
run into difficulties proving that they own their homes if
their property was handed down informally through the years.
To address this, we have expanded the forms of
documentation that can prove ownership, including documents
like receipts for major repairs or improvements, court
documents, public officials' letters, mobile home park letters,
and applicant self-certification for mobile homes and travel
trailers as a last resort.
In addition, FEMA has also changed the way it calculates
the threshold for property losses to qualify for direct
housing, such as a trailer or a mobile home. This ensures
equitable damage evaluation regardless of the size of the
damaged home.
The recovery phase for Hurricane Ida continues as we speak,
and we will be dealing with the consequences of this hurricane
for quite some time. But even as we do that work, we must make
the kinds of generational-level investments necessary to reduce
the impacts of climate-fueled disasters that we will face in
the months and years ahead.
Mitigation investments are incredibly worthwhile. An
independent study by the National Institute of Building
Sciences in 2019, found that every dollar in Federal Hazard
Mitigation Grants invested in mitigation saves the American
taxpayer an estimated $6 in future spending.
At FEMA, a cornerstone of our mitigation efforts is the
Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities program, or
BRIC. I would like to thank Congress for providing the
legislative tools to create BRIC through the Disaster Recovery
Reform Act of 2018. By establishing a reliable stream of
funding for larger mitigation projects through a nationwide
grant program, the BRIC program provides a critical opportunity
for state, territorial, Tribal, and local governments to invest
in a more resilient Nation, reduce disaster suffering, and
lessen future disaster costs.
Earlier this year, President Biden visited FEMA to announce
that he was increasing the funding available for the BRIC
program to $1 billion for Fiscal Year 2021 application period.
These are the kinds of investments that will protect lives and
property in the face of the future storms we are going to face.
Another important element of FEMA's mitigation efforts is
the Hazard Mitigation Grant program. In August, President Biden
approved more than $3.46 billion for the HMGP program for the
COVID-19 disaster decorations. As a result, every state, tribe,
and territory that received a major disaster declaration in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, will be eligible to receive
substantial levels of funding to invest in mitigation projects
that reduce risks from natural disasters.
For eligible mitigation projects, HMGP funding can cover 75
percent of the total project costs while states or communities
cover the remaining share. We will be urging relevant agencies
in your states to ensure that these funds are delivered to
disadvantaged communities and would welcome your support in
this effort.
One more critical piece is the FEMA Flood Mitigation
Assistance program, or FMA, which helps provide financial and
technical assistance to states and communities to reduce the
risk of flood damage to homes and businesses through buyouts,
elevation, and other activities. Flooding is the most common
and costly natural disaster in the United States, and the
direct average annual flood losses have quadrupled from
approximately $4 billion per year in the 1980's, to roughly $17
billion per year between 2010 and 2018. The bipartisan
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, approved by the Senate
in August, would provide $3.5 billion over five years for the
FMA program. The Biden administration has urged the House to
approve the bipartisan infrastructure bill without delay, and I
would like to add my voice today in calling for its swift
passage.
Mitigation is particularly important for underserved
communities that are most vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change. In administering our mitigation programs, we will keep
equity considerations top of mind, and will include them in the
competitive scoring process for programs such as FMA. Equity is
one of my top priorities at FEMA, and the intersection of
climate change and equity is a particular concern for our
agency, as the impacts are worse for our vulnerable
communities.
In closing, I would like to thank all of the first
responders across our Nation, our amazing FEMA work force, and
our interagency partners, for their tireless work in responding
to Hurricane Ida. They continue to answer the call to respond
to disasters fueled by climate change, which truly is the
crisis of our generation. The intensification of natural
disasters will be our new normal, but this is a call to action,
and I looked forward to continuing to work with Congress to
make our Nation more resilient.
I would be pleased to answer any questions you have.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Thank you very, very much
for your service and for your testimony today.
And I recognize myself for five minutes.
Administrator Criswell, I know that you visited New York
City with President Biden and myself after Hurricane Ida, and
saw firsthand the devastating loss and suffering it brought to
New Yorkers. As the former Commissioner of the New York City
Emergency Management Office--this is the office that rebuilt
New York after 9/11, an incredibly important position--you know
how unusually intense Ida's rainfall was for New York City. It
overwhelmed drainage systems and caused flash floods. Eleven
New Yorkers drowned in their basement apartments. Divers had to
retrieve bodies, including a two-year-old toddler. You can see
on the screen a picture of what remained after one basement
apartment was flooded. And when we looked up the addresses of
the five homes where New Yorkers died on FEMA's flood map, I
was surprised to find that all of them are located in areas
marked as having minimal flood hazard.
So, Administrator, I understand that FEMA flood maps are
intended to be limited tools and provide information on some
flooding risks but not all, but is it true that local emergency
responders sometimes use FEMA maps to determine which residents
should be evacuated, and what areas to prioritize after a
flood? Yes or no?
Ms. Criswell. Chair Maloney, thank you so much for the
question, and my heart goes out to those families who lost
loved ones due to this event.
As you stated, our flood maps are designed to be tools that
account for coastal inundation as well as river flooding, and
they do not take into account the storm sewer systems. As you
saw, we had a record rainfall in New York which was broken by
the previous record, which was just a couple of weeks before
that, and it's a sign that our infrastructure has an
opportunity to be upgraded and mitigated against, so we can
prevent future flash flooding urban events like this. And these
are the type of projects that are eligible under our hazard
mitigation programs.
We are going to continue to see these severe rain events
across the country, and so we need to take action now to help
mitigate the effects of these types of events.
Chairwoman Maloney. That is great, and I am sure that the
localities will be applying for it. And we saw that the storm
water and drainage systems were overloaded in New York and
probably across the country too. Will you commit to updating
flood maps in New York City to better reflect local limitations
such as storm water and drainage systems?
Ms. Criswell. Chair Maloney, the flood maps are community
maps, and we will work with all communities to help updating
their maps with the information that they have available so we
can make them more accurate.
Chairwoman Maloney. Great, great. In addition to updating
maps, does FEMA provide funds to communities to upgrade storm
water and drainage systems so that they are more resilient to
the flooding, such as what we saw with Ida and extreme weather?
Ms. Criswell. Yes. Some of those upgrades are certainly
things that could be eligible under our hazard mitigation
programs. I would encourage communities to check with their
hazard mitigation specialist to see if they are eligible under
that program.
Chairwoman Maloney. And we saw in Hurricane Ida the crucial
importance of investing in infrastructure before a hurricane
hits. You noted New Orleans has a special system to reduce
storm risk, which includes raised levees and fortified flood
walls. This helped protect New Orleans. New York City has also
invested in protecting waterfront areas vulnerable to storm
surges and sea level rise after Hurricane Sandy, but Ida
brought a different challenge, with more than three inches of
rain per hour, far more than New York's 100-year-old drainage
system can handle.
How can FEMA help New York and other cities assess the new
climate risks we are facing now? Will FEMA give advice to
cities across our country on how to become more resilient to
extreme weather?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, I think you raise a really great point,
Chairwoman. Again, the levee systems are designed for certain
types of events, but as we continue to see more and more of
these severe rain events that are going to happen across our
country, we need to start thinking about the future risks that
our communities are facing. And so we do have technical
assistance that we would be happy to work with local
communities to help better understand what their risks are
today, and the future risks that they are going to face.
Chairwoman Maloney. And my time is running out, but,
Administrator, do you agree that it's important that Federal
agencies, including FEMA, plan ahead for the next disaster, and
that local communities have a voice in that plan, which is like
the prep bill that I am introducing today?
Ms. Criswell. I think it's critical that we continue to
plan for what the future disasters might be, instead of always
focusing our efforts on our historical events. As we've seen
this year, it's going to continue to change, and we're going to
continue to be faced with more severe events.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much.
And I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, which was
very hard hit. Mr. Higgins is now recognized for five minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Chairwoman.
Before I begin my statement and questions, I would like to
introduce several documents for the record. In the interest of
time, six of them are local articles, media articles detailing
FEMA's actions in my district in south Louisiana. One is an
official FEMA document discussing NFIP risk rating 2.0 changes
for Louisiana.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection, all are accepted.
Without objection, all are accepted.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, thank you. Thank you, good lady.
Administrator Criswell, thank you for being here today and
for visiting Louisiana in late August. Let me clarify that
virtually every public entity, including Calcasieu Parish
School Board, Cameron Parish, the Jeff Davis Parish, the Port
of Lake Charles, and the city of Jennings, have numerous public
assistance applications still outstanding from the 2020
hurricane season. This delay in funding has real world
consequences that forces small and local government entities to
attempt to fund recovery efforts from very slim margins of
revenue, and the leveraged state bond funding and other revenue
streams. The fact that over a year after the initial incidences
that these cities and towns are still waiting on public
assistance reimbursements that they qualify for, on some cases,
even to have FEMA inspectors come and appraise the damage a
year later is shameful.
Administrator Criswell, as a Biden administration official
to participate in oversight hearings and the first as Congress,
I appreciate you being here. I look forward to our discussions
with you.
FEMA's response to the 2020 and 2021 disasters is an issue
within itself, but our overall Federal response is always
seemingly late. While politicians and bureaucrats discuss the
need for better mechanisms to respond to these disasters, the
answer is definitely not to create more bureaucracy. The
bureaucracy we have is slow and thick. As we discuss potential
changes to Federal programs to better respond to future natural
disasters, meeting the citizens needs should be our top
concern.
An increase to focus on timely responses between the
Federal Government and state and local entities, that should be
primary, and better coordination and proactive efforts are
needed.
Administrator Criswell, I wrote to you on August 10
regarding Calcasieu Parish School Board's public assistance
applications. This is an example of the bureaucracy that we are
frustrated with from FEMA. The school board has two Category A,
21 Category B, and 82 Category E projects currently
outstanding. This is from a storm a year ago, ma'am. While some
of these applications have been approved, there's very few.
Most of the requests are still outstanding. Jeff Davis Parish
has $2 million worth of requests. These parishes cannot afford
to carry that for a year for programs that they qualify for.
Additionally, regarding FEMA's 50 percent rule, the Port of
Lake Charles has submitted multiple projects in order to
receive funding and has yet to receive one validation or
determination from FEMA.
Administrator, can you explain why this school district,
for instance, local governments and others like it in my
districts, have had to wait, in some cases, over 300 days, to
receive reimbursement that they clearly qualify for? Is it a
funding issue? Is it because of inspectors, or is it due to
bureaucracy, ma'am?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman Higgins, I certainly appreciate
your advocacy for your constituents there in Lake Charles. We
discussed this previously on the Committee on Homeland
Security, and following that, I did make a trip down to Lake
Charles. I visited with Mayor Nick Carter to better understand
some of the struggles that he has been experiencing, and I
brought my senior leadership team with me so they could
followup directly.
Some of the things we learned brand new during that visit,
and my team has been following up on it. I don't have the
specifics on the school district that you mentioned, but it's
taking too long is what it sounds like. So I commit to you that
my team will continue to work with the representatives there to
make sure that we are moving this forward as fast as we can. I
thought that we had made some progress after that visit, but I
will followup and make sure that it's continuing to move
forward.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the administrator for her candid
answer. We will communicate directly with you and your office,
ma'am, with further details and specifics.
Madam Chair, I thank you for holding this hearing today.
And my time has expired, so I yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from the District of Columbia, Ms. Norton,
is now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Madam Chair, for this hearing.
As you indicated in your remarks, this hurricane was felt
in the Northeast as well. Fortunately, the District of
Columbia, my district, was spared.
But, Administrator Criswell, we see a rising number of
natural disasters. I think that's because of climate change
and, therefore, increased reliance on the Federal Government.
Your own National Advisory Council has indicated that the
public assistance program most benefits communities that can
afford to pay the required match and can navigate the
complexities of the contracting agencies.
So my question is, what actions is FEMA taking to assist
existing disaster recovery and mitigation programs to ensure
outcomes are more equitable for all communities, including
those that cannot afford to pay the required matching funds?
Ms. Criswell. Congresswoman Norton, thank you for that
question.
You know, all of our programs always have opportunity for
some improvement, and since I arrived here, I have worked with
my team and directed them to take a people-first approach, and
remember that we can't have programs that come in with a one-
size-fits-all way of applying our programs. We have to be able
to understand the needs and the unique needs of individual
communities and individuals themselves and bring our programs
to them instead of forcing them to always maneuver their way
through the bureaucracy.
We made several programs going into this--or several
changes going into this hurricane season in order to improve
the equitable delivery of our individual assistance program.
This is just the beginning. We are going to continue to look at
ways that we can reach our communities more equitably,
understanding that I have seen firsthand how our underserved
communities, who already have difficulty, are more
disproportionately impacted after a storm has passed. And, so,
you have my commitment to continuing to work at our programs to
find ways that we don't always go with this one-size-fits-all
approach, and we understand the unique needs of individual
communities and individuals.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Administrator Criswell.
Indeed, GAO has noted that some communities simply don't
have the technical staff, engineers, grant managers, the
necessary capacity, in other words, to submit a complex grant
application. And as GAO has recommended that FEMA create a
centralized inventory of hazard mitigation resources on the
FEMA website, has FEMA developed an inventory of resources yet?
Ms. Criswell. What we have developed is our mitigation
action portfolio which provides examples of mitigation projects
that have been done across the country that can help
communities better understand the type of projects that could
be eligible. I am not sure if that's exactly answering the
question on resources, and if it's not, I will certainly look
into it and see exactly what you're talking about. But I would
also like to say that we also provide technical assistance. We
understand that not all communities have the ability to hire
somebody to come in and write a competitive grant application,
which is why we are doing directed technical assistance through
our new Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities
program. We offered this to 10 communities touring the first
round, and we have doubled that to 20 communities, and I have
been working with our state partners to help identify those
communities who need this type of assistance the most so we can
reach those populations that would otherwise not try to apply
for this type of assistance.
Ms. Norton. Administrator Criswell, thank you for that.
The GAO has published a report in which it notes the
complexity of the application process, the timeliness to grant
awards and the technical capacity required to successfully
apply is a problem. What specific opportunities has FEMA
identified to simplify, or shorten the application process?
Ms. Criswell. Again, there's a couple of ways that we can
help communities with this. One is through technical
assistance. It's one of the key ways that we can help
communities better understand how to navigate some of the
complexities. But with other programs, like our Assistance to
Firefighter Grants program, we have shorter applications for
smaller amounts that can help get those through quickly.
But there's always opportunities for us to improve, and I
have asked my grants section here to take a look, an
overarching look at all of our grant programs to get a better
understanding of where we are missing some communities, and
then understand what the barriers are for them trying to reach
out and ask for assistance so we can address that root cause of
the problem.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Norton. I welcome the opportunity for technical
assistance. And, of course, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is
recognized for five minutes. Mr. Norman.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney. And,
Administrator Criswell, thank you for coming.
I would like to address your answer to Congressman Higgins,
but before I do that, you know, Ms. Criswell, you talk about
crisis. We have got a crisis on the border. In seven months,
we've had over 170,000 illegals cross the border. It's a
medical crisis, and it's a military crisis. We've got an
inflation crisis.
Ask any American who is paying 40 and 50 percent more for
gas from foreign countries that don't like us, if that's not a
crisis, along with the food and everything else that inflation
is hitting. We have got a military crisis in Afghanistan. You
know, we have got 13 dead Marines. We have got Americans left
behind. We have got crises, and this administration has simply
not addressed them.
Chairwoman Maloney, as has been mentioned, we've sent three
letters on having testify before us different people. Why is
Mayorkas not appearing before us to answer questions? Why is
General Milley, Austin Blinken not before us answering
questions? Why is Janet Yellen not here answering questions?
This administration has simply put this country in a crisis
mode from the day it took office.
With that being said, Ms. Criswell, in response to
Congressman Higgins, in all due respect, ma'am, it's just
words. If you were in the private sector, you could not give
the kind of answer that you gave. This is--we are two months,
three months shy of 2022. He asked you questions about 2020
that has not been addressed. And you said you would address
specifics, but why the delay?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman Norman, recovery takes a long
time and it's complicated. And when you look at an event like
Hurricane Laura, followed by Hurricane Delta, there are a lot
of complicating factors that make it even longer to recover. We
are working as fast as we can in coordination with our state
and local partners to assist with their recovery efforts, and
there's a number of things we can do to help speed that up. We
can----
Mr. Norman. Ma'am, in all due respect, when you received a
request dating almost two years ago, was Louisiana responded
to, the specific questions? Did your agency respond to each one
of them?
Ms. Criswell. I don't have the specifics of a letter
received two years ago prior to my administration, but I know
that we have addressed the requests that I have gotten since my
time here in office.
Mr. Norman. And you have been here how long?
Ms. Criswell. I started at the end of April.
Mr. Norman. And you would have looked over past requests to
see where it was and why the money hadn't been released. I am
saying if this would have been in the private sector, you would
have had a problem.
My other question to you, President Biden rescinded the
proclamation declaring a national emergency at our southern
border. If the crisis at our southern border is not an
emergency as Biden proclaimed, then why was your agency, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, deployed to the southern
border?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, FEMA is really good at
coordinating across Federal agencies. It's one of the skill
sets that we bring to the table, and it's one of the things
that we do best. And in this case, we were asked to come in and
help coordinate and support our partners at HHS and CBP. We had
a very limited role. We no longer have a presence in supporting
that mission, and it's just done now through our normal
interagency avenues.
Mr. Norman. How much money has been expended for the
limited role that you say that FEMA had?
Ms. Criswell. I don't have the exact dollar amount, but all
of the funding that FEMA would have incurred has been
reimbursed by those agencies.
Mr. Norman. All right. Could you get that--I mean, could
you get the numbers for us? And could you report on why you
were there, the dollars that were spent? Are you still there?
Ms. Criswell. We have nobody that is supporting that
mission directly. It's all being supported through our normal
interagency venues.
Mr. Norman. OK. And is there any other outstanding issues
with other states that your agency either needs to respond to
or hasn't responded to?
Ms. Criswell. Sir, I would have to know specifically what
types of events you would be talking about, but to my
knowledge, we are still managing recovery from disasters across
this country, so we will continue to support those disaster
response and recovery efforts.
Mr. Norman. OK. And you led off with the fact that, you
know, climate change is, you know, an overriding issue, and I
guess money is no object for combating climate change. Are you
aware of a study of MIT that said if every Nation complied with
the Paris Accord, that it would only reduce carbon emissions by
.2 percent?
Ms. Criswell. Sir, I am not aware of that study.
Mr. Norman. OK. That's another thing. Could you take a look
at it and give us your thoughts on it and give us some idea if
that's true or not? That's a pretty big statement for them to
make, and they're not some fly by-night agency.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, ma'am.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, is now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you so
much for having this hearing. And, Administrator Criswell,
welcome.
And I must say my friend just--Mr. Norman just talked about
crises when the Biden administration began, and he is
absolutely right. The Biden administration inherited endless
crises from the Trump administration, I mean, everything from
an insurrection at the Capitol to a pandemic that was made so
much worse by the response or lack of response by the Trump
administration and by the President himself, Mr. Trump. And,
oh, by the way, through one other crisis, FEMA. We just voted
for a continuing resolution and $28 billion in natural disaster
relief, and 175 of my Republican colleagues voted against it.
So, Administrator Criswell, if your budget had been zeroed
out, as apparently some of my colleagues would have it, would
that have created a crisis for you? And could it create a
crisis for America in terms of preparedness for disasters and
response to disasters?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I do appreciate the passing of
the continuing resolution so we can continue to support the
American people. You know, any disruption in funding to our
mission would certainly have an impact on our ability to
protect the lives of individuals that are faced by disasters.
Mr. Connolly. So let's be a little more specific. Thank you
for that diplomatic answer. But you're the administrator of an
agency that actually does nuts-and-bolts relief and recovery,
and you're the lead Federal agency for responding to natural
disasters. I don't know, has the frequency of hurricanes
reaching land on the Continental United States increased over
the last decade?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, what we are seeing is the number
of hurricanes, the number of wildfires, the number of severe
weather events continues to increase. They become more severe,
more intense. They are intensifying more rapidly, and that's
only going to continue to get worse.
Mr. Connolly. So I was looking at some interesting data. In
2017, three hurricanes of, you know, magnitude 3 or 4, hit
Continental United States, which I believe was the first time
that's happened. And the cumulative damage of those three
events that affected Puerto Rico, Texas, and Florida, was $265
billion, a record. That's the largest disaster costed out in
American history.
And the question is, given climate change, are we--when you
do your planning, what do your experts tell you, Administrator
Criswell? Should we expect more, or was this just a fluke and
we're out of the woods?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I think that we are seeing from
the impacts of climate change is that we can expect to see more
events like you just mentioned, which is why it's so important
right now that we start to think about what these future risks
are going to be and we invest in mitigation projects so we can
reduce the impact, the financial cost of these disasters.
Mr. Connolly. And are you also working with states,
Administrator Criswell, to do more resiliency planning? You
know, flooding is more frequent. Tidal surges are bigger and
more dangerous and damaging. We've seen it even in urban areas
like New York where the subway system now floods anytime
there's any kind of major storm because the tidal surges and
the rise of ocean level are now affecting places like Manhattan
and shutting down subways.
Are those events you're planning with local governments and
state governments in terms of resilience? And, if so, can you
tell us a little bit about it quickly?
Ms. Criswell. States and local jurisdictions are required
to have hazard mitigation plans which address some of the
concerns that you talked about, and FEMA does provide
assistance, again through a technical assistance program, and
we also fund the development of those plans through our hazard
mitigation grant programs. What we need to do is work with them
closely to think about, again, what are these future risks that
you're going to face so the next iteration of their hazard
mitigation planning is thinking toward the future and what are
the crises that our children and grandchildren are going to
face so we can better protect against them.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
My time is up. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller, is now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Keller.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Natural disasters and flooding poses enormous risks to our
homes, businesses, crops, and infrastructure. They also
jeopardize the safety and well-being of Americans nationwide. I
think we can all agree that flood protection and prevention are
essential tools to mitigate damages caused by severe weather,
such as hurricanes, tropical storms, and heavy rainfall that
have the potential to decimate communities like the ones all
across Pennsylvania, all across our Nation, but particularly in
the area that I am privileged to represent, Pennsylvania 12.
Events like Hurricane Ida and other storms that took place this
year underscore the need for our communities to remain
resilient when challenged with these storms.
That all starts with investing in disaster protection. In
Pennsylvania, the Williamsport Levee is the second largest
flood control project of its kind. The system protects central
Pennsylvania from catastrophic flooding of the Susquehanna
River. The levee system originally completed in 1955 is in
desperate need of repair. The 2020 Water Resources Development
Act named the levee as a priority, and Lycoming County's 2018
County Comprehensive Plan update calls the state of the levee
system, quote, ``the single greatest threat to maintaining and
pursuing economic resilience.''
Commissioner Criswell--or excuse me, Administrator
Criswell, thank you for being here today. I understand you have
experience with emergency management in the Northeast, having
served the state of New York previously. And in many cases in
New York, there are plenty of river towns like that here in
Pennsylvania. Do you believe--what do you believe are some of
the most pressing disaster-related needs for communities like
the one I represent in Williamsport?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I think the example you gave is
a really great example of really understanding what our current
risk is, and looking at the age of our infrastructure. We have
to understand whether or not the infrastructure that was built
decades ago is still adequate to support the extreme weather
events that we are starting to see and will continue to see
moving forward.
I think it's critically important for all of us, and we
have a shared responsibility, to look at what we can do to
upgrade current infrastructure, or also improve the mitigation
projects that we have so they can reduce the risk, reduce the
impacts from this increase in the number of weather events that
we are seeing.
Mr. Keller. Yes, I guess I agree with that.
Are there ways we can streamline items in the project
delivery process for investments in priority flood protection
projects, like the one in Williamsport?
Ms. Criswell. I don't know the specifics about that
project, but I think that there's always ways that we can work
together to try to streamline the delivery of projects. If
there's something specific on that one, I'd be happy to have my
team get back with you and see what we can do.
Mr. Keller. I appreciate that because, you know, looking
back to 1955, you know, we want to be able to lower the risk
and severe damage from a process standpoint, and that's really
what we want to look to do. We certainly need that flood
protection here in central Pennsylvania, around our Nation,
because it does protect homes, families, businesses, and it's
so important from that standpoint.
So if there are things that we can look at and we can do,
you know, to lower the risk of severe damage by having a
streamlined process, you know, I would like to be able to work
with you and your team on that. Again, it will benefit the
areas that I represent, but, also, many of the people in
Congress. We certainly need that help. So anything we can do to
help that along we are willing to work on that.
Ms. Criswell. Absolutely, Congressman. I'll have my team
get back and see if there's anything specific we can do.
Mr. Keller. Thank you. Because, again, you mentioned that,
you know, these mitigation projects, you know, were completed
before I was born actually, 1955, but I've been in the area a
long time, and it's so important that we protect. And that's
really our job as people who work for the individuals that pay
our salaries, whether we're in Congress, whether we're at FEMA.
You know, our responsibility is to the people of the United
States of America, and we need to make sure that their money is
being invested to protect their interests.
So I appreciate the time to be here today. I appreciate you
being with us, Administrator Criswell, and look forward to
working with you and your team on these important issues.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Mfume, is now recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Mfume.
You're muted. Mr. Mfume.
Is he there? Let's go to Ro Khanna.
OK. The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, is now
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much, Chairwoman.
And thank you so much to Administrator Criswell for not
only joining us today, but even recently coming to visit so
many of our communities in New York, as well as across the
country, who are so deeply devastated by Hurricane Ida. And
also for, in addition to that, your flexibility in
implementation of our COVID funeral fund program, which has
helped families all across the country help recover from the
devastation of the pandemic, in addition to some of the other
natural disasters we've been seeing across the country.
Chairwoman, I would like to seek unanimous consent to
submit a record--to submit to the record the full testimony of
one of my constituents, Delawar Ahmed, regarding their
experience post-Hurricane Ida.
Chairwoman Maloney. Without objection.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you.
Deluwar, alongside many others, wrote to my office, quote:
I looked out the window and saw cars uncontrollably adrift
during the Ida floods. A woman wading waist-deep in the street,
people yelling for help. These are some of the images that we
saw across the district. And I strongly believe that FEMA can
play an active role in mitigating an experience like theirs.
Now, earlier this year, Administrator Criswell, you told
The New York Times that the risks we are seeing from climate
change are the crisis of our generation. And I think that
you're right. When we look at the numbers after doing some
digging, according to the agency's data, in 2005, there were 48
major disaster declarations. That was in 2005, 48 disaster
declarations. Now, in 2020, there were 104 major disaster
declarations, more than double that number.
Now, the climate research commission by the city of New
York projected that in 2015, the number of days with rainfall
of at least four inches would increase by as much as 67 percent
by the end of the decade, and that's compared to the period
between 1971 to 2000.
Is FEMA operating and planning ahead with similar
projections for the climate crisis?
Ms. Criswell. Congresswoman, thank you again for, you know,
hosting me in New York City and being able to see some of the
impacts that we saw or that people experienced from Hurricane
Ida. Completely devastating to many of those individuals.
And I think, you know, the data that you just mentioned,
what that highlights is the thing that I'm stressing here, is
that we have to stop focusing all of our efforts on historical
risk--the historical risks that we faced in the past--and look
to our future risk, and better understand what that future risk
might be. That's hard to do because it's not tangible. You
know, you can put your finger on what happened in the past and
build to that. But we have to be able to be comfortable with
understanding the potential for the future risk and the
investments that it's going to take in order to protect against
that future risk.
And so I am committed, with my team, to working with locals
as they are upgrading their mitigation plans, as they are
looking at what their future risks will be, to help them better
understand what that future risk, that future threat from
climate change is going to be.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much, Administrator. And if
you could list some of the measures. You know, one of the
things I've been thinking about is that as climate change gets
worse, the way that we're going to have to approach not just
disaster response, but disaster prevention, is really going to
have to evolve with the increasing threats that we have, and
that includes our approach within FEMA.
And so my question for you is, if you could list some
measures that would aid or assist in shifting FEMA's role in
responding to more frequent natural disasters, what would some
of those measures be? Is it more funding for staff? Is it kind
of increasing into or growing into disaster prevention?
Streamline response measures during disaster relief time?
Internal reorganizations? You know, from your bird's eye view,
what are some of the things that we need to know on the
congressional side, whether it's the potential for expanding
authorizations, et cetera, that you see is going to be
necessary in the coming years and decades?
Ms. Criswell. It's a great question. And I think there's
two things that I would talk about right now. And, one, we used
to see a very cyclical disaster response cycle where we would
reset in the wintertime and get ready for the next disaster
season, and we don't see that any longer. Our team has been
working hard, and now they are working year-round, to support
the different types of weather events that we are seeing. And
that's just going to continue. And so we are taking a hard look
at how do we now create a year-round disaster work force that
can keep up with the demand of the disasters that we are
seeing.
But I think the only way that in the long term we are going
to continue to be able to keep up with this is reducing the
impact so we don't have to respond as much. And the way we do
that is through mitigation. And so we need to continue to
educate communities about the importance of reducing the
impacts, putting in communitywide mitigation projects in order
to protect their citizens.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlewoman from New Mexico, Ms. Herrell, is recognized
for five minutes.
Ms. Herrell.
Ms. Herrell. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I really
appreciate this hearing.
I just want to kind of piggyback on something that my
colleague, Congressman Norman, said regarding the border, just
because it is such an important part of this entire process.
But we know that there is a crisis at the border. And we also--
it is worth noting that 458,000 people came into our Nation
illegally in the year 2020. But yet, over 1.5 million have come
in this year so far. So I don't think that this current
administration inherited a crisis at the border; I think he
created a crisis.
But with that being said, Administrator, I would like to
know, are there policies or decisions that have been made by
this administration that caused a crisis on the uptick in the
crossings on the southern border, the illegal crossings?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, FEMA's--or, Congresswoman,
FEMA's role is to support the response to disasters. We do not
get involved in policy regarding immigration. I would have to
defer you to the Secretary.
Ms. Herrell. OK. Thank you. And can you just quickly give a
couple of examples of how FEMA was able to help provide HHS and
others support to move the children, the unaccompanied minors,
out of border protective custody?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, ma'am. Again, one of the things that
FEMA does so well is helping to coordinate interagency efforts
in large complicated structures. And we were able to put a
process in place that helped them be successful in managing
that mission. It's how we manage any of the events that we
respond to, as far as helping with the process, helping with
the flow, putting the organization in place that can facilitate
the decisionmaking and setting benchmarks to set standards and
goals that we wanted to achieve. Through that we were able to
reduce the amount of time that migrant children were in custody
and the amount of time that they spent with HHS.
Ms. Herrell. Great. Thank you. And then, just going back to
some of the services, this is just more for clarity. And I know
people don't think of flooding in New Mexico, but, actually, we
have a large amount of rainfall in some of our areas throughout
the district. And this is just for clarifying. Some communities
and counties believe that they cannot ask or apply for FEMA
grants unless the state declares that specific area an
emergency. Is that correct or are there programs where counties
and communities can go directly to FEMA?
Ms. Criswell. Congresswoman, I'd have to understand more of
the specifics. They can't apply for public assistance grants
unless there's a state-declared disaster. But our Hazard
Mitigation Grant Program, like the BRIC program and the Flood
Mitigation Assistance program, does not require a state-
disaster declaration. And then there's also our Preparedness
Grant program.
So I'd have to know specifically which types of grants that
they're talking about. I'd be happy to have my team followup
with you.
Ms. Herrell. I would really appreciate that. Because we
have a lot of very small communities that were hit very, very
hard, and they don't have the income, they don't have the
ability to do some of these repairs, but it's affecting
everybody in those communities, but it's not big enough to be
called a state disaster.
And I would welcome you to come to New Mexico to look at
some of our rural communities that have been hit. You know, you
just don't think of flooding in New Mexico, but it happens, and
it is devastating for those that live in and around those
areas. So I appreciate all of your hard work. And the
invitation is open. So thank you very much. And if you could
have your people reach out to our office, I would really like
to maybe push some of this information out to the district that
I represent.
Ms. Criswell. Absolutely, ma'am. Thank you for the offer.
Ms. Herrell. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
But I would like to respond to your earlier comments.
Although we do not want to be distracted from today's topic of
today's hearing, I do want to note that migration across the
border did not start under President Biden. It started long
before his Presidency and this Congress. And the cruel child
separation policy of the Trump administration did nothing to
address the root causes of the problem, but this is a very
important hearing on FEMA and its response to Ida.
So I would now like to call on the gentlelady from
Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Thank you.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairwoman. And thank you,
Administrator, for being here. Really impressed in the years of
service that you had within FEMA and, of course, as a
firefighter for I think over two decades. Very impressive.
Thank you, Chairwoman, for holding this really critically
important hearing.
I know when I talk to my residents, they are not talking to
me about the broken immigration system when they are saying can
you get the sewage out of my basement, or, you know, Rashida,
literally there's a river in front of my home. So I want us to
really focus on the fact that we haven't invested, I think, the
critical amount of money, the kind of bold, meaningful
investment that we need to really address the fact that we have
a climate crisis in our country.
But, Administrator, I do want to talk to you about
something really serious, and I hope that under your leadership
changes can be made. As you noted in your testimony, flooding
is the most common, costly natural disaster in the United
States. I've seen it. My folks have been flooded, I think, four
times just in the last two months. And your team on the ground
here have been leading with compassion, and I can't express to
you how much that means to me representing the third poorest
congressional district in the country. These are folks that did
not have any savings, anything to really address--again, they
had no safety net to address the flooding in their homes and,
of course, damage to their homes.
But you know that every five years FEMA is required to
update their flood maps. Correct?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Tlaib. And it has to reflect, you know, whether
properties are at risk for flood damage. And flood maps are a
critical tool, as you know, to where major decisions are made
about investment, where folks need flood insurance, where
critical infrastructure is built, who gets evacuated during a
flood emergency, as you know.
So, last year, I know FEMA officials testified during a
hearing in the House Science Committee that FEMA's flood maps
may give false impressions to some communities, that they have
little to no flood risk. We're already seeing that with, you
know, FEMA officials on the ground can tell you and attest to
that, Administrator.
We know that new data released by an organization called
First Street Foundation, which uses data to provide flooding
risk levels for individual properties, shows that 8.7 million
properties are at risk from a 100-year flood than what current
FEMA maps show. And there have been, you know, other kinds of
reports afterwards. But, you know, this is serious, and
anything I can do to be a partner in this. But does FEMA plan
to update its data and, you know, the method that they use to
include forward-looking climate projections in its flood maps,
such as heavy rainfall and sea level rises?
Ms. Criswell. Congresswoman, thank you for the question.
And you represent my home state of where I grew up, in
Michigan, in Manistee, Michigan. So it has a very soft place in
my heart.
Flood maps are an incredible tool that we have and, again,
designed primarily to support the inundation that we're seeing
from coastal flooding or riverine flooding. They don't
necessarily reflect the rain events that would cause some of
the urban flooding that we see. But we work with the
communities to help them update their community flood maps as
they need to. And we would be happy to work with communities to
help incorporate additional data that they may have to better
portray the risks that they may be experiencing.
Ms. Tlaib. You know, and I appreciate that, Administrator,
but I think we need to go farther in providing the capacity.
Many of them are not--you know, don't have the know-all in
regards to that. I don't know if it's been a priority in
pushing the state to maybe provide that capacity. But we are,
you know, at a point, I think, in our country that we need to
start thinking about how we do some of the, I think, preventive
measures in place to making sure people have that safety net,
that they are covered in regards to flood insurance, in regards
to infrastructure implementation.
And I say this sincerely. I--you know, my local
communities, we're not prepared for this flooding. And I don't
know how I can go back to them now and say, hey, I need you all
to figure out, you know, what are the tools, what are necessary
in regards to figuring that out. If that makes any sense at
all. Look, I'm a social worker at heart, and I'm a person that
understands, you know, some of my local communities--my larger
cities may have more capacity, but my smaller communities, the
11 that I have that were impacted directly by flooding, really
don't have that capacity. And I really think FEMA, we need to
step up and we need to look at these foundations and reports
that are coming out, and say, let's put some of that data point
in there in regard to sea levels, in regard to where we've seen
flooding. And I think we have a really important responsible
role in not saying let the locals do it. And I know I hear that
a lot and it is something that I'm learning.
But, you know, Administrator, please, I'm asking you, let's
change that culture and let's not, you know, kind of wash our
hands in regards to the flood mapping. I think we have a role
here and there is enough information out there that says we can
do more.
Ms. Criswell. Yes. I think what you speak of really
amplifies what I've been saying, is this is the crisis of our
generation. And we all have a shared responsibility to make
sure that we are better understanding what the risks are that
we're going to face in the future. I mean, so, yes, we have a
lot of work to do, and FEMA has a lot of work as well, to
support our communities in helping to understand what those
risks are.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz is now
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Administrator Criswell, it's good to see you. And I would
really be remiss if I didn't start off by thanking you so much.
You and your incredible team, you personally, Tom McCool, who
could not have represented FEMA better, nor done more, you
know, hands-on work than anyone could during the Surfside
disaster in my congressional district. As you know, we're still
dealing with that crisis. Families have been torn apart and are
in crisis. And I appreciate the President's quick reaction,
your team's help. But just would ask for an opportunity to talk
with you, because there are some things that we continue to
need to sort through. And I just have some questions, so if we
can could followup afterwards, that would really be helpful.
Ms. Criswell. Absolutely ma'am.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But, primarily, thank you. Thank you
so much on behalf of my community.
Shifting to Hurricane Ida, which made landfall in
Louisiana, and that was a Category 4 hurricane, and then it
quickly became, as we discussed this morning, one of the most
devastating natural disasters in U.S. history. And being from
the state of Florida, I'm obviously quite familiar with the
experience of the impact of natural disasters and the
aftermath.
But in this case, over the course of 24 hours, Ida
strengthened from a Category 1 to a Cat 4 storm. Winds
increased to 150 miles per hour, leaving so many people, as we
heard today, in Louisiana unable to safely evacuate. And that's
a story that my constituents in Florida are all too familiar
with.
As the storm moved across the southeast, up the mid-
Atlantic, to the northeast, as we know its intense rainfall
brought dangerous conditions to the communities in its path. I
want to show on the screen a picture of the flooding in
Louisiana and the flooding in New Jersey.
So my first question is really just, can you underscore why
Hurricane Ida caught so many people off guard?
Ms. Criswell. Congresswoman, I'll start with the fact that
it intensified so rapidly, as you stated, it went from just a
tropical wave into a Category 4 hurricane in a very short
amount of time. And this is what we're starting to see more
often. And it's giving our state officials less time to be able
to put their plans in place where they normally, you know, had
several days to put those plans in place. And that timeframe is
continuing to get shorter and shorter as these storms intensify
more quickly.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Yes. And it feels like that, that
window of opportunity is shrinking so quickly. In New York,
although the area was bracing for the storm, the city was
unable to predict the severity of flooding that would hit. And
FEMA does have an integrated public alert and warning system
that works in connection with our local alert authorities to
send out warnings and other alerts related to disasters.
As the storms came through, emergency alerts blared through
cell phones and warned residents of dangerous flash floods,
that they should head for higher ground and stay out of flood
waters. One of those alerts said, and I quote: This is a
extremely dangerous and life-threatening situation.
Do you believe that that system and other warning systems
worked as intended for Ida? Are there steps that FEMA or local
governments can take to improve the way information is shared
about the risks of a pending disaster? Because this was the
first time that New York had ever issued a flash flood
emergency.
Ms. Criswell. Our IPAWS system is an excellent tool that
really helps to warn individuals across the country for a
variety of disasters. And it has worked successfully across the
country. I think when you're in an area that you haven't had to
use it before, it's hard to really understand what the
significance might be. And so I think we all have a lot of work
to do to continue to educate our communities, when we're doing
our public preparedness campaigns, about the importance of when
you do get an alert like this, that you need to take it
seriously.
But at the same time, we also have a lot of work to do to
continue to educate our communities about what their risks
might be so they know, when something happens, what are your
unique risks to you where you live and what type of alerts
should you be looking out for.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. And then just one last question,
because there's so many long-term strategies that we need to
take, but investing in climate resilience is definitely one of
them. And as a senior member of the Appropriations Committee, I
always use my position to push for greater funding for the
Weather Service, the Hurricane Center programs like the
National Mesonet.
How does FEMA work with NOAA and the National Weather
Service to get the scientific data and forecasts and translate
those into public warnings? And is there more that can be done
to encourage residents of our most vulnerable communities to
prepare for storms or other severe weather events?
Ms. Criswell. NOAA and the National Weather Service and the
National Hurricane Center are such amazing partners of ours.
And, you know, we have a morning daily operations call that
they are part of to let us know what the current threats are.
But we also work with them, and we are working really closely
with NOAA right now as they are trying to identify what the
future risks from climate change are going to be, to develop
tools for local communities to better plan for what these
impacts are going to be so that they can put the proper plans
in place.
So we will continue to work closely with them to try to
develop these types of products so we can get additional
information into the hands of these communities.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you so much.
And, Madam Chair, I thank you for having this important
hearing.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, is now recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing.
And it's well documented that natural disasters exacerbate
inequality. Communities of color are disproportionately
vulnerable to the harmful effects of flooding, wildfires, and
tornados. Moreover, people of color are more likely to die from
the negative effects of climate change.
When Hurricane Ida struck New Orleans, predictably, Black
Americans and non-White communities suffered the brunt of the
devastation. Hurricane Ida is yet one more example in a long
history of poor marginalized communities getting
disproportionately hurt by natural disaster. That's why when it
comes time to rebuild in the wake of a natural disaster, the
Federal Government should prioritize rather than deprecate
historically marginalized neighborhoods.
It's common for many Black families to hold title to what's
known as heir property. When a property owner dies without a
will, their home and land is passed down over generations to
their heirs and land title becomes cloudy. Because of an array
of racist policies in the past, Black Americans particularly in
the South were precluded from the legal system and unable to
obtain deeds and titles to their land.
How is FEMA meeting the needs of historically oppressed
communities who are unable to abide by existing guidelines
which were designed to exclude them? And what changes have been
made to ensure that those who can't show clear title to their
homes can receive disaster assistance from FEMA?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, you raise such an important
question. And it's something that, when I came into office, I
started to hear about, and I knew that we could do better. And
so I challenged my team here to see how we could better provide
assistance to survivors. And we made some significant changes
going into hurricane season to better help with the issues that
you raise about heir rights.
And so what we have done is we have changed and expanded
quite significantly the types of documentation that we will
accept from individuals to prove homeownership or even to prove
occupancy. That can range from paying your tax bill, to utility
bills, a statement from your landlord in a mobile home
community, a wide variety of types of documents that can be
accepted now.
The other big change that we have done as well in part of
my effort to try to bring services to survivors to bring our
help to where the people are instead of making them come to us,
in the past, if somebody didn't pass that verification through
our online system or on the phone, we would immediately send
them a denial letter. Now what we're doing is if they can't
pass on that first step, if they haven't been able to identify
the type of documentation, even with this expanded amount, we
will still send a building inspector to them personally. And if
they can see the type of documentation upon arrival, then
they'll just check that off in the system.
And so that has--what we're seeing in Hurricane Ida has
increased dramatically the amount of people that have not had
to go through the laborious process of trying to appeal their
determination that they did not own the property or they were
not a resident or an occupant on the property.
This is just the beginning. We're going to continue to make
changes for how we can equitably deliver our programs, meet
people where they're at, and understand that we can't have a
program and a process that's a one-size-fits-all approach.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Ms. Criswell.
Georgia has the sixth highest population of renters and
ranks among the top 10 for states most at risk for a natural
disaster. And renters applying for assistance through FEMA have
to go through a very long process before they can get
assistance. What's being done to reduce the wait period for
renters who are displaced?
Ms. Criswell. I think, Congressman, some of the things that
may have delayed their process is, again, being able to prove
that they are occupants or renting a certain residence. Those
are some of the changes that we made to our program. If there's
anything else that's specific that you're aware of that's
slowing down their process, I'd be happy to have my team get
with you to better understand the challenges your constituents
are facing in Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you so much for your
testimony today and for your actions in streamlining the
process so that more people can receive assistance.
And I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
And the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Chair. And thank you, Administrator
Criswell, for being here today.
I come from a district that was dramatically affected by
Hurricane Harvey. And so we've spent the last four years
working to help our communities recover from that. I know
today's about Ida, but I think some of the lessons we've
learned from FEMA or some of the questions we have certainly
would be applicable to any disaster that we're dealing with. So
wanted to thank you for appearing here today.
One of the issues I wanted to ask about was the definition
of ``resilience.'' One of the major issues Congress intended to
address in the Disaster Recovery and Reform Act of 2018 was
that under the law at the time, the public assistance program
was designed to assist communities rebuilding and to rebuild
back to--at the time, it was to the precondition of what it
was. And what we found ourselves was kind of in a loop where we
would rebuild to a standard that would not withstand
potentially the next storm.
And so Congress directed that we begin to rebuild toward
resiliency for future disasters. But there was supposed to be a
rule for what resiliency met that was to be defined by April 5
of 2020, and final guidance for 90 days after that. To date,
that has not been issued.
Could you let us know, in writing within the next 14 days
or so, when we can expect that rule to be finalized so we have
the critical definition of ``resiliency''? I know some people
are having their claims denied based on resiliency, but that
term is still left undefined. And so could you commit to get us
a timeline for that?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I'll have to get with my team.
But, yes, I commit to getting you a timeline for what the
status is on that.
Mr. Cloud. OK. I really appreciate that. That would be a
big help.
And one issue that has been, you know, probably an issue
for decades it would seem, but for a long time has been just
the staffing and the turnover. I know many of the people in our
district, some are on there in the matter of four years on
their twelfth program delivery manager. It's made dealing with
these applications very, very difficult. For example, the
Refugio ISD superintendent wrote us a letter saying: As you're
aware, the rebuilding of the school facilities has been slow,
tedious, and frustrating. Two Refugio ISD employees, the
District's architect, and I have spent nearly four years daily
navigating the FEMA process, and, to date, have received only
$382,488 of the between $15 million and $20 million in damages.
With 12 program delivery managers cycling through our case,
this has been an--there has never been an opportunity to really
make any ground.
And so, I've heard of similar cases. Oftentimes, we've had
a recovery--or a team come and do a site visit at a particular
site, seven different teams, for example, come up and show up.
Will there be--do you foresee any sort of solution, or
what's FEMA doing to deal with the employee turnover or at
least to deploy the employees we have for a longer term than--
for a longer term in the field?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I appreciate your insights. You
know, and part of it is, especially when we're talking about
four years, there will be some change in staff as we go through
the years. And these complicated projects that you're talking
about do take a long time to get through the recovery process.
But I understand the concern, as a previous local emergency
manager, how frustrating it is when you have to start over in
explaining your story and where you are at in the process. I
will work with my team to figure out if there's----
Mr. Cloud. Right.
Ms. Criswell [continuing]. A way to provide greater
consistency for your folks down there as they're continuing
their recovery process from Harvey.
Mr. Cloud. Well, thank you. And do you know if there's been
any sort of report on how--you know, it would seem to me that
we're taking a much longer time processing these claims and
that there's kind of a built-in waste, a built-in cost increase
in recovery due to some of the staffing issues and how we're
deploying them. And I would be very interested if FEMA could
look into that and maybe provide a report to us on what we can
do to streamline that. Not only will it provide better customer
service, so to speak, but it would also, I think, help us be
mush more efficient with taxpayer dollars in administrating
this recovery program. So is that something that you all could
work on?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, Congressman. I think anything we can do
to improve the customer experience is worth our research, and
so I would be happy to have my team look into that.
Mr. Cloud. OK. Well, thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you so much.
And now the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Raskin, is now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you hear me now?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Raskin. All right. So, Administrator Criswell, thank
you very much for your intense focus on this civilizational
emergency that we're in. It is clearly a code red for humanity.
And as President Biden said in touring the damage of Hurricane
Ida, the Nation and the world are at peril.
We are seeing an increasing frequency of natural disasters
but also an increasing destructive velocity of the natural
disasters that are coming. NOAA began tracking billion dollar
extreme weather events in 1980. Since then, they have visited
more than $1.975 trillion in damages on the country. And here's
the amazing thing to me: Between 1990 and 1999, the average
number of billion dollar extreme weather events was five per
year. But in the last five years, between 2016 and 2020, as you
can see on this chart, that number has jumped to 16 per year.
So the number of extreme weather events has tripled just in the
last two decades.
Now, you've made climate risk reduction one of your top
priorities. What is FEMA actually doing now to measure our
progress in efforts to reduce the risks posed by climate
change?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, that is such an important graph
that you showed, and it demonstrates how we are now in the
crisis of our generation, that the climate crisis is going to
continue to get worse, and I think that we'll continue to see
that number of billion dollar disasters only increase as we go
further.
We are investing in mitigating, in reducing the impacts.
The President has authorized close to $5 billion this year to
help communities reduce the impacts that they're seeing from
climate change. And we have to continue on that path forward.
It takes a long time for the mitigation projects to get
completed. And so we have to continue to work with our
communities to better understand their risks and ensure that
we're getting this money in the hands of those people that need
it the most.
Mr. Raskin. Will you help me understand this: When we say
``mitigation,'' what are we talking about exactly? Are we
talking about the kind of things that my friend, Congressman
Higgins, is talking about, which is the aid that comes after a
disaster has hit, or are we talking about readiness, about
getting ready in advance, knowing that, you know, there will be
another hurricane coming to hit Lake Charles soon?
Ms. Criswell. It is a combination of both. Our Building
Resilient Infrastructure and Communities Grant program is pre-
disaster mitigation funding, but our Hazard Mitigation Grant
program is funding that's available after a disaster, but it
can be used for any type of risk that they're facing. It
doesn't have to be directly related to the incident that they
had just experienced.
What we have to do is help communities understand the best
way to make these communitywide investments to reduce these
impacts from future threats.
Mr. Raskin. I want to ask you a rather odd question,
Administrator Criswell. I want to ask you about polarization
and division in American society. I know that's not directly
under your jurisdiction, but in some sense I think that FEMA
can be the place where we bring America back together.
Do you agree with me that the risk in extreme weather
events, both the new frequency of the events and the extreme
velocity of these events should be bringing people together
across geographic lines, sectional lines, political party, and
ideology lines?
And related to that, extreme weather is obviously the
problem being caused by climate change, but as my friend, Mr.
Higgins, said, there is a problem of extreme bureaucracy that
Americans have complained about from the beginning of our
Republic and we want to make sure government is working for the
people. But there's also a problem, isn't there, of extreme
propaganda and extreme denialism around climate change? And
can't we all gather together through the good work of FEMA,
through hurricane and disaster readiness, to bring the country
together? Is there a way that this can be the source of unity
for us?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I think that we all have a
shared responsibility to help ensure that we are protecting our
Nation from the risks from future events so our children, our
grandchildren, and future generations will not have to go
through what we're going through now.
Disasters don't discriminate where they're going to land.
They're not red or blue. And we do have a shared responsibility
to work together to make sure that we have the environment that
we need to support our future generations.
Mr. Raskin. Right. Well, I appreciate that very much. I
thank you for your hard work. And, you know, there was an
attempt to say that the disasters that have been inherited by
the Biden administration were caused by the Biden
administration. I was glad my friend, Mr. Connolly from
Virginia, corrected that. I will resist the opportunity to say
that the entire last Presidency was a disaster and hope that
the situation we're in will bring all of us together as a
country.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman, you're recognized.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. Here I am. Can you hear me?
Chairwoman Maloney. You're here. OK, good.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Couple of general questions. You know,
one of the criticisms always is the degree to which are we
rebuilding or, you know, rebuilding the same areas again and
again and again. I want your general opinion, do we have a
problem here in that, you know, some--there's some building
going on in areas that you could anticipate are going to have a
problem again in the next 10 years?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, we need to take a concerted
effort at making sure we know where the risks are. And people
understand, if they choose to build in a place, they understand
what the risks are going to be and what the potential impacts
might be. We need to help provide that information and educate
our population on what those risks are.
Mr. Grothman. Well, I think the thing I'm looking for is,
is it reflected in premiums? Are we doing something to make
sure that people are in particularly precarious areas, that we
are not rebuilding there? Are you doing anything along those
lines?
Ms. Criswell. What I can say is that our new Risk Rating
2.0, certainly the risk of where people build is reflected in
their insurance premium in a way that it hasn't been before.
And so those that are in greater risk areas will have a higher
premium.
Mr. Grothman. On the other side, in my district, I'm dating
back to my days as a lawyer, we always felt that there were
people who did have very high premiums, and just subjectively
looking at it, there's no way anything was going to happen
there in 100 years. But for whatever reason, lack of common
sense or whatever, they were considered to be in the flood
plain.
Are you doing anything in which some people are peeling off
from that or not?
Ms. Criswell. I don't know that I completely understand
your question.
Mr. Grothman. OK. As I understand it, they require flood
insurance if you're in a flood plain. Correct?
Ms. Criswell. Correct.
Mr. Grothman. And there are areas designated flood plain
that, you know, you could talk to somebody, they go back to
their grandmother, who never remembers any floods in that area
or close to floods. Nevertheless, somebody, when they drew the
line said this is a flood plain. So they're stuck paying for
this insurance on something that everybody in the area believes
will never happen in a million years.
Have you guys, over time, taken into that account and tried
to remove people from flood plain who perhaps were erroneously
put in it over a period of time?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, again, I think that goes to the
new release of our Risk Rating 2.0, where it takes an
individual homeowner's particular risk into effect. And so if
somebody does not have a risk that they were paying for before,
then their rates would go down.
Mr. Grothman. I understand. I mean, the question is, have
you peeled anybody out of flood plain that in the past was
considered flood plain?
Ms. Criswell. I'd have to get back to you on the specifics.
But as our flood maps are updated, those types of data are
incorporated into the risk premiums.
Mr. Grothman. I would like for you to get back to me.
Now, I think Representative Higgins has a very interesting
question, a spellbinding question.
Representative Higgins, I yield my time.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Ma'am, regarding Risk Rating 2.0, respectfully, members of
the Louisiana delegation have written several letters to your
agency. And this may predate your service, and I respect that,
but would like some answers on this. The quote from a FEMA
document stated that 97 percent of current policyholders'
premiums will either decrease or increase by about $20 a month
under Risk Rating 2.0.
We know this is not true. We're seeing example after
example after example of extreme variances in policy expense;
sometimes going from maybe $500 a year to $2,000, $3,000,
$4,000, $5,000, $7,000 a year. There's some incredible
disparities between reality of the implementation of Risk
Rating 2.0 and what was expected and projected and communicated
by FEMA as that legislation was passed.
So I ask, can you respond to that, please, to this
committee, like, formally? And can we get a commitment from you
today that FEMA will consider delaying the implementation of
Risk Rating 2.0 until we get solid answers about the realities
of what it really means to American citizens that carry
National Flood Insurance Program policies.
Ms. Criswell. Congressman----
Chairwoman Maloney. Time has expired. The gentleman's time
has expired.
You may answer his question.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, we can certainly get back to you
with any of the specific information, but Risk Rating 2.0 has
been implemented, and already individuals are seeing decreases
in their insurance rates, which is the first time that this
program has taken equity into account to make sure people are
paying for the risk that they have.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. He
yields back.
The gentlewoman from Missouri, Ms. Bush, is now recognized
for five minutes.
Ms. Bush.
Ms. Bush. I thank you, Madam Chair, for convening this
important hearing today.
Hurricane Ida was yet another graphic example of how
unprepared our Nation is for increasingly dangerous climate
disasters driven by fossil fuels. For communities like mine
that have already been hurting for decades, we do not have the
room for these new challenges of flooding and heat waves and
more. Like those that were destroyed or severely damaged by
Ida, our community faces more and more climate risk every day.
Administrator Criswell, numerous FEMA disaster programs are
not targeted to those in greatest need. Poor program design
combines with unequal access to resources to worsen every
single climate disaster that hits this country. For example,
when FEMA conducts damage assessments after storms, they are
measured based on proper ownership. This focuses relief
programs on wealthier parts of a community as opposed to the
renters and unhoused neighbors most in need of support.
Similarly, the National Flood Insurance Program only supports
people who can afford to buy flood insurance; almost precisely
the opposite of how this program should work.
Transforming this program would mean saving lives. FEMA's
relief program that is available immediately after a disaster
is out of reach for frontline communities. FEMA's National
Advisory Council described their program as being, and I quote,
more accessible to those with time, income, and access.
Thank you for being vocal about your commitment to
improving equity in FEMA programs. I was very, very glad to see
the recent change in FEMA policy that would allow Black
families in the south who did not have a formal deed or a proof
of homeownership to access disaster assistance.
But can you explain how this policy change will
specifically help Black, Brown, and indigenous families?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, Congresswoman. It's so important that we
don't overcomplicate the system that is already complicated and
that we don't try to use, again, this one-size-fits-all
approach, because everybody's situation is specific to them and
unique to them. And it's so important for us to make sure that
we understand that and that we put people first.
The changes that we have made so far, we're already seeing
big improvements in the number people that are deemed eligible
for our programs, meaning that they didn't have to go through
that laborious process of trying to appeal what we would have
normally denied. These are only the beginning of the changes.
We're continuing to look at our program. So the heir
rights, the property ownership is just the start. We're going
to continue to see where have we taken this cookie-cutter
approach and need to adjust it so we can better understand the
unique needs of specific communities as we deliver our
services. And I'd be happy to work with your team on any
suggestions you have in things that you've seen.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Well, it's an excellent policy change
that we know will benefit many people. We need to expand it to
St. Louis, my home, and across the country, as we develop
further fundamental reforms to problematic FEMA programs.
What other examples of changes that FEMA has made or
intends to make that will improve equity in disaster relief?
Can you give us some examples?
Ms. Criswell. I think the other example that I would give
is that we also change the cost threshold for determining
whether or not you would be eligible for direct housing. We
used to have a fixed dollar amount for that threshold which
left many homeowners that had a smaller amount of damage
ineligible for our program. And so now we've changed that to a
cost per square foot, which is really starting to effect our
lower-income populations and so they become eligible for our
direct housing program. Again, just one small example of how
we've taken this cookie-cutter approach that we've been in the
past and made it unique and specific to the individuals' needs.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. Thank you.
The Biden administration also launched an important
initiative by selecting two of FEMA's predisaster programs to
be piloted under the Justice40 program. Justice40, you know, is
the whole-of-government effort to ensure that Federal agencies
work with the states and local communities to deliver that
minimum of 40 percent of the overall benefits to frontline
communities. The stakeholder engagement plan and plans have
maximized benefits among those that are supposed to be
developed already. So how will engagement with impacted
disadvantaged communities inform your assessment?
Ms. Criswell. We are very excited to be part of the
Justice40 initiative. And it's part of our BRIC program and our
Flood Mitigation Assistance program that we are incorporating
that into.
We have adjusted our scoring criteria to give greater
points to underserved communities. And we're working with our
state partners and through our Technical Assistance Program to
get the message out there and reach out to our stakeholders so
they understand the importance of having more individuals that
are part of these communities apply for this type of
assistance. We're looking forward to seeing where we can
include this in additional program in the future, but very much
looking forward to seeing how the results of this round of our
BRIC funding and FMA funding go.
Ms. Bush. Wonderful.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady's time has expired,
regretfully.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. She yields back.
The gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, you're now
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
And welcome, Administrator Criswell. Thank you. You have
one of the most important jobs. And we've benefited here in
Vermont during tropical storm Irene with the extraordinary work
that FEMA did. So we're grateful.
Actually, what Jamie Raskin said too is something I think
all of us feel, at the time we need them, FEMA shows up. It is
something that can unify us; obviously a good thing.
The topic I want to discuss is the grid. It's not directly
under your control, obviously, but the breakdown in the grid
and the challenges to the grid and the necessity for upgrading
the grid. I want to ask about what the impact would be with
respect to the scope and scale of what you have to contend with
after a big storm, an event like Ida.
So maybe you can start by describing what the impact was on
families and communities after Ida because of the long-term
shutdown of the grid and how that impacted them and how it made
the challenge you and your folks at FEMA had to contend with.
Ms. Criswell. Yes. Congressman, the power grid is so
important to keep the communities moving, and the sooner we can
get the power turned back on, the sooner their recovery begins.
And so what we see is that, as it continues to delay getting
the power turned back on, these communities have such an
increased amount of time for their recovery.
What we saw during Hurricane Ida was hospitals having to be
evacuated, communities having to be evacuated, and that all
puts a toll on their families and on their communities. And so
we need to be able to, you know, work with our private sector
partners to help them get back online quicker, if we can.
But it's also an example of how our infrastructure in many
places is so outdated. And we have to invest in improving our
infrastructure so it can withstand this increasing number of
severe weather events that we're going it to continue to see.
Mr. Welch. So this power outage situation we faced in Ida,
how long did that last in some communities?
Ms. Criswell. I think that there's some communities, some
smaller communities, that are still without power in southern
Louisiana, but many parts of the state, they were without power
for several weeks.
Mr. Welch. So just on a practical level, if a family can't
go back to its house, they can't stay in the house once the
storm subsides, that's an added burden for the resources of
FEMA to just help those folks have shelter and food and warmth
or cooling, whichever the case may be?
Ms. Criswell. I wouldn't state that it's a burden for FEMA.
That's the type of support that we provide the communities to
help them during their recovery process. It's certainly a
burden on the family that's been impacted. But we do have the
resources and the tools necessary to provide that temporary
lodging to assist them.
Mr. Welch. Yes. And you were good to correct me on the use
of the word ``burden'' with FEMA, because whatever the need is,
that's your job, and I get that. But it does mean that the
needs that that family has and that community has are greater,
because they can't get back into their house and get things put
back together, correct?
Ms. Criswell. Absolutely. And it just delays their overall
recovery process, making it that much longer for them.
Mr. Welch. You know, let me ask you about that. Because I
think great resilience and modernization is essential, but, you
know, when we had Hurricane Irene, the families were able to
get back in, even though the house was a mess, there was mud
there, they had to start digging it out. My observation was
that there was a lot of hope that they had that they're on the
road to getting back to normal. Whereas, if somebody's out of
their home for, not two days, but two weeks or two months, then
that hope begins to fade.
Tell me whether that's a fair assessment, in your
experience.
Ms. Criswell. Sir, I would think that that is a fair
assessment. You know, people want to be able to start
recovering quickly. And when they are prevented from doing
that, it causes additional despair for those families.
Mr. Welch. OK. I thank you very much for your good work.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, is now recognized.
Mr. Sarbanes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. Can you hear
me OK?
Ms. Criswell. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes.
Thank you, Administrator Criswell. I really appreciate the
testimony, as I know everybody does, today. And thank you for
your good and important work.
As you know, Hurricane Ida, obviously, it did huge damage
in many parts of the country, but that included Maryland as
well. On September 1, it came through the state of Maryland and
damaged hundreds of homes and businesses. Unfortunately, it
even claimed the life of a resident of Rockville, Melkin
Cedillo.
I'm very grateful to the President and to you for granting
the Maryland delegation's request to FEMA for Federal disaster
assistance through the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program, which
you spent a lot of time today talking about. That was granted
on September 13. And last week, I joined the Maryland
delegation in urging the President to approve the state of
Maryland's request for Presidential disaster declaration for
individual assistance to Anne Arundel County, which I represent
in Congress, and to Cecil County, which were hit by severe
flooding and a tornado, in fact, and Hazard Mitigation Grant
Program assistance for all jurisdictions in Maryland, so that,
you know, our residents, like many others in these various
states, can get the assistance that they need. This is Federal
assistance. It's very necessary. It's warranted. I hope it can
be expeditiously reviewed and granted.
But I want to talk about the grant program a little bit,
because as I understand it, FEMA provides for up to 75 percent,
it's a cost share situation, so the Federal Government provides
75 percent of eligible project costs, and then states and
communities cover the remaining share.
Do you know--has there been discussion, do you know what
the capacity is--I mean, obviously, there's a budget dimension
to it, but can you give us some insight into the potential for
FEMA to increase the Federal cost share to pick up more of the
tab for the HMGP program, which would make it more likely that
states and localities who have budget crunches could respond to
current disasters and better prepare for future ones?
Obviously, this may not be critical in every instance, but
there's going to be situations where communities are going to
be either reluctant or incapable of accessing the program's
benefits because of the cost share obligation. And I wondered
if you could speak to any kind of thinking or review on that
front.
Ms. Criswell. Thank you for raising that question.
The HMGP program is such an amazing tool to help
communities again fight against the risks that we are seeing
and prevent future damages from the severe weather events. I
have heard from many people across the country that they do
have a struggle meeting the cost share requirement.
That cost share requirement is set forth in the Stafford
Act, and so, that's not something that we can change. However,
I think that there's work that we can do to figure out how we
can help communities partner and try to find other funding
sources that, perhaps, could be available to help them with
that. And, you know, I'm going to be meeting with state
directors to have this same conversation on how do we help
communities take advantage of this critical resource so they
can start to invest in their future risk.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that. I mean, any
recommendations? I mean, there may have to be statutory changes
there to make it work better, but any recommendation that you
can offer us based on the data that you're gathering up from
across the country that may show an uneven opportunity to take
advantage of the Hazard Mitigation Program I think would be
very, very helpful.
And, again, I just want to thank the President for
committing an historic amount to this Hazard Mitigation Fund, I
think about $3.5 billion, to reduce the effects of climate
change, which we know is the most pressing factor in all of
this.
You know, Annapolis, over the last 50 years, has
experienced an incredible increase in nuisance flooding, which
closes road, it overwhelms storm water drains, damages
infrastructure. It's one of the most extreme impacts we see in
the country. In fact, today, Annapolis expects over 50 flooding
events every year now, up from an average of four annual
flooding events just 50 years prior, so we are very focused on
this.
Thank you for your good work. Thank you for recognizing
that climate change is this huge impact that we have to both
prepare for, and have resilience for, but, obviously, take
proactive steps to curb that trajectory.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
And the gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Madam Chair, for convening this
important and timely hearing.
Certainly, natural disasters are disruptive and traumatic
life events. To suddenly lose your home, your savings, family
heirlooms, or even the lives of loved ones has devastating
impacts on survivors' mental health. When this trauma is left
unaddressed, survivors can develop drastic mental health
consequences. In fact, experiencing a natural disaster by age
five is associated with six percent--a 16 percent increase in
mental health or substance use issues in adulthood. Again,
experiencing a natural disaster by age five is associated with
a 16 percent increase in mental health or substance use issues
in adulthood. A large-scale study of earthquake survivors found
that one in four had PTSD.
Fortunately, Administrator, FEMA already does have a
program in place that assists territories and tribes after a
disaster to address the immediate mental health impacts.
Administrator Criswell, can you please tell us what the Crisis
Counseling Program is, and how FEMA has worked with localities
to help survivors in communities across the country?
Ms. Criswell. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Our mental health is so important, both for disaster
survivors, as well as I stress it for my employees as well, and
our Crisis Counseling Program is definitely a tool that is
available to help disaster survivors manage the stress and cope
with the losses that they've experienced from this disaster.
It's a program that's available under the Individual Assistance
Program when that is authorized for major disaster declaration,
and executed by the state, a really important resource
available to help individuals that have been impacted by a
disaster.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
And I thank you also for including your staff in that. You
have to heal the healers as well.
This lifesaving program has been deployed nationwide in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in Puerto Rico following
Hurricanes Irma and Maria, and in New York, following September
11 terrorist attacks, to name a few. However, there are many
people who survive disasters from terrorist attacks to mass
violence and natural disasters that can't take advantage of
this program.
Administrator Criswell, can you--as you know, there are two
types of disaster declarations, major disasters and emergency
declarations. Is the Crisis Counseling Program currently
available following emergency declarations?
Ms. Criswell. Congresswoman, no, it is not currently
available for emergency declarations.
Ms. Pressley. OK. Well, I would like to, you know, implore
you to make that change. I think it should be available under
both declarations. Over the last decade alone, there have been
more than 4,000 emergency declarations in the United States.
And I represent Boston, and the Boston Marathon attack--you
know, the ripple effect of that trauma, some of it was
immediately manifesting, but some manifested later, and I think
it's time to ensure survivors of all disasters can access
counseling and be connected to long-term mental health
services.
I appreciate your agency has worked with me already on my
proposal to expand the program to emergency declarations and
that FEMA does not foresee any hindrances to providing crisis
counseling to help more people.
We would love to followup with you beyond this hearing and
would love to hear your response to that.
Ms. Criswell. Yes, ma'am. We would be happy to continue
providing technical drafting assistance on making that change,
again, so important that we're taking care of the mental health
of those people that have been impacted by these traumatic
events.
Ms. Pressley. I did also want to ask you, because I always
seek to engage those closest to the pain, Manya Chylinski,
who's a survivor of the Boston Marathon bombing, she shared her
story in May that she wishes the assistance provided under the
Crisis Counseling Program had existed for her eight years ago.
So it really is time, again, to ensure that survivors of all
disasters can access counseling and be connected to long-term
mental health services.
So look forward to being in touch with you about that.
In what little time I have remaining, if you could respond
to, you know, what are the provisions and what are the plans
for those that are disabled, those that are incarcerated, and
those that are hospitalized when it comes to a major disaster
or an emergency declaration. Are there any protocols in place,
any plans?
Ms. Criswell. I don't know that I'm understanding
specifically what you're asking, but our disaster response
programs, when we respond to incidents, it's to help all people
that have been impacted by those disaster. We do have an entire
unit here that focuses on the planning and preparedness for
individuals with disabilities, and we work closely with our
state partners through our regional offices to understand the
unique situations within each of the communities once a
disaster has happened, like those that may have been
incarcerated.
Ms. Pressley. OK. All right. Well, we will followup on that
as well.
Thank you so much.
Ms. Criswell. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlelady yields back.
And without objection, Mr. Troy Carter from Louisiana is
authorized to participate in today's hearing. Mr. Carter's
Louisiana was greatly impacted by Ida.
You are now recognized, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Chairwoman Maloney, thank you the opportunity
to participate in this hearing. As a nonmember, I greatly
appreciate the opportunity to present.
On August 29, Hurricane Ida made landfall as a Category 4
hurricane with sustained winds of 150 miles per hour. Coastal
Louisiana experienced 16-foot storm surges and significant
flash flooding 16 years to the day, 16 years to the day of
Hurricane Katrina. Of course, the Federal Government made
substantial investments in shoring up our levee system, and it
made a big difference in this hurricane, and we are hopeful
that going forward under Build Back Better and other resources
will do the same, like burying our grid to make sure people
never have to suffer weeks of being without power. It's very
difficult in the sweltering months of August to be without
power, for senior citizens, for people with disabilities, for
our young people. It adds insult to injury.
And so we are hopeful as we build back better, we continue
to buildupon mistakes of the past. We know hurricanes come
every year. We don't know the name yet. We may not know the
intensity. But we know with climate change, warmer waters bring
stronger storms, and we should endeavor to do better than we
did from previous years as we did after Katrina.
Administrator Criswell, I want to thank you, President
Biden, Senior Advisor Richmond for coming to my district, for
coming to Louisiana, walking the streets of the community and
seeing firsthand. I cannot tell you how much that meant to the
people of Louisiana to have you on the ground to see firsthand
the level of devastation.
Hurricane Ida caused major damage in my district and
communities across Louisiana, devastating homes, knocking out
the electric grid, and leaving trails of damage along the Gulf
Coast.
There are two points I would like to get across quickly
before my time elapses. The storm showed the value of Federal
investments in protecting communities, areas like New Orleans
and the river parishes. Storms and flood protection systems
stayed dry after the investments after Katrina. We know now we
have to do better going forward to make sure that these
communities are weatherproofed for the future.
Having lived through my fair share of storms, I've seen
recoveries that work and recoveries that don't. The biggest
factor in recovery is how fast we get money back into the
pockets and start people getting back to some semblance of
normalcy with their lives. We need Federal recovery process
that recognizes this. Far too many of our programs takes months
to kick in.
So turning to my question, as a part of the FEMA recovery,
you instituted several policies and granted waivers for people
that mischecked the box, and as a result, many people were
denied, I should say, for mischecking the box. What can we do
to create an appeal process for a person that may have made an
innocent mistake or accident in their filing are not summarily
rejected?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, the program that we implemented
that you're talking about is our Critical Needs Assistance
program, and it's an amazing tool that helps us get money into
the hands of survivors quickly, and we were able to get money
out into the hands of survivors faster than we have in any
other disaster. And we did hear that some individuals were
having difficulties with how they answered the questions, and
so we did go back and take a look at what we were using as
criteria to approve those for Critical Needs Assistance, and we
were able to give funding to an additional 120,000 families. We
are now taking a look at our systems to see if there's anything
else we can do to improve that moving forward, as we are always
trying to improve the delivery of our services to help give
money to those that are eligible for it.
Mr. Carter. And I want to take time to thank you, too,
because you and your people have been incredible. We've
challenged you in every possible way. We've pushed the envelope
to try to make things more seamless for people, and we've been
on the 1-yard line of FEMA to make sure they do that. And I
want to thank you as well as your people on the ground for
doing a great job in that regard.
Real quickly, blue roofs, the Blue Roof Program, while it's
very effective, can you share with me ways or things that you
are putting in place to advance or move them more quickly? As
you know, we continue to have rain, and the ability to mitigate
the existing damages would be very helpful if we could do it
faster.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. The gentleman's time has expired,
but you may answer his question.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Criswell. Yes, Congressman. The Blue Roof Program is a
partnership with FEMA and the Army Corps of Engineers, and it's
a great program to provide some temporary repairs to homes, as
you know. I did speak with Lieutenant General Spellman directly
to talk about the status of the program, and he has assured me
that he's made some improvements into how they're executing
their mission. And I think from the numbers that I've seen,
they have already significantly increased the number of blue
roofs that they have installed.
But I'll tell you that that's never fast enough, and I'm
pushing our people, as well as the Army Corps, to continue to
find ways to get those on the homes as quickly as possible so
we can get people back into their homes sooner.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Higgins for a closing statement.
Mr. Higgins?
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Administrator Criswell, thank you for being here today. We
have more work to do. My office will be delivering a letter to
you and your senior staff by the close of business today
documenting specific urgent requests to FEMA on behalf of my
constituency who has been suffering for over a year from
Hurricanes Laura and Delta. I would like your personal
commitment, ma'am, that you will receive our letter and be
involved. You have been very gracious today and professional,
and I thank you for that. So I'm going to lean on you for a
commitment to personal involvement in the letter that we
deliver today.
And, finally, regarding rural areas and small towns, I beg
of you, madam, to let's make sure that our small towns, rural
areas, poor communities get adequate attention and
compassionate response, that they don't get left behind. Can I
get your commitment on receiving our letter documenting
specific requests, urgent requests? And can I get a commitment
that our rural areas and poor communities don't get overlooked
and left behind?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman Higgins, you have my commitment
to be personally involved in that response to your letter. And
I would like to thank you and Congressman Carter for your
leadership in supporting the people that have been impacted by
these recent events in Louisiana.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, ma'am.
And to my colleague, Representative Carter, he's been an
amazing complement to the Louisiana delegation. I commend him
for the work that he does and continues to do. He had big shoes
to fill with our friend and colleague, Congressman Richmond,
who is now in the White House as a senior advisor. We are
Louisiana strong in Congress and in the White House, so we are
joined together.
Madam Chair, thank you for your gracious allowances of time
during this hearing.
Thank you very much, madam. I yield.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman yields back.
And I now recognize myself.
In closing, I want to thank Administrator Criswell for
testifying today, and thank you and all of the FEMA employees
who are working tirelessly to respond to disasters around the
country and really visiting the sites personally to oversee and
help.
I want to emphasize that survivors of Hurricane Ida, as
well as previous disasters, still need help. They need to know
how to apply for financial assistance. They need clear
information about what qualifies for assistance, and they need
quick processing of their responses.
Administrator, I appreciate the commitment that you made
today to work with all communities to update their flood maps
so that they can be more accurate with community input.
I also think it's important to emphasize your testimony
that communities can apply for FEMA grant money to invest in
mitigation even when they are in an area that has not been
declared a disaster.
As we heard from you today, Administrator, we need to
invest in climate and resilient infrastructure, ensuring that
we are investing in frontline communities who are
disproportionately impacted by severe weather.
I urge all of my colleagues to support the Federal Agency
Climate Prep Act, the bill I introduced today that would ensure
that the Federal Government has a comprehensive plan to tackle
climate change, coordinated by the White House, and in
partnership with local communities.
I also call on my colleagues to support the Build Back
Better Act, which would make critical investments to upgrade
our infrastructure so that we can be better prepared for future
disasters. These investments are critical so that states and
local governments are not left dealing with the immense cost of
recovering from disasters on their own.
In closing, I want to thank all of our panelists for their
remarks, and I want to commend my colleagues for participating.
With that and without objection, all members have five
legislative days within which to submit materials and to submit
additional written questions for the witness to the chair which
will be forwarded to her for her response. I ask our witness to
please respond as promptly as you're able.
This hearing is adjourned. Thank you so much to everyone
who participated. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:16 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
