- EXAMINING NEXT STEPS FOR. U.S. ENGAGEMENT IN AFGHANISTAN

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING NEXT STEPS FOR.
U.S. ENGAGEMENT IN AFGHANISTAN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 20, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-24

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-687 PDF            WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Katie Porter, California             Pete Sessions, Texas
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Andy Biggs, Arizona
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Scott Franklin, Florida
Georgia                          Jake LaTurner, Kansas
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Pat Fallon, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Byron Donalds, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Mike Quigley, Illinois

David Rapallo, Staff Director
Daniel Rebnord, Subcommittee Staff Director
Amy Stratton, Deputy Chief Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on National Security

Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts, Chairman
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin, Ranking
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,          Minority Member
Georgia                          Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Jackie Speier, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 20, 2021.....................................     1

Witness

Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad (Invited), Special Representative for
Afghanistan Reconciliation Department of State
Oral Statement...................................................     4

Written opening statements and statements for the witness are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: docs.house.gov.

Index of Documents

----------

No additional documents were entered into the record during this
hearing.

EXAMINING NEXT STEPS FOR

U.S. ENGAGEMENT IN AFGHANISTAN

----------

Thursday, May 20, 2021

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Subcommittee on National Security
Washington, D.C.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:13 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn Office Building, Hon. Stephen Lynch
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lynch, Johnson, DeSaulnier,
Grothman, Foxx, Gibbs, and Higgins.
Mr. Lynch.[Presiding.] Again, good morning. The hearing
will come to order.
The chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
committee at any time.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good morning, everyone. First, I would like to thank our
special witness, U.S. special representative for Afghan
reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, for joining us once again.
Thank you as well for your service to our country. Your
perspective, especially before this subcommittee, has been
extremely helpful in informing the decisions that members on
this subcommittee have to make, so we are greatly appreciative
of your willingness to help this committee with its work.
Today's hearing will examine President Biden's landmark
decision to withdraw all remaining U.S. military forces,
approximately 3,500 troops, from Afghanistan by September. When
announcing this historic decision last month, President Biden
underscored that the United States has achieved its primary
objective for launching Operation Enduring Freedom in 2001,
``to ensure Afghanistan would not be used as a base from which
to attack our homeland once again.'' I certainly share
President Biden's desire to bring a responsible end to
America's longest war.
Since 2001, more than 2,400 U.S. servicemembers have made
the ultimate sacrifice, and over 20,000 have been wounded in
support of U.S. military operations in Afghanistan. Nearly two
decades of war in Afghanistan have also cost U.S. taxpayers
more than $873 billion, including an estimated $144 billion on
reconstruction costs alone. No matter how thoroughly
considered, however, the withdrawal of U.S. forces from
Afghanistan will come with significant consequences for our
national security, the long-term viability of the Afghan state,
and the future stability of the region, especially in the
absence of any internal Afghan peace agreement. As members of
the Oversight Committee, it is our job to ensure that those
consequences are recognized and those risks are minimized to
the greatest extent possible, while continuing to promote the
responsible stewardship of U.S. taxpayer resources.
For example, during our subcommittee hearing earlier this
Congress with the Afghanistan Study Group, former chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Joe Dunford, and former
Senator Kelly Ayotte from New Hampshire cautioned that without
a U.S. military presence in country, our intelligence and our
quick strike capabilities against al-Qaeda, against the Islamic
state in Khorasan Province, and other terrorist groups will
likely be significantly diminished. Several weeks later,
special inspector general for Afghanistan reconstruction, John
Sopko, testified before this subcommittee that regardless of
our military footprint, the Afghan government will continue to
need substantial U.S. and donor assistance to sustain its
security and defense forces, as well as its fledgling
political, economic, and civic institutions, or risk eventual
collapse.
So, I am encouraged that the Biden Administration has made
clear that, notwithstanding our scheduled withdrawal
militarily, the United States will continue to provide vital
civilian and humanitarian assistance to the Afghan government
and to the Afghan people. Last month, Secretary of State
Anthony Blinken announced that the Biden Administration will
allocate $300 million in additional aid for economic
development, anti-corruption, women's empowerment, and other
essential programs in Afghanistan. However, without a U.S.
security presence on the ground in Afghanistan, it will become
increasingly difficult, but not impossible, for independent
auditors, such as Special Inspector General Sopko and his team,
to conduct oversight of U.S. taxpayer-funded assistance and
development programs in Afghanistan. To that end, the
Administration should begin planning now, not when U.S. forces
have already left, to ensure that proper oversight mechanisms
and safeguards are in place to promote the effective and
responsible use of taxpayer resources in Afghanistan.
Once again, I would like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad
again for testifying before our subcommittee today. With that,
I will now yield to our ranking member, the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, for his opening remarks.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. I would like to thank Chairman
Lynch for holding another hearing on Afghanistan. We had one a
little while ago. On the last hearing, I think you didn't see
me or whatever, and I didn't give a closing statement. I wanted
to point out at the last hearing that I, at least personally,
did not feel it was necessary to leave Afghanistan right away,
and I say that not as someone who was thrilled we went there in
the first place. I was never a George Bush fan of getting
involved in Afghanistan in the first place. But I am worried
about our allies, people who have worked with us in
Afghanistan, as well as future people who, when the United
States gets involved in a mission, do they feel that the United
States is in it for the long haul.
I would like to thank the Ambassador for being here. I know
you are very busy. President Biden announced his intentions to
withdraw by September 11th. I would prefer to see the date not
set for one of such significance and remembrance. Troops began
to withdraw on the first date originally set by the Trump
Administration. In fact, this withdrawal would not be possible
without the leadership from President Trump. Between his
efforts to bring peace to Afghanistan and numerous deals to
normalize relations between the Arab world and Israel,
President Trump's foreign policy was very successful.
But we are here today to discuss America's longest war. For
20 years, the U.S. has had a military presence in Afghanistan,
taking over 100,000 soldiers. We have lost almost 2,500
soldiers, and over 20,000 are injured. We owe these soldiers
our sincerest gratitude. I think there are probably very few
Americans who could not name at least one person they know who
died in Afghanistan. The decision for withdrawal has been
contemplated over three Administrations. President Trump
finally took concrete steps to ensure the withdrawal, and
hopefully we will not have any negative consequences.
He conditioned our withdrawal on the Taliban disavowing al-
Qaeda, the prevention of Afghanistan becoming a safe haven for
terror, and begin working toward a broader peace. President
Biden's troop withdrawal is unconditional, meaning perhaps the
Taliban does not have to do that. We will ask more questions of
that today, but this withdrawal needs to be done safely with
both the interests of the U.S., the Afghan people, and our
allies all being kept in mind.
Our witness is on the front lines of ensuring this happens.
We must prioritize a withdrawal that stifles potential
violence, protects against the vacuum of fear, and maintains
regional stability as well as maintains social gains. We must
ensure social gains made by Afghan women and girls. We must
ensure that Afghanistan and the Taliban are not the next Israel
and Hamas. Through the groundwork laid by President Trump, I
believe this is possible.
After the troops are gone, our job in Congress is not over.
It is likely the American taxpayer will continue to provide
assistance to the Afghan government for years to come. What we
have heard from others, like the special inspector general for
Afghan reconstruction, this assistance must be conditional.
Sometimes the check is mightier than the sword. In a country
plagued by corruption, it is vital taxpayer assistance does not
fall into the hands of terrorists and drug runners. I look
forward to discussing these topics today.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman yields
back. And now I would like to welcome our witness. Today we are
joined by Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, who is the special U.S.
representative for Afghanistan reconciliation at the Department
of State. Ambassador, thank you for appearing before us again
today. We look forward to your testimony.
It is the custom and practice of our committee that our
witnesses be sworn, so could you please stand and raise your
right hand?
Ambassador, do you swear or affirm that the testimony you
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Khalilzad. I do.
Mr. Lynch. Let the record show that the witness has
answered in the affirmative. We thank you, and without
objection, your written statement will be made part of the
record.
With that, Ambassador, you are now recognized for a five-
minute recitation of your oral testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ZALMAY KHALILZAD, SPECIAL
REPRESENTATIVE FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONCILIATION

Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and
distinguished members of the committee. I welcome this
opportunity to brief you about America's strategy in
Afghanistan.
With the President's decision to withdraw the remaining
U.S. forces by September 11th, we are entering a new phase in
our partnership with Afghanistan. Our objectives for this phase
include, one, safely withdraw our remaining forces, leaving
Afghan forces in the best position possible to defend
themselves, and security for Afghans who are at risk because
they worked with us; two, promote a political settlement and
oppose the imposition of a government by force--we seek a
settlement that protects the rights of all Afghans, including
women, children, and minorities; three, prevent Afghanistan
from becoming a platform for terrorists threatening the United
States or our allies; four, promote regional cooperation,
including connectivity, trade, and economic development to
shift the country to a peacetime mindset, and give the region a
stake in Afghanistan success.
Based on these objectives, we are, one, building
international support for a political settlement that would
have broad support in Afghanistan; two, encouraging unity among
Afghan leaders and the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan side;
three, sustaining military, political, and economic support for
Afghanistan; four, incentivizing the Taliban to reduce
violence, accelerate negotiations for a political settlement,
and agree to a comprehensive and permanent cease-fire; five,
strengthening our cooperation against terrorism with countries
in the region through enhanced monitoring and response
capabilities; and six, promoting economic connectivity, trade,
and development between Central Asia, Afghanistan, and South
Asia.
Mr. Chairman, the Taliban face a fundamental choice between
two very different futures. They can enhance and embrace a
negotiated path to peace, make the transition from a violent
insurgency to a political movement, and be part of a nation
that enjoys respect in the global community. But if they pursue
a military takeover, they will face isolation, regional
opposition, sanctions, and international opposition, and our
allies' support to Afghan security forces will continue.
I want to thank Qatar for hosting the Afghan negotiations.
We are working closely with the United Nations to enhance its
role, which is an important one due to its expertise on matters
such as cease-fires and process design. We welcome the United
Nations, Turkey's, and Qatar's willingness to co-convene high-
level dialog and negotiations in Istanbul. The parties need to
agree to a date as soon as possible, and we expect them to come
prepared with concrete proposals. The opportunities are in
place, the international will to assist is robust, and both
Afghan government leaders and the Taliban need to do their part
to ensure this historic moment is not lost.
Mr. Chairman, Pakistan has an important role to play. We
remain in close touch with Pakistan's leaders, pressing them to
exercise their considerable leverage over the Taliban to reduce
violence and support a negotiated settlement. I believe
Pakistan understands that a protracted war in Afghanistan is
not in its interest. As you know, we have already begun the
process of withdrawing our remaining forces. The withdrawal so
far has taken place without significant incident, and we expect
this to continue. However, we are prepared to respond
forcefully if attacked and have made this very clear.
Mr. Chairman, we are building an international consensus in
support of a political settlement in Afghanistan. We recently
had productive meetings with Russia, China, and Pakistan, and
separately with our European allies, and released powerful
joint statements calling on the two sides to reduce violence
and engage seriously in negotiations, and on the Taliban not to
pursue a spring offensive. All our partners have made clear
that a peaceful Afghan nation, resulting from dialog and
negotiations, and not from force, can count on material
assistance, support, and mutually beneficial relationships.
With the support of Congress, we are committed to maintaining
substantial security assistance through the Afghan Security
Forces Fund. Our NATO allies and partners are likewise
committed to stand with Afghanistan, its people, and its
institutions in promoting security.
We have heard justifiable concerns regarding the safety of
the thousands of Afghans who have worked with our diplomats and
soldiers over the past 20 years. As Secretary Blinken has made
clear, we are working hard to ensure that we have expedited
considerations for those at risk. At the same time, we must not
assume the inevitability of a worst-case outcome. Our goal
should be an Afghanistan in which all the country's people can
live in peace and security. Ideally, Afghans who have acquired
education, skills, and international experience will form the
backbone of a new economy and prosperity for a peaceful
Afghanistan. Strong measures must be taken to ensure that the
value of these individuals is recognized and that retaliatory
acts or formally forsworn. This will be an integral and
essential part of peace talks and of our discussions with the
Taliban. We will continue to advocate preserving the gains for
minorities and for women, including their meaningful
participation in the ongoing negotiations and their
representation in society and politics. This is something I
have worked hard on during my time as Ambassador and in my
capacity, and the significant progress achieved must not be
lost.
The Taliban should also understand that the Afghanistan of
today is very different than it was 20 years ago. We are
reconfiguring our counterterrorism capabilities to ensure our
ability to monitor and address threats emanating from
Afghanistan. We will maintain intelligence collection in the
region, and we will continue to work closely with our Afghan
counterparts. We are developing opportunities for enhanced
cooperation with regional partners who share our concern and
are open to cooperation. We will hold the Taliban accountable
to their commitments to prevent al-Qaeda, and ISIS, or any
other terrorist group from using Afghanistan as a base for
attacks against the United States and our allies.
Please note that the release and safe return home of Mark
Frerichs, who has been held as a hostage since 2020, is very
important to Secretary Blinken and to me. Secretary Blinken has
raised Mark's safe return repeatedly with his counterparts in
the region, and in my meetings with the Taliban, I have
demanded his release. I want to take a moment to acknowledge
the tremendous loss following the recent attacks on a girl's
school near Kabul. This was a deeply shocking incident. It
appears that ISIS was responsible, but, ultimately, it is the
ongoing violence and chaos that makes such attacks possible.
Mr. Chairman, in conclusion, I want to take a moment to
thank all U.S. personnel, military and civilian, for the
sacrifices that they have made to make America more secure from
threats from Afghanistan given what happened on 9/11, and for
making Afghanistan a better place, the progress that has been
made there for transforming Afghanistan, and giving
Afghanistan's leaders a chance for peace negotiations. Now it
is up to the Afghans to seize their opportunities. Our troops
are coming home, and Afghanistan deserves a chance to find its
own way forward with help and encouragement from its friends,
especially the United States.
I look forward to your questions. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. I will now recognize myself five
minutes of questions.
Ambassador Khalilzad, I think in your opening statement,
you have framed the central question very, very well. You posit
that either the Taliban can embrace a negotiated path to peace,
make the transition from a violent insurgency to a political
movement, and be part of a nation that enjoys respect in the
global community, or they can pursue a military takeover and
``face isolation, regional opposition, sanctions, and
international opprobrium.'' That really does present us with
two scenarios that might happen. Unfortunately, the Taliban
have not behaved in a manner that convinces me that they are
inclined to choose the former, and I think much of that is
shaped by the teaching in Deobondi and Madrasas in Northern
Pakistan as well as Southern Afghanistan.
In the lead inspector general for Operation Freedom's
Sentinel's most recent quarterly report, U.S. forces in
Afghanistan reported ``a historic increase in enemy-initiated
attacks since the signing of the U.S.-Taliban agreement.'' And
in addition to the violence that you have noted in your opening
statement, the Defense Intelligence Agency assessed that the
Taliban is likely to use targeted assassinations in Afghanistan
``to create security vacuums in the major cities, discredit the
Afghan government, and highlight the weakness of the Afghan
security apparatus.'' That has been happening as well across
Afghanistan.
Mr. Ambassador, on Tuesday, you testified the Taliban,
``They seek normalcy in terms of relations, acceptability,
removal from sanctions, and not to remain a pariah.'' I
struggle with the duality here. You know, the assurances that
we receive from the Taliban leadership and their negotiating
team in Qatar, and the evidence that we have and the reports we
have from women's groups in Afghanistan, from government
officials on the ground, and that is supported by the reports
of our own personnel who remain on the ground in Afghanistan. I
just have to ask you, what calculus, what evidence has led you
to conclude that the Taliban would prefer to reach a peace
agreement with the Afghan government than what we saw back in
the 90's? They ruled as a pariah in the late 1990's. Why would
they not be prepared to do so again after resisting the United
States for two decades?
Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you, Chairman. That is obviously an
excellent observation. Skepticism is justified. We will have to
see what they do. But what I have said is based on what they
have told me they seek, that they do want to be accepted, to
have normal relations, to receive assistance from the United
States, that their country's needs are great and will continue
to be so. That assistance will be needed, and they do want to
get out of the blacklist. Some of the leaders are on our list
and also on the U.N. list. They have repeated this, and that
they have learned from their mistakes of the past, of the 90's,
that they were not prepared and they made mistakes for which
they have paid a high price, 19 years of war and all the rest.
With regard the commitments they have made, their record so
far is mixed. They have kept, it is important to keep in mind,
many of their commitments, particularly not to attack our
forces after we signed the agreement, and not a single
American, thank goodness, has lost his life or her life since
we signed that agreement. So, we have to be prepared for the
decisions that they make with regard to those choices that they
face. We can't be driven by wishful thinking that they will
make the right choice that we would like, but at the same time,
we shouldn't close the door to that possibility, and confront
them with opportunity costs for them and for Afghanistan if
they make the wrong choice.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. My time has expired. I now recognize
the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, for his questions.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Just to clarify, is that September
11th a hard date, or if things really go south or the Taliban
clearly are not acting within the spirit of the agreement, is
there still wiggle room to extend our presence there?
Mr. Khalilzad. The President has been quite clear that all
our forces will be out of Afghanistan by September 11th.
Mr. Grothman. Even if it is clear that the Taliban have no
desire to----
Mr. Khalilzad. I will not speculate about what ifs, but I
think the President's decision is quite clear.
Mr. Grothman. I believe the Afghan government has some
reputation for graft, and obviously we intend to continue a
financial presence in Afghan. If we are going to continue to
aid the Afghan government, do we have assurances that the
United States would perhaps not be giving money, or be giving a
minimal amount of money, and be buying themselves, reducing the
chance for graft? We wouldn't be going through organizations
like the United Nations, which is hardly a model for, you know,
keeping things. Will the United States do all they can to make
sure we are buying military equipment, what have you, and we
are not transferring money through these international
organizations?
Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you, sir. Of course we would like to
be able to provide assistance. We are determined that we would
like to provide assistance to the Afghans to defend themselves
and to advance our values, including women's and girls' rights,
and assistance is critical in that regard, and our partnership
against terrorism with Afghanistan will also require us to
provide support, but governance has been a problem. In fact,
the problems of governance and Afghanistan's corruption is one
of the challenges, a reason for where we are.
Mr. Grothman. It is. They only give me five minutes here,
so.
Mr. Khalilzad. Oh, sure.
Mr. Grothman. Would we give them money----
Mr. Khalilzad. We will do all that we can to make sure that
the money is spent as intended.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Mr. Khalilzad. And we will have----
Mr. Grothman. So we will not transfer money through a third
organization that might have their own corruption problems, and
we will, insofar as we can, give the Afghan government things,
not cash to buy things. I guess that is what I am looking for.
Mr. Khalilzad. Well, we have some obligation to provide
cash support through institutions that exist, but we pay,
obviously, close attention to the practices----
Mr. Grothman. Yes, we will do that minimally. We do that
minimally. Minimally. I mean, I don't like to give cash to
third party organizations because third party organizations may
have their own graft problems. Will we use them minimally, with
the greatest degree possible, make sure we are giving them
money, and I don't even like giving money, or we will give
whatever supplies or food stuffs or whatever that we have to
give?
Mr. Khalilzad. Just to be clear, Ranking Member, that we do
provide salaries for the Afghan security forces----
Mr. Grothman. Right. Right.
Mr. Khalilzad [continuing]. Through an arrangement that is
managed----
Mr. Grothman. OK. That is fine.
Mr. Khalilzad. But we pay attention as to the money is
spent as appropriated.
Mr. Grothman. Quick question. I don't think the Taliban are
known for being, you know, all that nice. If the Afghanistan
regime would collapse, I assume people who helped us would not
fare that well. How many people do you think would die or what
would happen to people if the Afghan regime fell?
Mr. Khalilzad. Well, it depends on different scenarios, but
the risk to the people who have worked with us has increased.
We are prepared to provide a detailed briefing to you,
classified, on the numbers and what we are planning to do.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I will give you another question. There
has been a lot of emphasis on this committee on making social
improvements in Afghanistan, and, particularly, progress for
women and girls. On the other hand, I think our enemies in the
Taliban and maybe the members of the Afghan government are not
thrilled about that. Does this commitment make it more
difficult for the Afghan government to hang on?
Mr. Khalilzad. Well, the Afghan government is concerned,
legitimately, in the aftermath of the decision that the
President has made, but they respect the decision and would
like to receive assistance and support, which we are prepared
to do. There are several futures----
Mr. Grothman. I know I am over the limit here. Can I ask
one more question----
Mr. Khalilzad. Yes, sir. Sorry.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. Because you are not really
answering my question. I talked to a soldier who was over
there, and his line to me was, ``They hate us.'' I think that
is not across the board, but I am mindful of that. I think as
we push them to treat women and girls more like they do in the
United States, I don't know if that makes it more difficult for
the Afghan government to hang on, and I am afraid that if the
Afghan government falls, a lot of people will die.
Mr. Khalilzad. Right.
Mr. Grothman. OK. So I wondered is there a tradeoff here
between making conditions on the way the girls and women are
treated in Afghan society and the ability of the Afghan
government to hang on.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman's time has expired, but the
gentleman may answer.
Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Briefly, please.
Mr. Khalilzad. Well, I think that the fact of what the
government stands for, that includes respect rights of women
and girls, is the basis also for the support that it is getting
from the population of Afghanistan. There is a difference of
views among Afghans on values as well as on political
philosophy and arrangement, and the Afghans need to come
together on a formula for how, given the differences in values
and beliefs, including on human rights, they can co-exist as
citizens in a single nation. I think that one should not look
at advocating or respecting, advancing the rights of women and
girls as a net negative for the government. In my judgment, it
is a net positive.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for five
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassador Khalilzad, for being here today. When President
Biden announced last month that the U.S. would withdraw all of
its military forces from Afghanistan, the President insisted
that the United States would not ``take our eye off the
terrorist threat,'' and would reorganize our counterterrorism
capabilities ``from over the horizon.'' Last week, acting
assistant secretary of defense for Indo-Pacific security
affairs, David Helvey, testified that the Defense Department
was working with the State Department to ``reposition our
counterterrorism capabilities, including by retaining assets in
the region, to prevent the re-emergence of a terrorist threat
to the U.S. homeland from Afghanistan.'' Mr. Helvey testified
that, thus far, the Administration has not reached an agreement
with regional partners that would provide DOD with the
necessary access basing or overflight to enable the over-the-
horizon capabilities the Administration envisions.
Ambassador, as you talk to Afghanistan's neighbors and our
regional partners about the importance of reaching a peace
agreement in Afghanistan, are you also talking to them about
the need for the U.S. to have these over-the-horizon
capabilities, and has any progress been made on reaching an
agreement with regional partners in order to establish those
capabilities?
Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you, sir. The answer is, yes, I do
discuss with the neighbors the need for enhanced cooperation
for monitoring the situation in Afghanistan with regard to the
future of terror, as well as the ability to strike should that
decision be made to do so, and there is progress. That is all I
can say in this setting.
Mr. Johnson. Given President Biden's deadline for the
withdrawal of U.S. troops being less than four months away, do
you have a timeline for when you expect such an agreement?
Mr. Khalilzad. We have agreement and understandings already
for enhanced monitoring and continued overflights for both
monitoring and if strikes should be needed, and this is a work
in progress. We are confident that although our monitoring
capability will diminish with the full withdrawal of our
forces, and that will also affect our strike capability, but
given this lower level of terrorist threat, that we would be in
a position to monitor and respond adequately when our forces
are out of Afghanistan.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you, sir. Last September, you
told this subcommittee that, ``With regard to terrorism, al-
Qaeda in this setting, what I can say is that the Talibs have
taken some steps, based on the commitment that they have made,
positive steps, but they still have some distance to go.'' Just
recently, the Defense Intelligence Agency reported that, ``al-
Qaeda continues to rely on the Taliban for protection, and the
two groups have reinforced ties over the past decades, likely
making it difficult for an organizational split to occur.'' Mr.
Ambassador, the Taliban was supposed to cut ties with terrorist
organizations, such as al-Qaeda, as part of the February 2020
agreement. Have they done so?
Mr. Khalilzad. Sir, what I can say in this setting is that
they have agreed not to allow terrorist groups, including al-
Qaeda, from using Afghan territory to plot an attack on the
U.S. and coalition countries, and the definition of that has
been not to host, not to allow training, recruitment, or
fundraising by these groups. And what I can say, since my last
briefing to you, there has been further progress by the Talibs
with regard to what I just described, but we are still not
satisfied and are pressing more. I would be happy to provide
greater details in a proper setting.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir, and I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentlewoman from North Carolina, Ms. Foxx, for
five minutes.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassador, for being here today. Ambassador, you know, the
American people are very concerned about the treasure we have
invested in Afghanistan over the years, and what is going to be
the result after we leave, and there are mixed emotions, of
course, about our leaving there. But in his speech announcing
the troop withdrawal, President Biden stated that the U.S. will
continue to support the rights of Afghan women and girls by
maintaining significant humanitarian and development
assistance. And I heard your comments to Representative
Grothman about your saying that the government wants to
continue those, although there are differences of opinion. How
are we going to be able to ensure that any assistance that is
provided will go toward the intended goal and the intended
recipients, because I think people are pretty concerned about
not continuing to waste money. We would like to do humanitarian
work and make life better for women in Afghanistan, for all the
people, but how can we know that the money we are spending is
going to make a difference?
Mr. Khalilzad. Of course that is the obligation of the
executive branch, that the money is spent as intended, and we
intend to maintain a robust embassy and to protect that
embassy, secure it so that we can perform that responsibility,
the oversight of money spent, as intended going forward. So I
understand the concern, I understand that a lot of resources
have been spent, I understand the ambivalence, but given the
alternatives available and the decision of the President, the
choice that he has made, we will continue to advance the values
that you described, ma'am, and will do our best in terms of
oversight. And the rationale that I described for the embassy
is continued operation in Afghanistan.
Ms. Foxx. President Biden also made a commitment to
continue providing support to the government of Afghanistan and
assistance of the national defense and security forces, but we
also know there has been tremendous corruption in that country
among the forces. What level could you put on the pervasiveness
of the corruption within the Afghan security forces? How would
you describe it?
Mr. Khalilzad. I think overall, corruption is a serious
problem. The governance is a serious problem. And, as I said
before, part of the reason for finding ourselves in the
position that we have is because of these problems that we have
not managed and they have not managed to win the war. And we
have got essentially a stalemate, meaning that we don't see a
military solution anymore, and that either we have a long war
or a political settlement. But corruption, in my judgment, will
continue to be an issue, and we need to do our best and that
our resources are made conditional on performance with regard
to corruption, and that is part of an agreement that we have
with the Afghan government.
Ms. Foxx. So our presence is going to continue in
Afghanistan, and so if we are going to continue there, again,
at what level do you expect that presence to be, and how
confident are you that we are going to be able to have some
accountability for the funding that we continue to give them
given the corruption? How are we going to monitor that? That is
what we want to know.
Mr. Khalilzad. Perfectly understandable. It is our
responsibility, and one mechanism, the key mechanism, will be
the embassy. There are other mechanisms for making sure that we
monitor the resources spent on intended goals and projects that
are being approved, that the money is dedicated for, in fact,
are taking place as intended. So it is a challenge. I don't
want to underestimate it, and perhaps it will become more
difficult, but we are committed to following the law and making
sure that the money is spent as intended.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentlewoman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Gibbs, for five
minutes.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Ambassador, for being here today. You know, it is going to be a
difficult thing. We will see how this works to withdraw the
troops. But in your testimony, you talked about economic
development and education, which, of course, is essential to
give people more freedom and protect a struggling democracy.
And even before 9/11 happened, you know, we had a lot of
corruption in the opium trade, and poppy farming, and then the
production of heroin, and I think that has increased
exponentially over the years. And, Ambassador, we talk about,
you know, so much corruption. You know, can you relate to us
about how this illicit drug trade in Afghanistan flows in, and
in trying to do economic development, you know, are there
really good prospects for economic development Afghanistan, or
is it just the drug trade and all the corruption? You know,
what is the outcome here to bring stability and an ideal end
state, as the study group talked about, in Afghanistan?
Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you, sir. Of course, as you said
correctly, narcotics is one big source of income, and there are
not only the Afghans. Farmers probably get a small part of that
income. The traffickers, those who take the opium and turn it
into heroin and then sell it, they make more money, and the
involvement of people in Afghanistan and beyond Afghanistan.
And as long as there is demand, of course, supplies will come.
And one reason Afghanistan, in my view, has become a place
as big as it has become, despite our efforts of the last 20
years, is because one key factor is war, and rule of law is
obviously limited in the condition of war. And we have tried
alternative livelihood, eradication, various other programs,
but the net result hasn't been effective. And one key factor is
in war, the law cannot be applied effectively throughout the
country because of the war, and so----
Mr. Gibbs. Well, let me interrupt you, Ambassador, because
the Taliban, they are really the beneficiaries of the revenue
stream for this drug trade, right?
Mr. Khalilzad. Right. That is one of the sources of income,
sir, for the Talibs, narcotics, also others who benefit from
narcotics, but it is a key source of income for the Talibs as
well.
Mr. Gibbs. On economic development initiatives, what are
some possibilities in Afghanistan for economic development?
What sectors of the economy? What are we looking at?
Manufacturing? Agriculture? What are the possibilities?
Mr. Khalilzad. Well, mining has great potential.
Traditionally, subsistence agriculture has been what
Afghanistan has had. It has land, it has water, but water is
not properly managed, so there is great potential for
alternative livelihood products for which there is demand, and
they could be produced in Afghanistan. And then location could
be an asset. That is what we have been focused on, and that if
there is regional connectivity, which requires peace for it to
happen, then mining, which is potentially a huge resource
should it be developed, and increased agriculture, and the rent
that it could charge as a land bridge between Central Asia----
Mr. Gibbs. Well, I just wanted to highlight----
Mr. Khalilzad [continuing]. And those potential sources.
Mr. Gibbs. I just wanted to highlight that because I think
that you made a key point. Other countries in the region would
have to partners in this and rule of law, and then there is a
possibility of getting capital in there. And that is how you
really end this problem, concern of us pulling out and
Afghanistan becoming a terror safe haven again. And so I think
that is important on the economic side, so I am glad to hear
there are some possibilities and opportunities there if we can
get stability and we get private capital coming in from around
the world, especially our neighbors. That would enhance the
peace prospects.
I thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Lynch. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, for five
minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ambassador, thank you
for appearing before us today. You have a very difficult job,
sir, and we very much respect your efforts. As a spokesman for
the citizens that I serve, we have serious concerns about
continued investment of treasure in Afghanistan because of the
notorious reputation for corruption. We have lost life and limb
for 20 years in a region that has been at war with itself for
9,000 years. I think it is time to bring our troops home. We
should do so in a strategic manner, and what we leave behind
should be a sufficient intelligence apparatus to protect
America from emerging threat that could threaten our homeland
or our allies abroad. Our investment in American treasure for
20 years has been the equivalent of about $8 billion a month.
That as an incredible amount of treasure, and it is time for
Afghanistan to take care of itself. That is my opinion.
I would like to ask you, Mr. Ambassador, you know, we are
talking about the withdrawal of American troops, and many
Americans envision that as a vacuum of tactical operations,
capabilities. Please speak to the capabilities of Afghanistan's
own military assets and the existence of 18,000 or 20,000
private military contractors that remain in Afghanistan. Please
speak to their capabilities and give us your thoughts on that,
please.
Mr. Khalilzad. Thank you very much, sir. Afghanistan has
substantial military and security capabilities that they did
not have 20 years ago, thanks to the taxpayers and the effort
of the U.S. military and contractors. And it has some 300,000
large security forces, very substantial, perhaps one of the
largest special forces of any country in that region, numbering
close to 40,000. It has significant counterterror capabilities.
I believe with continued support in the new context of no
military presence, the Afghan security forces, if politically
led properly, meaning that the political class does not
fragment along ethnic or other lines, should do well in terms
of defending the republic. And so----
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Ambassador----
Mr. Khalilzad. Sure.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. Thank you for your response. In
the interest of time here, let me just state for clarification
that it has been envisioned that the Taliban will become part
of the political process that you referred to. I personally
have zero confidence that there will be success of political
engagement with the Taliban. But let's just say that I am wrong
and those that want continued American treasure post-withdrawal
of American troops, let's say they are right. The Taliban is
making about $40 million a week from heroin. If the Taliban is
part of the political solution, why would they not be part of
the financial solution, and I give you the floor, sir, for the
remainder of my time to respond to that.
Mr. Khalilzad. Without commenting on the number that you
mentioned, I believe that if the Taliban joined the political
process, lived by the rules of the international system,
meaning observe international law and agree to a formula with
fellow Afghans about how they can run their country, that will
be success, in my judgment. If that is achieved, that would be
success for Afghanistan. That will be good for the United
States because that would mean that our security will not be
threatened from Afghanistan, and we would have left a great
legacy behind for Afghanistan's war to end, a worthy legacy
given the sacrifices that you referred to, sir, and the
chairman and others have referred to.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for
your Indulgence. My time has expired.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman yields.
Ambassador, I think that most of the concerns expressed by
the members today have focused on, first of all, the fact that
with the U.S. withdrawal of security forces, we have also
withdrawn 13,000 U.S. contractors that provided the services,
and that infrastructure, those 13,000 contractors, from
security, to healthcare, to food assistance, rule of law, with
the withdrawal of that infrastructure, also the oversight and
the adherence to U.S. contracting laws and the custody of U.S.
resources in the country were protected. Now that we have
removed, or we haven't removed them, but they have decided to
leave since the security forces are leaving, we don't have an
infrastructure there whereby we can be confident that the money
that the Administration continues to send into Afghanistan is
getting to the right people. So that is a major concern.
Even when we had 100,000 troops on the ground with NATO,
and with our allies, and the United Nations, it was extremely
difficult to maintain rule of law and accountability with
respect to the resources that we were putting into Afghanistan
because of the level of corruption there. Do we have a plan B?
You know, this committee and Congress in general has a
responsibility to make sure that we try, to the best we can, to
spend whatever resources the American taxpayer allows us to
contribute to this country, to do so in a responsible way. And
I just don't see the checks and balances and the oversight
capacity, and I have heard this from the special inspector for
Afghan reconstruction, Mr. Sopko. He is very concerned that
without security forces, he cannot get out to these projects to
review them.
We continue to rely upon Afghan or third country nationals
to go out inspect these projects. Members of this committee,
including myself, we have done that in the past on a regular
basis, but I daresay that those opportunities will be few and
far between now that we have no security going in there. When
members of this committee went in, including myself, we had
plenty of military protection when we went into these areas to
do our inspections. That would be fraught with great hazard if
we were to try to do that after September. And so, do we have a
plan B if, one, the Afghan national army is overrun, or, in
combination with the Taliban's insertion to the government, we
lose complete control of the resources that we are contributing
to Afghanistan?
Mr. Khalilzad. Sir, I hear you loud and clear, and I share
the concerns that you have expressed. I have been there as
Ambassador during the early phases, the challenges we faced of
doing development projects with the security environment in
which we had to operate, and over time we developed mechanisms
to do better. But now that a decision has been made, it is
quite recent, and I think you will have to wait to see. I want
to assure you that we are working very hard to think about
alternative futures for Afghanistan and what could happen, and
how we would operate and carry out the mission that the
President and Congress decides for Afghanistan, and how the
mission could be carried out, and how we can spend the
resources of the taxpayers as intended.
And the plan is not finished. I think you obviously are
entitled to receive information and be informed, and we are
committed to doing that. But I just want to remind ourselves
that this is a decision that came only a few weeks ago, and
your state Department people, USAID people, are working hard to
come up with plans. But we hear your concerns loud and clear,
and I personally share them as well.
Mr. Lynch. I thank you for that. And, look, I don't
discount the extreme difficulty that we are faced with here.
There are no good choices.
Mr. Khalilzad. Right.
Mr. Lynch. But we do have an open line of communication
with many of the women----
Mr. Khalilzad. Yes.
Mr. Lynch [continuing]. In Afghanistan, who are in
positions of some power and part of the government. And the
reports that we are getting from them regarding their own
safety, regarding the opportunities for girls in Afghanistan,
are extremely fragile right now. There is great fear in many of
the communities across Afghanistan, but especially in Kabul.
And so, we have got an onslaught of people who are trying to
get out because they are known to have been helpful to the U.S.
government. And so, I am trying to get reassurance that we are
at least acknowledging the dilemma that we face, and that we
are taking every reasonable precaution to prevent the worst of
outcomes from occurring. So, I do want to thank you. I know you
have worked on this for many, many years, and you have been a
stalwart advocate for democracy in Afghanistan, and you have
been outspoken to your own risk in your time in Afghanistan,
and we appreciate the service that you have rendered to our
country.
In closing, again, I want to thank you, Ambassador
Khalilzad, for your testimony here today. I want to commend my
colleagues for their insightful observations and their
important questions. I am sorry. I yield to the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman. I did not see you return. Thank you.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. I would like to thank you for being
here. Just in closing, I think you could tell from my questions
I am also very concerned about what happens here, America's
reputation. People helped us. I think it is simplistic when
people, including some Republicans, just say, let's get out
tomorrow. I wasn't thrilled to get in 20 years ago, but we are
there now. If you need more wiggle room, I am sure there are
Republicans who would not at all be critical of you for taking
advantage of that wiggle room. I am worried if the worst would
happen, the number of people who would die, and if we need more
flexibility and whatever to prevent them from dying, I
certainly understand that.
I strongly hope that insofar as we put money in
Afghanistan, and I suppose we will put a lot of money in there,
that we, you know, keep it on a short leash, you know, don't
send it to any third party organizations that we can't trust
and that. But I would like to thank you for being here, and I
hope you don't feel pressure to, like I said, get out before,
at least the rumors are you don't even have your full team over
there yet, which is understandable. Every new Administration
takes a while. But just remember our people and who helped us,
and remember what would happen if things collapse, and it is
more important to get it done right than get it done quick. So,
thank you much for letting me speak again.
Mr. Lynch. I thank the gentleman. The ranking member yields
back.
With that, and without objection, all members will have
five legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses through the chair, which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response. And, Ambassador,
I would ask you to please respond as promptly as you are able.
Mr. Lynch. This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:18 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
