- [H.A.S.C. No. 116-87] THE MILITARY'S #METOO MOMENT: AN EXAMINATION OF SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PERCEIVED RETALIATION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND AT FORT HOOD

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 116-87]

THE MILITARY'S #METOO MOMENT:

AN EXAMINATION OF SEXUAL ASSAULT

AND PERCEIVED RETALIATION IN

THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND

AT FORT HOOD

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JULY 29, 2020

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
42-963              WASHINGTON : 2021

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

JACKIE SPEIER, California, Chairwoman

SUSAN A. DAVIS, California           TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, Jr.,           LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
California, Vice Chair           PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
DEBRA A. HAALAND, New Mexico         MATT GAETZ, Florida
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia
Hannah Kaufman, Professional Staff Member
Paul Golden, Professional Staff Member
Danielle Steitz, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Kelly, Hon. Trent, a Representative from Mississippi, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.....................     3
Speier, Hon. Jackie, a Representative from California,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.................     1

WITNESSES

Bryant, Melissa A., Grass Roots Movement: Justice for Vanessa,
U.S. Army Veteran..............................................    28
Del Gaudio, Lucy, Grass Roots Movement: Justice for Vanessa, U.S.
Army Veteran...................................................    31
Galbreath, Dr. Nathan W., Deputy Director, Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response Office, U.S. Department of Defense.....     5
Wempe, COL Patrick J., USA, Command Inspector General, United
States Army Forces Command.....................................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Bryant, Melissa A............................................    65
Del Gaudio, Lucy.............................................    76
Galbreath, Dr. Nathan W......................................    50
Speier, Hon. Jackie..........................................    47
Wempe, COL Patrick J.........................................    59

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Texas House Women's Health Committee Letter..................    93
Texas Senate Hispanic Caucus Letter..........................    96

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Bergman..................................................   101
Mr. Crow.....................................................   101
Ms. Sherrill.................................................   101

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Speier...................................................   107
THE MILITARY'S #METOO MOMENT: AN EXAMINATION

OF SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PERCEIVED RETALIATION

IN THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND

AT FORT HOOD

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, July 29, 2020.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jackie Speier
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JACKIE SPEIER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Ms. Speier. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
This is the Military Personnel Subcommittee. I am the
chair, Jackie Speier, and today we are going to have a hearing
entitled, ``#MeToo Moment: An Examination of Sexual Harassment
and Perceived Retaliation in the Department of Defense and at
Fort Hood.''
The hearing will now come to order.
We are here to discuss a pernicious military culture that
time and time again, SAPRO [Sexual Assault Prevention and
Response Office] report after SAPRO report, exposes an
environment that is ripe for sexual harassment, where women are
afraid to report their harassers because of a stigma, fear of
retaliation, ostracism, or worse, fear that they won't be
believed and the harassers won't be held accountable.
By declaring #IAmVanessaGuillen, thousands of service
members and veterans have taken to the streets and social
media, demanding safety and respect, demanding that the rules
of the, quote, ``Old Boys' Club'' and the, quote, ``locker room
talk'' are no longer the price of admission.
Demanding that the sexually explicit language in the motor
pool, in the field, or in the office, stop.
Demanding that the unwelcome stares in the dining facility
and the unyielding sexual propositions, or worse, stop.
In an institution that prides itself in cohesiveness, to
leave no soldier behind, we are failing. These service members
and veterans who have taken to the streets, spurred by the
horrific circumstances surrounding Specialist Vanessa Guillen's
disappearance and murder, raised their voices and laid bare
their stories of sexual harassment and assault in the military.
For too long they have lived and suffered in silence,
silenced by a culture that doesn't trust women, that questions
their competence, that is suspicious of their motives, that
perceives them as weak and unreliable.
But their voices will never again be silenced. When our
service members pledged their lives to defend our Nation, when
their parents, brothers, sisters, loved ones entrust their
child, their sister, their friend to the military, it should be
with the comfort that they will not be sexually harassed,
demeaned, raped, or brutally murdered by one of their own.
Specialist Guillen's death will not be in vain. By now you
know the story. Specialist Guillen was murdered in an arms room
on Fort Hood on April 22nd, 2020. For her family and loved
ones, there is the memory of an outstanding young soldier and
the terrible belief that she had been sexually harassed by
someone in her chain of command.
After Specialist Guillen's sister reported that Specialist
Guillen was sexually harassed but afraid to report for fear of
retaliation, hundreds of current and former military members,
women and men, shared their stories of sexual harassment,
assault, and fears of retaliation under the social media
#IAmVanessaGuillen and #IAmVanessa.
Stories like Trista's, who was in her first week of tech
school when she went to a birthday party for a fellow airman
where she was drugged and sexually assaulted. Trista and her
assailants all received the same punishment, a letter of
reprimand for underage drinking.
Stories like Crystal's, who joined the Navy at age 19. On
her first deployment she was repeatedly catcalled. When Crystal
reported the sexual harassment to a SHARP [Sexual Harassment/
Assault Response and Prevention program] official, she asked
that it be kept confidential. But her request was not honored.
After the SHARP told one of her supervisors, the harassment got
worse and her commander told Crystal that she needed to, quote,
``grow up.''
But the abuse didn't stop and instead it turned physical.
The SHARP official discouraged her from reporting it, saying
that she should ask herself is it worth it. Crystal reported
the assault anyway, but her assailants were given a slap on the
wrist and one was even promoted.
And stories like Tyler's, who was an ordnance Marine and
newly open about his sexuality. A respected staff sergeant
would tease him about it in front of other Marines but also
offered to serve as his mentor.
This mentorship continued until the staff sergeant sexually
assaulted Tyler. Tyler confided in a fellow Marine, who
suggested that Tyler keep his mouth shut about the incident
because he thought the leadership would defend the staff
sergeant while Tyler's career would be cut short.
Tyler took the advice, kept silent and, ultimately,
transferred to the Army.
These stories and the thousands more provided the catalyst
for grass roots movements combating sexual harassment and
assault in the military to spring up across social media.
Rallies and vigils were held in Specialist Guillen's name
to promote awareness and demand reform.
The Coast Guard is outside this committee's jurisdiction,
but the cultural rot is the same. Recently, Sara Faulkner, the
Coast Guard's first female elite rescue swimmer, spoke out
against the extreme hostility and debasing abuse she endured
throughout her distinguished career of some 20 years.
She has also become a rallying cry for other women and men
in the Coast Guard as dozens more have come forward to share
their stories of harassment and assault despite Coast Guard
leadership pressuring them not to speak out or even post
support online for Sara and her colleagues, who were also
interviewed in the McClatchy five-part investigative series
that was printed recently in 29 daily newspapers in 14 States.
Service members everywhere have bravely raised their voices
to demand accountability, to call out their perpetrators and
demand change now. Their voices are a warning to those who deny
the problem, who glorify a culture not of honor, duty, and
respect but a culture imbued with misogyny and reticence to
change.
And this is my warning. Sexual harassment, sexual assault,
retaliation are never acceptable. Find solutions, fix problems,
get out of the way, because, as John Lewis would call us to do,
then get in the way.
We will not continue to lose soldiers, sailors, airmen, and
Marines because of the sexual harassment is one of the ``most
pervasive and degrading facts of military life,'' unquote.
Now, this is a quote from a female service member in a
story in the Washington Post in 1980. That was 40 years ago.
Little has changed in those 40 years except we have thrown a
lot of money at this problem. I estimate it is close to billion
dollars now, and what do we have to show for it?
Well, we are going to explore that today. I have spent 10
years on this issue. I don't take any pride in the numbers
going down or going up because, frankly, not much has changed.
For all that we have done, not much has changed. We haven't
fixed it, and until we get very serious about this, nothing is
going to change.
I want to thank the panels that are here today and we will
be hearing from you shortly. Before we introduce the first
panel, let me introduce Ranking Member Kelly for his opening
remarks.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Speier can be found in the
Appendix on page 47.]

STATEMENT OF HON. TRENT KELLY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSISSIPPI, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chairwoman Speier, and thank you for
holding this important hearing on this important topic today.
Thank you to our panelists today for coming in and sharing
your findings. I think it is vitally important that we
understand completely any positive or negative trends across
DOD [Department of Defense] and down at Fort Hood and I think
both panels today will help us get perspective on that.
Sexual harassment is a scourge across society, rooted in
ignorance and disrespect that has no place in our military.
When young women put up their hand and swear the oath to
protect our Constitution and country, they do it with the
understanding, belief that they protect us and that we will
protect them.
We will protect their dignity, honor their sacrifice,
recognize and defend their professionalism. Sexual harassment,
like any exploitation or maltreatment, undermines that
commitment and dishonors the sacrifices they make for each and
every one of us in this Nation.
When I was a company battalion brigade commander in the
Army, I dealt with sexual harassment in my formations and it
pained me to see all too often young female soldiers
disrespected and sometimes exploited just because of their
gender.
I learned that the only way to counter this insidious
threat was quick and decisive action at every level in the
chain of command and fighting to establish a culture of
intolerance for sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment demeans the service of these victims who
are more professional, capable, and committed than those who
seek to victimize them. And while true that sexual harassment
is a societal problem, that doesn't mean we can accept any
lesser levels of harassment in the military and call it a
victory.
The military is better than that, grounded in common values
that have no place for harassment, disrespect, or exploitation
of other service members or anyone outside of the service, for
that matter.
Any level of sexual harassment is unacceptable. Reporting
may be trending favorably and that is vitally important so
leaders can illuminate and eradicate problems, and prevention
and response may be improving.
But any level of harassment is too much. We need to find
creative ways for educating and empowering leaders at all
levels and our most valuable--vulnerable populations of service
members to shape culture of intolerance and set conditions for
effective prevention and response at all levels.
I am particularly interested in hearing from our panelists
any ideas for how we can make that happen, how we can make
institutional change across DOD because our service members
deserve our full attention and every effort we can muster to
counter the corrosive impact of any level of sexual harassment.
I think it has to be personal. It has to be not in my Army,
not in my Navy, not in my Coast Guard, which we don't have but
it is still--not in my Air Force, not in my Marine Corps.
That has got to permeate through every senior leader, every
senior noncommissioned officer from the sergeant major of each
of those services on down, and we have to make sure that we
won't tolerate it from anyone. Not in my Army. Not in my DOD.
Thank you again to our panelists. I look forward to a
productive discussion today.
Thanks again, Chairwoman Speier, for calling this hearing,
and with that, I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
Each witness will have the opportunity to present his or
her testimony and each member will have an opportunity to
question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
We respectfully ask the witnesses to summarize their
testimony in 5 minutes or less. Your written comments and
statements will be made part of the hearing record.
I ask unanimous consent that non-subcommittee members be
allowed to participate and ask questions after the subcommittee
members have had the opportunity to ask questions.
Without objection, so ordered.
There are also Members of the House who are here who are
not members of the Armed Services Committee. I would ask that
they too have the opportunity to ask questions after the
subcommittee members.
Without objection, so ordered.
Let me now welcome our first panel. Dr. Nate Galbreath, the
Deputy Director of Sexual Assault Prevention and Response
Office, SAPRO, at the U.S. Department of Defense.
And we will then hear from Colonel Patrick Wempe--excuse
me, Wempe--Command Inspector General, U.S. Armed Forces
Command, FORSCOM.
Thank you very much. You may begin.

STATEMENT OF DR. NATHAN W. GALBREATH, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, SEXUAL
ASSAULT PREVENTION AND RESPONSE OFFICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Dr. Galbreath. Madam Chair Speier, Ranking Member Kelly,
members of the subcommittee and other Members, good morning. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today.
For the last three decades, I have committed my life to
supporting and caring for child victims and adult victims of
violent crime. Since 2007, my efforts have focused on
prevention and response to sexual assault.
I wish that circumstances were different and that we were
not here to discuss the loss of a service member, a soldier, a
daughter.
Even with my 30 years investigating violent crime,
supporting victims, and counseling the wounded, nothing
prepares one for situations like this. The murder of Specialist
Vanessa Guillen has touched us all in some way.
But no one feels the loss more than her family. I can only
hope that the groundswell of support and love and compassion
and even inspiration that has come from--about in the last few
weeks in Vanessa's name can bring some comfort for those that
loved and knew her.
Nadie deberia sufrir lo que esta familia ha sufrido.
Which, for the record, means that no one should suffer what
this family has suffered.
My organization, the Department of Defense Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response Office, or SAPRO, establishes policy
and conducts oversight on efforts to assist victims of sexual
assault, encourage greater reporting, empower survivors to
recover, and prevent the crime.
While harassment policy, criminal investigation, and the
military justice system fall outside my portfolio, we are
keenly aware of how these issues play a critical role in our
work to prevent and respond to sexual assault and to allow
those who choose to make a report to do so without fear of
retaliation.
Although more work remains, many of our efforts have
resulted in certain progress. As many of you know, the
Department has two key metrics in the sexual assault program.
First, estimated prevalence, or how often the crime occurs,
is a number we want to go down. And second, the number of
reports we want to go up, which means that more victims are
coming forward to connect with care and support services as
well as aid our efforts to hold offenders appropriately
accountable.
The data tells us that the estimated prevalence rates of
sexual assault in the Department of Defense have decreased by
over a third in the past 14 years and reporting of sexual
assault is 4 times what it was in 2006.
However, in our most recent Active Duty survey in 2018 we
saw an increase in the prevalence of sexual assault for women.
In addition, in that year, about 24 percent of women and 6
percent of men on Active Duty indicated experiencing behavior
consistent with sexual harassment in the year before being
surveyed.
We know we must do more. Fear of retaliation complicates
and degrades our efforts to encourage greater reporting of
misconduct and connects service members with restorative care.
While not all behaviors perceived to be retaliatory by
someone constitute retaliation that is actionable, all
behaviors, actionable or not, gravely undermine our efforts in
this space and are incongruent with our expectations for
dignity and respect.
To be blunt, such behaviors are absolutely unacceptable and
have no place in a military that is striving for greater
dignity, respect, and inclusion for all.
In sum, achieving and sustaining progress requires
continuous institutional examination, reflection, and
evolution. We acknowledge the gap between where we are now and
where the Department desires to be.
We are committed to working towards lasting impactful
cultural change. Again, thank you for your commitment and
support to the men and women who serve our Nation and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Galbreath can be found in
the Appendix on page 50.]
Ms. Speier. Colonel Wempe.

STATEMENT OF COL PATRICK J. WEMPE, USA, COMMAND INSPECTOR
GENERAL, UNITED STATES ARMY FORCES COMMAND

Colonel Wempe. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Kelly, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, good morning.
As the Inspector General for Army Forces Command, or
FORSCOM, I appreciate the invitation to share information and
insights from our inspection of the SHARP program and command
climate conducted at Fort Hood, Texas, from June 29th to July
3rd, 2020.
Let me begin by expressing my sincerest condolences to the
Guillen family. As a soldier and as a father, I cannot fathom
the acute sorrow and grief that they are feeling over the loss
of their daughter and their sister.
What happened to Vanessa is tragic and should never happen
to a daughter, a sister, or to a soldier. You have my profound
sympathy.
Our IG [inspector general] team serves as the eyes and ears
of our commanding general, General Michael Garrett. To meet
these expectations, we interact with members of the FORSCOM
community in a variety of ways, at all levels, and on myriad
topics.
In our role as inspectors, we look at our organizations and
programs to assess them against existing guidance. We also
assess organizational climate to identify trends and systemic
factors affecting our units and our people.
Our assessments inform FORSCOM leader actions and decision
making. On June 27th, 2020, General Garrett directed me to lead
an inspection of the SHARP program and command climate at Fort
Hood.
General Garrett's intent was consistent with this type of
short notice inspection to as quickly and accurately as
possible identify any critical issues, to help Fort Hood
leaders understand the strengths and weaknesses of their SHARP
program and the institutional environment--excuse me,
installation environment--and to recommend specific actions to
make improvements.
Six personnel from the FORSCOM IG conducted the inspection,
augmented by a SHARP trainer and a special victim counsel from
18th Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg.
Our inspection methodology included a written survey of
over 225 soldiers from 12 battalions and 6 brigades. We
conducted 14 small group sensing sessions and command team
interviews with 4 battalions in 2 brigades, gathering inputs
from nearly 200 soldiers and leaders.
Additionally, we conducted 16 sessions with our program
personnel from company to corps level. In all, we had touch
points with nearly 450 personnel from across Fort Hood.
Our inspection was not able to fully incorporate Specialist
Guillen's unit, the 3rd Cavalry Regiment [3CR]. We were
scheduled to complete the inspection of the unit on July 1st.
However, the tragic developments in the Specialist Guillen case
the evening prior and very early that morning caused us to
reconsider our plan.
I advised, and General Garrett concurred, that due to those
developments' impacts on the soldiers of the 3CR, we should not
complete the inspection of the unit at that time.
Though we believe our findings reflect the SHARP program
and command climate across Fort Hood, we acknowledge that
conditions within the 3CR could differ somewhat from those
observed for the rest of the post.
Therefore, General Garrett directed that our team return to
Fort Hood on July 27th and 28th to complete our inspection of
the 3CR. Our team, led this time by my deputy and our IG
sergeant major, is returning from Fort Hood today and will
continue the analysis of the collected data upon their return.
At Fort Hood, we observed the SHARP program needing to
improve in certain areas but one which units generally execute
the standard.
We observed consistent demonstration of program knowledge
and awareness of reporting procedures. Importantly, most
soldiers said they would report if sexually harassed. Most
would report if sexually assaulted and nearly all said that
leaders take reports of sexual harassment and assaults
seriously.
Our team did identify areas needing improvement. A few
soldiers indicated a hesitancy to report SHARP incidents for
several disparate reasons.
Some soldiers expressed the junior leaders in particular
lacked the practical experience to respond to a sexual
harassment or assault incident. Extended hiring timelines for
new SHARP program personnel can result in episodically unfilled
positions.
Finally, some soldiers indicated that the SHARP training
they receive is repetitious and unimaginative. Our team made
several recommendations to improve the SHARP program and
reinforce soldiers' trust in the process and in the chain of
command. Fort Hood leaders were receptive and committed to
making the necessary changes to address identified shortfalls.
In conclusion, no single inspection can be definitive. We
believe our inspection results provide an accurate assessment
of the SHARP program and climate at Fort Hood.
While differences may exist in individual units, Fort Hood,
overall, is meeting the standards prescribed by Army
regulations and policies, and the FORSCOM team is committed to
improvements.
Again, I appreciate the subcommittee's invitation to appear
today and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Colonel Wempe can be found in
the Appendix on page 59.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Colonel.
I yield myself 5 minutes.
Dr. Galbreath, we have spent many, many hours together over
the last 8 or 10 years. I have a great deal of respect for you.
I am deeply troubled, however, by the statement you made in
your prepared remarks in which you said estimated prevalence
rates of sexual assault in the Department of Defense have
decreased by over one-third in the past 14 years.
So I pulled the figures. In fiscal year 2002, for service
women the prevalence rate was 24 percent. In 2006, the year you
quoted it was 34 percent. In 2010, it was 21 percent. In 2014,
it was 21.4 percent. In 2016, it was 21.4 percent. In 2018, it
was 24.2 percent.
So if you look at the data, it hasn't gotten better. You, I
fear, plucked this high-water mark to make the case that
somehow we are doing better when, in fact, we aren't doing any
better.
Would you like to comment on that?
Dr. Galbreath. Yes, ma'am.
I would agree with you that the rates that you quoted for
sexual harassment have not changed. The data that I was citing
in my prepared statement were for rates of sexual assault over
the past 14 years and we have seen decreases in the prevalence
of those.
But you are absolutely right, there is no decrease in the
prevalence of sexual harassment that we have seen sustained
over time.
Ms. Speier. And you are saying if I went back to look at
the sexual assault data, we are going to see--we are not going
to see a similar listing of data that it has dramatically
decreased?
Dr. Galbreath. It has decreased, ma'am. Yes.
Ms. Speier. All right. I am going to look that up and we
will----
Dr. Galbreath. Yes, please.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. Before the hearing is over we will
get back to it.
So the inspection at Fort Hood found that survey
respondents did not trust their immediate supervisors to handle
a sexual harassment or sexual assault incident.
Junior supervisors also reported that they themselves did
not feel equipped to handle an incident, despite training. Your
report also indicates that we need to create a focus on this.
What do we need to do?
Dr. Galbreath. Everyone has to understand the message that
sexual assault, sexual harassment aren't tolerated. But it's
more than that.
We are not born with the skills to necessarily understand
what is acceptable and what is not acceptable when we deal with
people on an everyday basis. Leaders aren't necessarily born
with these skills and followers aren't necessarily born with
these skills to be able to confront people productively but yet
have rational discussions about what is offensive to them. We
bring people in from the service from a wide variety of
backgrounds.
So for that purpose, leaders absolutely need the tools to
be able to detect what problems that they have in their units,
and through that we have been revising our climate surveys to
help them really identify those topics that are challenging for
leaders and to move the needle.
In addition to that, our junior supervisors, our newest
people who see our folks at greatest risk for sexual assault
and sexual harassment every day, they also need those skills to
be able to understand what sexual harassment looks like, how to
shut it down, and how to encourage everyone to participate in a
unit that is at--then grow respect and dignity and inclusion.
In addition to that, we have to----
Ms. Speier. Actually, Doctor, I am going to have to----
Dr. Galbreath. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. Leave it there because I would
like to ask a question of Colonel Wempe.
Colonel, we talked last night and you indicated to me that
you had these listening sessions and talked to over 223 service
members. Is that correct?
Colonel Wempe. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. And the service members were mixed in terms of
gender, correct?
Colonel Wempe. That is correct, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. So as we said last night, to get a real fulsome
evaluation would require separating out the women so they could
talk with a sense of ability to talk freely without having it
create retaliatory actions.
So you recognize that that might have been a better
purpose, a better way of handling it?
Colonel Wempe. Madam Chair, I certainly acknowledge the
point. What gave us confidence that we were getting good inputs
from all soldiers in those sensing sessions was the very good
alignment with the results we got from the anonymous surveys,
which were entirely anonymous.
And so the results were consistent on trusting the chain of
command and willingness to report between the anonymous surveys
and the information that we were hearing soldiers in sensing
sessions.
And so I absolutely acknowledge the point of the value of
the gender-specific sensing sessions. In this case, there was
good correlation between the subjective information we got and
the survey information.
Ms. Speier. Well, you also said that 18 of the 52 women
surveyed--more than a third--reported being sexually harassed.
But why doesn't your data report include the data on any
gender-specific way so that we can look at how female soldiers
feel as compared to male soldiers?
Colonel Wempe. The inspection report that we provided was
actually provided to General Garrett, which is our norm. We
provide it to our commander, who directs us to do the
inspections.
And in this case, the inspection was really focused on the
broader climate at Fort Hood and their execution of the SHARP
program at Fort Hood, and we needed to provide him some answers
fairly quickly so he would know if there was an immediate
problem that needed to be addressed immediately at Fort Hood.
And so our inspection report really focused on the major
points that we thought were important--the level of trust in
their leadership, which was high--94 percent, based on the
survey--willingness to report, which, although still not 100
percent and we still have challenges there, the willingness to
report both assault and harassment incidents was also high, 86
percent and 87 percent, respectively.
And so based on the survey we did and the subjective
information and anecdotal information that we got from soldiers
that we talked to them, we felt that that, for the purposes of
this inspection, that immediate initial look at Fort Hood and
their program, we felt that that answered the immediate
questions that needed to be answered. We don't necessarily
promote our inspection report as the definitive answer at Fort
Hood----
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you, Colonel. My time has
expired.
Ranking Member Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you again, Chairwoman Speier.
I want to talk just a little bit--it sounds like that there
is a lot of confidence at Fort Hood in leaders who are at the
company and higher level and that the--any amount of
dissatisfaction is with those at the lieutenant platoon level
or at squad level or at some lower level--the junior leader.
I think it's important for people to understand that in
perspective. A second lieutenant probably has 6 months of
experience in the Army or in the Navy--an ensign, in that case.
But they are coming from a culture, and we like to always
focus on our service academies but I would say that probably 80
percent of our officers are commissioned from services outside
of the academy, if not a greater number, and most of them come
from colleges and universities and ROTC [Reserve Officers'
Training Corps]. There are exceptions. You have some coming
from OCS [Officer Candidate School].
I would also state that most of the issues are with
soldiers who have been in for less than 2 years. So they have
brought a culture with them.
I see our senior leadership--that is General McConville,
General Garrett, who I know and is a superb leader--I see a
much greater focus across DOD from the senior level leadership
where they are no longer giving lip service.
Do you see that, Colonel Wempe or Dr. Galbreath, where our
senior leadership--our senior enlisted leaders--are pushing
down we will not tolerate? Do you see that in application?
Dr. Galbreath. As a matter of fact, I do. I regularly train
individuals in the ranks of O-5 to O-6, E-7 to E-9, and also
senior GS [General Schedule] civilians ranks 13--GS-13 to -15.
And the changes that I have seen over the past 10 years are
substantive, that the fluency, their understanding of the
problem of sexual assault has increased substantially.
They could probably use a little bit more help with sexual
harassment, understanding what to do there. But yes, I have
seen a great change.
Mr. Kelly. Which brings me to my next point. We need to do
a better job of the PMSes--the primary military specialists--or
the colonel who is in charge of our ROTC programs.
We need to do a better job in our selection of drill
instructors or people who are responsible for these young men
and women who come into our service.
I am telling you, we have got to teach it from day one. We
have got to let them know that it will not be tolerated in our
Army. So I just ask that you refocus your efforts because our
problems have changed over time.
I am not saying that they have gone away. They have
changed. They went from the senior leadership endorsing
Tailhook, other examples, to now it's at the junior--the people
coming in bringing their culture with them.
And I will say the only way to eradicate that problem is to
send PMSes to our colleges and universities, which most people
come, is to at basic training our drill instructors who teach
from day one.
That means more women. That means more minorities. That
means in those positions. That used to be looked at if you got
a PMS that was not a good assignment. It may be the end of your
career.
We need to change that dynamic so that when you get a PMS
job it means the senior leadership of the Army trusts you the
most to bring in our most crucial asset, our individuals.
Tell me what you think about that, Colonel Wempe.
Colonel Wempe. Congressman, I will speak to what we saw in
terms of awareness and the focus on the issue. I will speak to
what we saw at Fort Hood during the inspection.
As I mentioned, the trust as expressed to us both through
survey and through the actual discussions, the trust in the
leaders was high.
The awareness and the emphasis on the challenge of SHARP
and the problems that presented, that awareness was very high.
Soldiers were very conversant, very aware of the SHARP program
that processes their opportunities to report and their
mechanisms to report.
So what we took away from that was that there was a
priority on SHARP at Fort Hood. The concern as expressed to us
by soldiers with those junior level leaders as they expressed
it to us was not one of trust per se.
It was that they trusted their leaders to take it seriously
but those junior leaders may not have either the life
experience or the military experience to deal with the
situation as it was presented to them.
And so our recommendation to get at that issue as expressed
to us was really to focus some training on that first line
supervisor or that junior leader, and the DOD initiative sounds
like it is addressing that challenge.
Mr. Kelly. And Colonel Wempe, just very quickly with the
few seconds that I have left, what that means is we have the
greatest NCO [noncommissioned officer] corps in the world.
We are the greatest military in the world because of our
noncommissioned officers, and I can tell you an E6 has adequate
experience and life experiences.
So maybe we need to shift the focus and we need to train
sergeants. We need to train first sergeants, platoon sergeants,
or the equivalent in the Navy. Those guys have the life
experience and they are at the levels where they can impact
that.
They have got to trust their squad leaders, platoon
leaders, and platoon sergeants and on up.
And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
Mrs. Davis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I express as well
as my colleagues condolences to the family of Specialist
Guillen, and others.
You know, I have been working with this as well for many,
many years, and I remember some of the initial work that we did
and especially trying to create what became the special victims
counsel and advocate, and that seemed to be something that, if
nothing else, gave the victims the confidence that there was
somebody there for them, because I think what we heard was they
felt extremely alone. Nobody would listen and they really
didn't believe that anybody cared.
So that made some difference. But we are still struggling,
aren't we? And we were often told, you know, you changed 9, you
know, major laws in regard to this, or 12. Whatever the number
was people told us, you know, wait, sit back. You know, let
us--let this change things. And we are still--we are still at
this.
You know, I remember--and I checked the date again because
it was June 14th of 2013 when General Morrison in Australia
told people, if you have got some sexist problems or issues,
get out and get out now.
And that resonated with us here too because we believed
that maybe the messages are not strong enough from our leaders
and, quite honestly, we didn't hear that, although I have to
say that I had great respect for many of the generals that we
were working with at that time.
But you are citing the junior level folks. So that means we
have got to look at the promotions. You know, what is the
climate under which they were working that they created in
their units.
And I know we have looked at this. We have talked about it.
But somehow or other, that is not getting through. But I also
checked back to see, okay, so what is happening with Australia
today.
Are they doing a lot better than we are? And if you want to
check that article, they are not, actually, and they are
suggesting that the media is still acting on the belief that,
quote, ``boys will be boys'' and that the system is not going
to change very much.
I hope we are better than that. But I worry that as we
continue to come back that is not always the case. I am pleased
that you cited the fact that women are saying that they have
more trust in some of their leaders and leaders that have gone
further in the services, and I have heard that as well,
especially in the Navy, because I have asked it a lot.
But I have always been concerned that somehow when it comes
to promotions that we are not looking at the right things. We
have got to do that. That is very important.
So I wanted to go back and just, very quickly, because I
know my time is running out. Colonel Wempe, are you planning to
go back to Fort Hood and conduct an inspection of Specialist
Guillen's unit, the 3rd Cavalry Regiment, as well? Do we need
to know more about that?
Colonel Wempe. Congresswoman, we actually did send a team
back this week and in the last 2 days they have been inspecting
the 3CR unit--Specialist Guillen's unit--because we weren't
able to inspect it when we were down there the first time in
late June, early July.
I think you can appreciate in this forum, in particular,
IGs operate by fairly strict regulations regarding the
confidentiality that we receive, and we do that to protect
soldiers and protect units because we need them to talk to us
and we have to protect them when they do.
So it wouldn't be appropriate to talk details about 3CR
specifically today, or at least great details. But we did
return and do the inspection the last 2 days.
The initial feedback that I got from our inspection team
led by my deputy, who is a very experienced IG, is that what
they saw within 3CR was very well aligned with what we saw with
the remainder of the post when we were down there the first
time.
Some slight variations in specific--in the way they
answered it, but no significant variances from what we saw, and
just as importantly, they felt like they had very transparent
and honest input from the soldiers in the sensing sessions they
did with them.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you.
My time is almost up. I was going to ask, and I am sure
others will, about the AWOL [absent without leave] process and
some specifics around that because we had concerns about that
at the last hearing.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Bergman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thanks for the
hearing. Thanks for the subject, because the youth of our
country is our future, period.
I would like you to just take this question for the record,
unless you know it right off the top of your head. What
percentage of the age-eligible youth, young people, enlist or
seek to enlist in the military today? What percentage? And if
you don't have it, that is fine. Take it for the record.
Dr. Galbreath. I am sorry, sir. I don't have that.
Mr. Bergman. Good. Take it for the record, and with that, I
yield the rest of my time to Mr. Turner.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Mr. Turner. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
When the story of Vanessa Guillen broke, my heart sank
because, in my community 13 years ago, the story was very
similar. Maria Lauterbach came up missing.
Stories began to circulate of the sexual assault that she
had reported. The accused became the primary suspect and her
body was, ultimately, found in his back yard where he had
murdered her and burned her body.
In this instance, with Vanessa, my heart sank because, once
again, the question arises has the military done anything
wrong. In this instance with Maria Lauterbach, there were
things that really went wrong that we knew needed to be
addressed, and I think our oversight--and Colonel Wempe, it is
so important in this investigation--that we need to look what
has DOD done, what did we know, what were we not doing, and
what did we not do correctly.
It has been my honor to work with Congresswoman Susan Davis
on this issue. As a result of Maria Lauterbach's death I got
involved in this, worked with Susan Davis and others. We gave
victims the ability to do an expedited transfer.
We gave, as Congresswoman Davis was saying, victims their
own counsel and even standing in court so the victims can have
their own legal representation to guide them through this.
We divided up our whole task into three categories.
Prevention--how do we make certain that we lessen sexual
assault and sexual harassment.
Protection--how do we ensure that victims themselves have
the tools that they need.
And then prosecution--ensuring that those who perpetrate
these crimes are held accountable.
Now, surely, we can tell that we are falling short.
Dr. Galbreath, I have one question for you to start, and
that is I fear that when we make it a gender issue that we
actually lessen the overall impact of sexual assault on men in
the military.
Now, you gave the percentages and it is my understanding,
Dr. Galbreath, that actually more men are assaulted than women.
Dr. Galbreath. Sir, that is--that was the case up through
2016. 2018 was the first year that we saw fewer men sexually
assaulted, as far as numbers go, than women.
Mr. Turner. What I find interesting about the percentages
and the extent is that when we talk about afraid to report,
there is afraid to report in the system and retaliation.
Then there is also cultural. And so what are we doing to
address this issue of assuring that people will be--feel that
they can come forward? When Congresswoman Davis and I were at
the Marine Commandant's residence, he was telling us what he
was doing on sexual assault.
But there was an officer--female--at the table who, during
the discussion, said she herself would feel afraid to report.
And that, of course, means that everybody is a victim, right.
Even if you are not a victim of sexual assault but if you
believe that if you are assaulted that you--that it is not
worth it to come forward, that you are still a victim of the
system.
Dr. Galbreath, tell me what you are doing in this regard?
Dr. Galbreath. Absolutely. We are making it very clear from
the very highest levels of leadership on down that encouraging
people to come forward and report is much more than just
saying, make a report.
We have to have systems that protect the confidentiality of
people and with restricted reporting that is something that we
did that actually brings in many, many more people than we
ever--than we ever recognized would come in to make a report
just by offering them that confidential ability.
In addition to that, we have to have highly trained people
that when people do walk in the door, they are heard, they are
respected, and they are assisted in the way that they want to.
And then we have to have services that appeal to people,
that really do make a difference in their lives.
Mr. Turner. With respect to harassment and the increase in
reporting, as we try to shift our culture, wouldn't we want
more reporting?
Wouldn't we want people to be more critical of the
environment that they are working in so that we have the
ability for intervention because harassment can so easily
translate into encouraging an environment that permits sexual
assault?
Dr. Galbreath. Yes, sir. The policies that we put in place
for sexual assault in 2006 quadrupled the number of service
members that make a report every year now.
That being said, we could do the same for sexual
harassment.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. I thank the gentleman.
I really think that being accurate is really important on
this issue. So I have had the staff give me the stats on sexual
assault in the military since 2006.
In 2006, it was 6.8 percent for women. In 2010, it was 4.4
percent. In 2012, it was 6.1 percent. In 2014, it was 4.9
percent. In 2016, it was 4.3 percent. In 2018, it was 6.2
percent.
So it was 6.8 percent in 2006. It was 6.2 percent in 2018.
That is not a third less. If what you are doing is combining
women and men in the military to get that reduction of one-
third, I don't think that is fair.
Now, for men it went from 1.8 percent to .7 of a percent
from 2006 to 2018. I think it is really important to be
accurate and fair and not let the stats twist the truth.
With that, Mr. Cisneros, you are next.
Mr. Cisneros. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank our panel
for being here today.
I, too, was very disturbed by Vanessa Guillen's death,
having lost a sister at a young age as well. It is something
that is devastating for a family, and with that, I will get
right to my questions.
Reportedly, for sexual assault and sexual harassment, the
number of court martials and NJPs [non-judicial punishments]
stayed about steady for 2018 and 2019 while the numbers of
administrative actions rose, indicating, in some instances,
commanders were choosing to either slap perpetrators on the
wrist or unload them from the service rather than take
appropriate disciplinary action.
What can we do to ensure that commanders are properly
investigating and responding to sexual assault and sexual
harassment allegations?
Dr. Galbreath. Sir, for sexual assault, no commanders are
allowed to investigate that crime. All allegations of sexual
assault are required to be provided to the military criminal
investigative organizations--OSI [Office of Special
Investigations], CID [Army Criminal Investigation Command], and
NCIS [Naval Criminal Investigative Service]--and that has been
the Department's policy since about 2006.
For sexual harassment, when formal reports are made you are
correct that investigations are conducted at the command level.
I think the best thing that has happened with that, though,
is to get--to ensure that the general court martial convening
authority over that individual command is notified of that
formal harassment complaint, which means that it is in the
light of day and other people's eyes are on it than just the
command.
Mr. Cisneros. So reports that are restricted where
survivors confidentially disclose an assault without stating--
without starting an official investigation saw a 17 percent
increase from last year with 2,126 reports.
Do you feel that the increase in restricted reports
demonstrates a lack of faith in the chain of command?
Dr. Galbreath. Actually, sir, I believe it's the exact
opposite. Our restricted reporters come forward because they
see it as a viable way to protect their confidentiality, and as
a matter of fact, we believe that any report is a good report
from the standpoint of allowing our service members to get the
care and the help that they need.
Mr. Cisneros. So if they had faith in the chain of command,
why wouldn't they make an official report?
Dr. Galbreath. Sir, our policy recognizes that reporting a
sexual assault is a deeply personal decision, and so we empower
everyone to make the decision that is right for them.
We have got to respect that some--for some people making a
report will never be right. But for others, we give them every
opportunity to come forward and, in addition to that, as a
restricted reporter you have the opportunity to convert your
report to unrestricted and participate. About a quarter of
people do that every year.
In addition to that, we have also employed the Catch a
Serial Offender Program for restricted reporters, which allows
them to submit the name of their offender into a system and if
there is a match then we contact them back and see if they
would like to participate in the justice system.
Mr. Cisneros. So sexual assault appears to be more
prevalent among junior service members relatively new to the
military.
So what preventive efforts are in place to prepare leaders
at all levels to better reach our youngest service members who
are most at risk? And I believe that is part of what Colonel
Wempe was talking about. But how are we reaching our young
junior personnel who are new to the military and to let them
know that this is not acceptable?
Dr. Galbreath. Absolutely.
Sir, we have a variety of ways that we go after this issue.
At first--first of all, within 14 days of you joining the
military, you are informed about the sexual assault prevention
response program. That is at basic training.
Then when you go to your advanced school you get additional
information about what is acceptable and what is not as far as
behavior goes.
In addition to that, we have taken a number of different
efforts since May of 2019 to ensure that our junior leaders and
our first-line supervisors will have the skill to be able to
address this behavior when they see it and shut it down.
In addition to that, we are also providing commanders with
new revised climate surveys that allow them to detect and then
take action on challenges within their unit to protect those
folks that are junior.
Mr. Cisneros. So is this training provided on an annual
basis while they are at the commands?
Dr. Galbreath. There is annual training, yes. Basic
training is not annual. It is when you first come in.
Mr. Cisneros. Well, I know. But it is why I am asking is
there a refresher training done every year?
Dr. Galbreath. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cisneros. All right.
So, look, we heard from Vanessa Guillen's family. We hear
from so many other individuals that she came forward and told
her family members, who she trusted, that she was being
sexually assaulted and didn't feel comfortable reporting that
to her chain of command, and that is not uncommon and we have
heard that so many times here. We need to do something to
change that.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Speier. I thank the gentleman.
I, too, share your reluctance in embracing restricted
reporting. I think it sends a message to the soldiers: don't
rock the boat.
Let us just give you the health care you need and let us
move forward. Let us just put this behind us. So I really am
not a fan of it, but it is in the system today.
I now yield 5 minutes to Ms. Escobar.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for another
hearing about this issue. Thank you for your continued
leadership and your partnership. I am very, very grateful for
it.
To our witnesses in our panel, thank you for being here.
All of us have been shocked and horrified about the news of
Vanessa Guillen and, once again, my sincerest condolences to
her family.
Briefly, Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record two letters from the Texas legislature calling on
the U.S. Congress to investigate Specialist Vanessa Guillen's
tragic disappearance and produce findings with utmost
transparency: the first from the Texas House Women's Health
Caucus, the second from the Texas Senate Hispanic Caucus.
Ms. Speier. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information can be found in the Appendix beginning on
page 93.]
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Madam Chair. I, too, have called on
Congress for an investigation, along with our chairwoman.
Gentleman, right after--as the chairwoman mentioned, right
after the discovery of Vanessa Guillen's murder and as the
brutal details became public, you saw women all over the
country talking about their experiences on social media and on
Zoom conversations.
I had my own conversations at home, and one of--really,
there is an alarming component of the conversation that I had
with one soldier. She talked about the incredible frustration
that she and her colleagues have in knowing that sexual
assaults are not either fully investigated or there is not--
they feel that there is not justice attached to those
investigations.
And so she said, why bother reporting sexual harassment if
the results with regard to sexual assault are so terrible, and
she said, in fact that--she has been deployed and she said that
she knew that there was, basically, a war outside the wire that
she was prepared for but there was one inside the wire she was
not prepared for, just for context.
So, Colonel Wempe, I want to ask you specifically, the
FORSCOM IG report indicates that most soldiers responded that
they would report assaults, that 86 percent would report
assaults.
However, the same investigation shows that just 50 percent
of those who were assaulted in the last year actually reported
it.
I didn't see that your recommendation addressed this issue.
Why not? And also, how should DOD and SHARP address this
disparity?
Colonel Wempe. Congresswoman, if I could just make a point
to clarify. What we did was an inspection rather than an
investigation, which in the IG realm are two distinctly
different things.
So for the inspection that we did, it did indicate that
only 50 percent of those that had been assaulted reported but,
yet, 86 percent indicated that if they were reported--if they
were assaulted they would report.
And the--I think the statistic is a little bit misleading
because it was such a small sample size for those that had been
assaulted. There were four of that survey group that had been
assaulted and two of those had reported.
So it was a very small sample size, and because it was an
anonymous survey we weren't able to dig into those cases
specifically as to why or why not they didn't report.
More broadly, and I think it is a very important that even
though 86 percent in the case of sexual assault indicated that
they would report and 87 percent indicated that they had
reported if they had been a victim, and so we make some
assessments based on that.
That in no way discredits the story for the experience of
an individual soldier because we know the incidents occur and
we know that not everybody reports.
So even though our assessments indicate the propensity to
report is very high, that in no way detracts from those that
choose not to report for whatever reason.
In terms of that difference between a very high level of
trust in command but a still high but lesser level of those
willing to report, either harassment or assault, in the sensing
sessions we really tried to understand why that was, why there
would be that disparity between the trust level and willingness
to report.
And what we found--what soldiers told us, it broke down
into a number of different reasons. Deeply personal decision
that is being made by somebody who has experienced a
significant event, and there wasn't any one reason of those
that stood out to us as to why they would not report that they
had experienced an incident.
Ms. Escobar. Colonel, just super quickly, have any of the
recommendations you made been adopted?
Colonel Wempe. We had, Congresswoman. They are doing
planning down there already in terms of how to implement
particularly some of the training recommendations that we made.
Additionally, some of the other programmatic
recommendations that we made about the processing of new SHARP
program personnel.
Our team actually looked into that earlier this week while
they were down there for the revisit, and it appears that
they--they didn't see--our team did not see a specific reason
for a backlog in the processing. It was just a process that is
very deliberate and very, very careful about who ultimately
goes into those SHARP program positions.
Ms. Escobar. Colonel, I am out of time. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ms. Escobar.
Ms. Luria, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and I would just
like to start by saying that, you know, I entered the military
in July 1st, 1993, and I feel like in all those years since
then and in the 20 years I served very little has actually
changed in what is happening.
You talk over and over again about the programs you have
implemented. I lived through that. I lived through those
changes, the implementation, all of them.
But I truly feel like we actually have to do something
differently, and I applaud Chairwoman Speier for an effort that
she put into this year's NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act] that Ms. Sherrill and I, also a Naval Academy graduate,
supported and we would like to look at how that type of change
of an independent prosecutor or something in addition to
supplement, to help with this problem with the chain of
command, can help with this situation in the future and
people's ability to report.
And I would like to yield the remainder of my time to Ms.
Sherrill.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you so much, Congresswoman Luria. I
couldn't agree more. It feels like many of the issues that I
heard about in 1990 when I was 18 years old and entered the
Academy we are still talking about today, and I would like to
mention some things.
I am going to have to head down to the floor after this so
I do want to quickly say thank you so much to Ms. Del Gaudio
for coming today. She is a member--she is from my State of New
Jersey.
She has stood up for women throughout New Jersey for many
years now, and now I am proud that she has come to stand for
women throughout the Nation. So thank you so much for coming
today.
Something that Chairwoman Speier said that has me very
concerned is in your finding about 18 of the, roughly, 50 women
reported being sexually harassed. Is that correct?
Colonel Wempe. Yes, that is correct, Congresswoman.
Ms. Sherrill. And you said that the majority of women in
your survey would report this. They self--they told you they
would report sexual harassment. Is that correct?
Colonel Wempe. Yes, that is also correct.
Ms. Sherrill. And so have there been reports from over one-
third of the women on the base that they have been sexually
harassed? Is that what the reporting has told us?
Colonel Wempe. Congresswoman, I would have to take that for
the record. We did not look at the overall reporting
percentages or prevalence at Fort Hood as part of our
inspection. So I would have to take that for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Ms. Sherrill. Could you please take that for the record?
Because it occurs to me that that would be a good way to check
your survey to determine if, in fact, that women are really
feeling free to come forward and I would suggest that if over a
third of the women on Fort Hood are reporting being sexually
harassed that that is certainly a real concern of mine and
something that really has to have further looking into.
I also want to focus on the finding that the SHARP program
at Fort Hood is operating to standard. Was that your finding?
Colonel Wempe. Yes, it was.
Ms. Sherrill. If that is true, it really leads to serious
questions about the usefulness of the Army's standard itself.
Given that if a SHARP program is operating at standard
missed the sexual assault and eventual murder of a soldier at
Fort Hood, the standard is flawed. So what steps are being
taken by the Army to assess that standard itself and what
changes would you recommend?
Colonel Wempe. Congresswoman, our inspection did not look
at the actual policies or regulations themselves. We strictly
looked at the unit's ability and their level of execution
against those standards.
I would have to defer to others in terms of any initiatives
or movements within the Army to change the standard itself.
I do think, however, having said that, that we didn't look
at the specific standards. If the intent of the policies and
regulations is to maintain focus on the topic of SHARP and the
prevention of incidents and the reporting of incidents, what we
saw was a--in the units that we talked to we did see a lot of
awareness of the topic, a lot of engagement and investment in
that topic at all levels of the soldiers that we talked to, and
of an absolute appreciation of the priority that needs to be
placed on it.
We did see that. So, in that respect, I think the intent of
the standards as they pertain to soldiers and how they do SHARP
I think what we saw at Fort Hood indicates that it was having a
very good effect, notwithstanding the effect or the point
that--the broader point that it may not be having the entire
effect that we are looking for.
Ms. Sherrill. I think maybe our measurements of good effect
need to be adjusted, simply, you know, if we are seeing
reporting of over a third of the women being sexually harassed,
if we have a murder that took place on Fort Hood, I have grave,
grave concerns about how we are measuring success in this
instance and I think we are failing, quite frankly.
So my time is up and I yield back. But thank you so much
for your testimony today.
Ms. Speier. I thank the gentlelady.
Colonel, it is true that there is a SHARP program, that
people know about the SHARP program. So you were able to check
those boxes. But you also, I think, in your report indicated
that the--is it the SHARP 360 program? Are you familiar with
that? The one where they have an actual facility there. They
create a bar, a motor pool, and act out.
But that wasn't well known to any of the people that--or
very few of the people that you actually interviewed. Is that
correct?
Colonel Wempe. Yes, that is correct, and we were not aware
of it before we got down there. One of the SHARP program people
that we interviewed on the first day mentioned it. Our team
went and took a look and our team was very impressed with the
platform for SHARP training that that facility provides.
And the few soldiers that had gone through small group
training at that facility spoke very, very well about the
facility. But it is absolutely true it was not well known. Even
the existence at the facility was not well known.
Ms. Speier. All right. And the SHARP program is online, for
the most part?
Colonel Wempe. In terms of the regulations and the
policies, what that requires of the units, yes. Yes, Madam
Chair, it was online from what we saw.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Ms. Haaland, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Haaland. Madam Chair, thank you for convening today's
hearing. As a mother, as an indigenous woman, and as a proud
member of this committee, I am deeply saddened and disturbed to
hear about the loss of Specialist Vanessa Guillen, and I
understand I am not alone in feeling this way. I send my
heartfelt condolences to Gloria and Mayra, Vanessa's mother and
sister, to the men and women in our military communities, and
our witnesses here today who are also grieving and searching
for answers.
I, too, wish that circumstances were different and that
Congress could have done more sooner to address the pervasive
climate of sexual harassment and assault in our military. I
hope today's hearing will lead us down a relentless path toward
swift military justice reforms, from my colleagues saying they
have waited a long time for these things, and protections for
all of our men and women who serve.
Colonel Wempe, I understand the Inspector General's
inspection at Fort Hood concluded the SHARP program is executed
as prescribed and meets Army standards. Yet many military women
have come forward to share their own personal stories of sexual
harassment and of sexual assault. These women have shared
they've been overlooked and silenced.
How do you rectify your findings with the real, lived
experiences of these women? And is there something that's being
overlooked?
Colonel Wempe. Congresswoman, the execution of the program
to standard, sort of the programmatics of the SHARP program,
that was one of the objectives that we looked at. And that was
really focused on: are they doing the training, are they doing
the training consistently, what is the level of awareness of
soldiers of the SHARP program itself? And all of that was very
strong from what we saw with the units that we inspected.
Probably more critical for the question, may be the
objective of our inspection that also looked at climate,
because so much of the climate affects not just whether or not
the incidents happened, but what happens after an incident
happens. And so we put a lot of focus on that objective, the
one of climate. And although it is true that both from the
survey information and the subjective information we got from
talking to soldiers, trust in the leaders to take it seriously
was very high, trust in the willingness to report was also
high, that doesn't preclude the experience of individual
soldiers. And we know that incidents are still occurring. I
mean, common sense says that, our survey indicated that, and
certainly the DOD statistics indicate that.
So we know that incidents are still occurring. We know that
there is work to do, really focusing, I think, on that 16 or 17
percent and why they are not reporting and how we can make it
more comfortable or easier for them to report. I think that's
very important so that we really understand the problem and its
scope better than we do now.
Ms. Haaland. I'm just curious, have you personally read any
of the #MeToo military stories that are out there?
Colonel Wempe. I am not on social media. I have not read
them directly. I certainly read a lot of the press reporting
about those stories that have been on social media.
Ms. Haaland. #MeToo stories are very personal. They are
from the women themselves. And I would encourage you to take a
look at some of those because I think they would be very
informative.
Madam Chair, I yield.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ms. Haaland.
Mr. Crow, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairwoman, for holding this really
important hearing on a critical issue for our military and our
young men and women.
The military goes to great lengths to instill esprit de
corps, to instill culture among its ranks. When I was a young
enlisted soldier, my career started when I was in the enlisted
ranks as a private, I remember going to basic training. And the
amount of time that was spent learning knowledge; you were
given this book and you are told to memorize the Army song,
Army history, the great battles in American history. You
memorize the ranks, the command structure. You know, it's a
reflection of the priorities of the force where you spend your
time--and instruction was broken down by the hour; you know, X
number of hours on marksmanship, X number of hours on physical
fitness--and where we spend our resources.
So, with that in mind, I am concerned that our time and
resources still do not adequately reflect the priority and the
urgency of this issue.
Dr. Galbreath, you said that within 14 days new recruits
are informed about the program. And then when they go to their
advanced training they are provided, quote, ``additional
information'' about the program. So can you shed some
additional light for me as to how many hours of instruction and
how much time is spent for these new recruits, who get their
first exposure to military culture and the priorities of our
force, to instill in them how critical this issue is?
Dr. Galbreath. I don't have that number on me, because this
is a service equity that they all execute just a bit
differently. But it is--once again, there is a substantial
amount of time spent. I just don't know what it is per service.
Mr. Crow. I would think you would want to know that. I
mean, you are one of the top leaders in the program that's
designed to instill accountability into our force. And I
understand that there is some disparities, but this starts from
day one. And, you know, I am dismayed, to say the least, that
you don't know how much time and effort is spent instilling
culture and priorities on our recruits from the first day they
step off that bus, right? Because when you get yelled at by the
drill sergeant, it's a reflection of the priorities of the
force. But we are clearly not doing that with an issue of
critical importance that goes to the esprit de corps, the
values, the culture, and the morality of our military. So I
want, for the record, to get that information from you, and I
want to know that this will remain a priority.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Mr. Crow. Dr. Galbreath, can you tell me how many of the
SHARP representatives throughout the force--I believe, at the
GS level they start at the brigade level--how many of those are
women?
Dr. Galbreath. The vast majority of them are women. I don't
have the exact percentage of what the gender breakdown is.
But----
Mr. Crow. So it's over 50 percent?
Dr. Galbreath. That is my understanding.
Mr. Crow. Okay. ``Vast majority'' is all that you know?
Dr. Galbreath. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Crow. Okay. Again, that is a number I would expect you
to know, because that's important, because that is also a
reflection of the priorities of our force and how we are
allocating our resources. And I would expect, as a leader of
this organization, that you would have that information, that
you would know how many women are out there within our units
actually addressing this issue.
The last question I would like to make is actually
dovetailing on the Ranking Member General Kelly's comments
about the impact of NCOs, because we've talked a lot about the
officer corps and, certainly, you know, the buck stops with the
officers. But the NCOs are critical. I could not agree more
with General Kelly's comment that if you want to know what is
going on in the barracks, if you want to know what is going on
during off-hours on the weekend, it's our sergeants, our NCOs
that know what is going on within the units. And I don't
believe that we are adequately training and equipping the NCO
corps, through the NCO development system and education system,
to lead on this issue.
So, my last statement would actually be a request that we
figure out a way to better equip the NCO corps and use them as
kind of our eyes and ears and tools on the front line to
address this crisis.
So, thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Speier. I thank the gentleman.
Ms. Garcia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you so much
for your leadership on this issue and for agreeing to let me
waive in since I do not serve on this committee. And with that
said, gentlemen, if I get some of the acronyms wrong, please
bear with me, because I am not a member of this committee.
But, Madam Chair, your leadership on this issue has been
consistent, and your support. As the Member who represents the
Guillen family in Houston, I can tell you that they know that
you're there with them and that this committee is supportive,
because not only does the family grieve, Houston grieves, the
Nation grieves. You know, when we see a march in Houston of
3,000 people in the middle of the heat, but we also see marches
across America, about 40 or 50 on one Saturday, this is a topic
that is very, very, very concerning to many, many people.
I am going to pick up where my colleague Representative
Sherrill left off. When were these standards of standard or
criteria for reviews or inspections, when were those developed,
just quickly? The year.
Colonel Wempe. Congresswoman, I believe the DOD level
standard was last updated in May of 2017, I believe.
Ms. Garcia. 2017. So is there a below standard? Above
standard? Or is that the only option?
Colonel Wempe. The policy, both DOD and Army, prescribes
what the requirements are for training and the programmatic
things. That becomes the standard.
Ms. Garcia. I know, but for you to decide whether the
programs are working, is the only option that they meet
standard or not standard? Like, I'm used to performance
reviews. There's above standard, there's below standard, or
needs improvement. I mean, they're either standard or not
standard.
Colonel Wempe. In our methodology, as IGs, because we deal
with so much subjective information as we receive it from
soldiers, our assessment that we make about whether or not it
is meeting the standard is--it includes some empirical
information, but it also includes a lot of subjective
information from the soldiers. And so we just make our
assessment----
Ms. Garcia. So that is the only option?
Colonel Wempe. That is correct, Congresswoman.
Ms. Garcia. Well, because it is disappointing, as
Representative Sherrill said, that if it is standard, that
there would still be about one-third or more that are not
reporting. And then if you look at--especially, I looked at
the--I also don't understand the difference between a formal
complaint and informal complaint on sexual harassment.
Colonel Wempe. In dealing with sexual harassment
specifically, the formal complaint would be one that they would
make to the chain of command or to the--to a--eventually to a
VA [victim advocate], and it would go through the formalized
process of an investigation and then whatever----
Ms. Garcia. Well, tell me about informal.
Colonel Wempe. Informal would be the soldier--for
timeliness purposes, the ideal is the soldier deals with it
immediately and the issue gets remedied immediately.
Ms. Garcia. It wouldn't be that she told her parents? It
wouldn't be that she told her sisters? It wouldn't be that she
told friends on the base? That's informal, in my view.
Colonel Wempe. Informal, in this context from the Army,
would be reaching out to somebody within the unit or within--at
that----
Ms. Garcia. So if she told a member of her unit--and her
unit was not in this survey, correct?
Colonel Wempe. That survey was just completed with her unit
the previous 2 days and the team has returned----
Ms. Garcia. Right. But if she told someone in her unit,
that would be informal?
Colonel Wempe. A victim would have the option of--
regardless of who they told, they would have the option of
making it formal or informal.
Ms. Garcia. Well, sir, it's a very direct question. If she
did share her story with friends in her unit, is that an
informal complaint?
Colonel Wempe. It could be, unless she intended it to be a
formal complaint. She had that option.
Ms. Garcia. Well, we certainly don't know her intent. She
cannot tell us her intent. If she could tell her story, we
probably wouldn't have to have this hearing. But,
unfortunately, she's not with us. So if she told her friends at
the unit, or someone there on the base, is that an informal
complaint?
Colonel Wempe. If she did not express the intent to make it
a formal complaint, then that would fall into the category----
Ms. Garcia. So you are saying that someone would have to go
and say, ``Sheila, you know what, I was sexually assaulted
yesterday but I don't want to make that an informal
complaint''? Someone has to consciously say that they want to
make it an informal complaint? It seems a little----
Colonel Wempe. The victim has the option of either making
it formal or informal. That's their decision.
Ms. Garcia. Right. Well, it's really disturbing to me that
the numbers still don't look good. And when I looked at your--I
guess it is Appendix F of the report, what did catch my eye is
this formal/informal complaint and how it intermixes with your
numbers. Because then you also have anonymous complaints. So I
won't ask you about those, because I'm sure then I'll hear that
the victim had to have some conscious level of saying it was
anonymous.
But I, like Representative Sherrill, think that you all
need to rethink your assessments, something other than just
standard, because, obviously, you know, that doesn't quite meet
today's demands. You know, I don't know what the history is of
how those were developed. But I think, if we are going to look
at making change, that is maybe one of the institutional
changes that we need to make.
Then I want to quickly ask Mr. Galbreath, you mentioned
that, in response to my colleague, that there was a very great
number of women that were SHARP officers or program managers.
Dr. Galbreath. Sexual assault victim advocates.
Ms. Garcia. Right. Are any of those women women of color?
Dr. Galbreath. Yes, they are.
Ms. Garcia. Do we know how many?
Dr. Galbreath. I have 22,000 sexual assault victim
advocates. About 2,500 are full-time members and some of them
are people of color. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Then I want to go back to you, Colonel.
You said that you did an inspection, but it's not an
investigation because you wanted to make sure that we quickly
went in there and saw what's going on at Fort Hood. And you
started July--no, June 23rd? No, July 27th?
Colonel Wempe. We arrived and began work June 29th at Fort
Hood.
Ms. Garcia. June 29th. Now, that's not really in a hurry,
is it? Because she went missing April 22nd. I sent a letter of
inquiry May 23rd. I visited Fort Hood June 23rd. But yet, 4
months later is when you started your inquiry.
Does it usually take that long? Because new reports from
the very, very beginning mentioned sexual harassment. Her
family shared that story from the very, very start. Why did it
take so long for you all to try to go in and look at this
snapshot to see what's going on in case you needed to do
something?
Ms. Speier. All right. Mr. Garcia, we're going to have to
ask for a very short answer because----
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Great. Thank you.
Colonel Wempe. The investigative efforts began immediately.
And we were not part of the investigation by CID, so I can't
really speak to their timeline or their details.
Ms. Garcia. No, sir. I was asking about your response on
sexual harassment.
Colonel Wempe. Our inspection was really to look at the
climate at Ford Hood and some of the concerns that had been
raised.
Ms. Speier. But it was General Garrett that assigned you
that task, correct?
Colonel Wempe. That's correct, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Madam Chair, thank you so very much for
your stupendous leadership and, certainly, the opportunity that
has been given to women members and men members of the United
States Congress to work with you on this extremely important
work.
Thank you to Congresswoman Davis, who has led this effort.
And we have had the opportunity to work with Susan, as well.
I join my neighbor and dear friend, Congresswoman Sylvia
Garcia, who has given stupendous leadership, tragically, to
this issue, and my fellow colleague, Congresswoman Escobar. I,
too, have come on this committee because of the enormous pain
that the whole community, the whole State of Texas, and, of
course, now the Nation, feels about Vanessa.
So, my colleague has pointed and focused on some questions
that I would like to follow up on. But at the same time, I
wanted to make sure that we all saw what kind of vibrant young
soldier that the Nation lost.
This represents a youngster who, in high school, was the
best athlete. There were men who said, ``I can't believe how
athletic, how strong she was.'' Who, the minute she graduated
from high school, on June 9th, she shortly shipped off for
basic training. A true patriot. And a family who came to
America and did all they could for their children. True
contributors to the infrastructure of this Nation.
I think what pains me is that she was missing for 70 days.
And, of course, the gruesome brutality of her murder. And so I
want to focus my deepest sympathy to her family and my
continued partnership, collaboration with Congresswoman Garcia,
and to join on legislation that I think is absolutely
imperative.
So I want to--though you were--I understand Congresswoman
Speier mentioned another general that was engaged, but I just
want to read this sentence into the record, or this paragraph:
``Army officials say Guillen never reported sexual harassment
through official channels. She told her mother near the end
that a sergeant had been harassing her. She told her best
friend that a soldier had walked in on her in the shower.''
That is well known throughout Houston. It is very painful.
``But she wasn't going to file a complaint, she told her
mother. Her superiors would laugh or brush it off if she said
something. She bristled at the idea of quitting the Army. She
would not violate her oath.''
And so we have a real problem. My colleague pursued
informal. This is not a complete system. If you have young
soldiers, male or females, but in this instance saying her
superiors would laugh or brush it off, then did your study
pierce into, as Congressman Crow said, I think he called them
the sergeants or NCOs, did you pierce into, did you try to
understand, to break that culture, did you interview? And out
of that report, did you develop policies that do not go to the
umbrella, the base commander, but get to the individual NCOs?
Because we lost a life because some young soldier so athletic
thought that they would bristle or that they would laugh it
off.
That's the number one question. I want to get this other
one in. I think there was a number that you were able to get
everyone or you thought you reached everyone except 16 or 17
percent. I just need to get that explained. Leaving that number
of people still impacted by sexual harassment means that you've
got thousands of soldiers, because we have millions of soldiers
that may be impacted by the failure of real policies of dealing
with ending sexual harassment.
Then the last question will be, you know, it's trending
upwards, as I understand. What are we doing to get it to stop
trending? But the first question is really how did you assess
or pierce where Vanessa was for her to have relief?
Ms. Speier. All right. Ms. Jackson Lee has 11 seconds. See
if you can fill those.
Colonel Wempe. In the case of our inspection,
Congresswoman, we did ask those questions. Again, trust in the
leadership indicated to us by soldiers was very high. And then
in the sensing sessions and interviews with them we tried to
really bore into why they would not report. And, again, a
variety of reasons, very personal decisions as to why they
wouldn't report. Certainly, concern about how they would be
perceived by others was one of those various reasons that they
indicated they would not report.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to
join with Congressman Crow to say that we need to deal with
these sergeants and NCOs. There has got to be a better culture
for young people in the enlisted men and women.
I thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. I want to thank our two witnesses
for your testimony today. I think it is very important, as we
study this issue, to recognize that Colonel Wempe's
investigation was not scientifically based. And you cannot
extract from that that it is relevant to the entire force. I
think you would agree with that, Dr. Galbreath, correct?
Okay. Thank you very much.
We will now have our second panel come forward.
[Pause.]
Ms. Speier. The hearing will come back to order. I now
welcome our second panel.
Ms. Melissa Bryant, Grass Roots Movement, U.S. Army
veteran. And Ms. Lucy Del Gaudio, who is Grass Roots Movement,
U.S. Army veteran. Thank you both for being here today.
Ms. Bryant, would you like to begin?

STATEMENT OF MELISSA A. BRYANT, GRASS ROOTS MOVEMENT: JUSTICE
FOR VANESSA, U.S. ARMY VETERAN

Ms. Bryant. July 29th, 2000, I was a 20-year-old cadet
stationed at Fort Hood for a few weeks for Cadet Troop Leader
Training as a part of ROTC. At first I was intimidated by the
sheer expanse that was Fort Hood, amazed that you could drive
for miles and miles and still be on post.
I was assigned to a military police unit where there was no
platoon for me to shadow to learn how to be an officer. So I
shadowed the platoon sergeant. I spent time with him and the
other soldiers in the platoon in the arms room, on the range,
in the motor pool, in the post exchange, joking around,
ignoring the occasional overt sexual comments.
I just wanted to fit in. Here I was with a silver disc on
my cap, a clear sign that I was a cadet and even lower than a
private, laughing off comments made about my physique with
junior enlisted soldiers, all because I didn't want to make a
scene. It's not like you can pull rank when you're a cadet.
There were no women officers in the unit and the men, while
nice guys, were either indifferent or oblivious to the nature
of the banter. I imagine this is how Vanessa Guillen felt when
she was sexually harassed by someone who outranked her, even
when he was also lower enlisted and not in her direct chain of
command.
Chairwoman Speier, Ranking Member Kelly, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the service women-led
Grass Roots Movement comprised of over 4,000 women and gender-
diverse veterans and over 6,500 allies and supporters, we thank
you for the opportunity to address the critical issue of sexual
harassment and retaliation in the military following the tragic
murder of U.S. Army Specialist Guillen.
Sexual harassment in the military is not only an epidemic
of fear, it is a national security risk, systemically degrading
the integrity of unit cohesion, thus reducing personnel
readiness. It compromises mission and personnel readiness by
taking service members out of our combat-ready ranks
emotionally, physically, and, in Specialist Guillen's case,
violently and permanently.
It is an issue of power and dominance and has nothing to do
with sexual gratification. To add insult to injury, those of us
who are lucky enough to survive military sexual trauma, or MST,
stemming from permissive and pervasive hostile environments
while in the military, face uphill battles with the Department
of Veterans Affairs once we take off the uniform and attempt to
claim VA compensation and other benefits for post-traumatic
stress disorder relating to MST.
One in five women who experience sexual harassment were
also sexually assaulted, giving credence to the hypothesis that
a permissive environment for harassment can foster perceived
permission for assault by an offender. It was concluded by DOD
that sexual harassment is the leading factor affecting the unit
climate on sexual assault. The data also show the majority of
victims were harassed by someone in their chain of command. And
perhaps most stunning, 1,021 formal sexual harassment
complaints were investigated in fiscal year 2019, a 10 percent
increase from fiscal year 2018.
It is a common belief that the rates of reporting in recent
years are resultant of ramped-up military education efforts to
destigmatize reporting sexual assault in the ranks. However,
this rising statistic also begs the question of whether DOD
ever had a fully accounted grasp of the broad scope of its
harassment problem.
Fear of retaliation, as expressed by Specialist Guillen to
her family regarding her own sexual harassment, remains a
driver for a majority of MST survivors to remain silent. The
latest data show 64 percent of women who report a sexual
assault face retaliation, that 66 percent of retaliation
reports alleged that retaliators were in the reporters' chain
of command. Approximately one-third of victims are discharged
after reporting, separated under other than honorable
conditions, thus impacting their service-connected benefit
claims as veterans.
In FY [fiscal year] 2018, over one in four victims who did
not report harassment or assault feared retaliation from their
command or coworkers. Many survivors have internalized that the
investigation process would be unfair, result in no outcome,
or, worse, adversely impact their career.
And the trauma doesn't end there. One in five women
veterans accessing VA have reported being the victim of MST and
25 percent of the women veteran population report inappropriate
or unwanted comments or behavior by their male veteran
counterparts while receiving care at VA facilities.
I hope this testimony eliminates the persistent challenges
in seeking justice which MST survivors endure, to include the
threat of violence and potential loss of life to either suicide
or homicide, and also how survivors are often condemned to a
never-ending, hellish cycle of victim-blaming, revictimization
when recalling their traumatic experiences later in their
veteran life, severe depression, PTSD [post-traumatic stress
disorder], and other correlated ailments resulting from a
military justice system that has repeatedly failed them.
It does not always get better with time and we cannot lose
another Specialist Guillen. In the words of many who have
posted their stories under #IAmVanessaGuillen: not one more.
Chairwoman Speier and Ranking Member Kelly, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, again, on behalf of the thousands
of service members, veterans, and allies of all stripes who
have mobilized in the last few weeks to demand justice for
Specialist Guillen, and the thousands of MST victims who came
before her, we thank you for the opportunity to share our views
on this critical miscarriage of justice, to advocate for swift
passage of military justice reforms, such as those underlined
in Chairwoman Speier's amendments to the FY 2021 NDAA.
Ms. Speier. Can you please wrap up, Ms. Bryant?
Ms. Bryant. Yes, ma'am. I agree with Ranking Member Kelly
in that MST is a scourge on our Armed Forces, diminishing the
public trust in the institution that is the U.S. military, and
leading service women, veterans, and advocates in this Grass
Roots Movement to not only call for the shutdown of Fort Hood
in response to Specialist Guillen's murder, but to call for no
future enlistments until a thorough congressional investigation
by an on-the-ground CODEL [congressional delegation] is
conducted.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bryant can be found in the
Appendix on page 65.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ms. Bryant.
Ms. Del Gaudio, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LUCY DEL GAUDIO, GRASS ROOTS MOVEMENT: JUSTICE FOR
VANESSA, U.S. ARMY VETERAN

Ms. Del Gaudio. Good morning, Chairwoman Speier, Ranking
Member Kelly, distinguished members of the committee. My name
is Lucy Del Gaudio. I am a United States Army veteran and
veteran advocate, and I am a member of a coalition of thousands
of women and gender-diverse veterans seeking justice for
Vanessa Guillen and systemic change for survivors.
I served from 1990 to 1998, Active and as a reservist. My
veteran advocacy work focuses on survivors of military sexual
crimes, predominantly women who experience sexual harassment
and assault during their military service.
I was born and raised in Union City, New Jersey, to Cuban-
Puerto Rican parents. After my father passed away in 1989, my
mother could not afford two daughters in college and I followed
my brother's footsteps. I am just one of many minority veterans
in the community to follow this path. We seek to create legacy,
to create equity, and to serve our country as patriots that we
are.
If I had to use one word to describe my military service,
it's ``tarnished.'' In 1990, I experienced firsthand how racial
slurs and sexual innuendos were fundamental training tools used
by both male and female drill sergeants. Even trusted mentors
would affirm to me that it's just part of military culture.
I was sexually assaulted overseas in 1992 by a senior NCO.
Reporting through my chain of command was my only option, and
nothing was done. I was told that any pursuit for justice and
accountability would ruin his career. Despite being a highly
motivated soldier who was good at her job, retaliation still
impacted my career. I did not speak openly about my military
service or assault until 2015.
These stories we bring to you are like broken records. In
1992, the same year I was assaulted, my mentor, Diane Dennis,
testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee about the
same very topic. She and others made it clear that Tailhook was
the tip of the iceberg.
Today, I testify before you 27 years later, working
tirelessly with a powerful grassroots movement that has
converged in the fight for justice for Specialist Vanessa
Guillen, a 20-year-old soldier whose whole life was ahead of
her and should have never died.
Women do not report because we fear for our safety, we fear
for our future, we fear for retaliation, and I have come to see
this too many times amongst my own story.
Nearly every year the same reports have pointed to the rise
in numbers of cases. Yet we don't know how many have gone
unreported. Who are the people not reporting? They are the
privates to the lieutenants, the sergeants to the commanders.
They are the ones who do not feel safe reporting. They are the
Vanessa Guillens. They are unaccounted for, because if only a
small number report sexual assault and rape, who is going to
take the risk to report harassment?
There is no safe reporting mechanism. There's no protection
for victims. There's no accountability for predators. The
murder of Vanessa Guillen is one of long line of issues going
on in Fort Hood. The base is a hot spot. This year, 23 soldiers
in Fort Hood have died or have been found dead. It begs to
question, what is happening at Fort Hood?
Each new story that I received from women at Fort Hood are
heartbreaking. My mom and aunt pressured me to say something
but I didn't. CID closed my case without notifying me. He got
off with just an assault charge and later promoted. I was
pushed out for not getting over what happened to me. The
triggers never really go away. They just lessen with time.
These are the steps I ask for Congress today. Open a
congressional investigation into the death of Specialist
Vanessa Guillen, including a visit to Fort Hood so you could
review the facilities yourself firsthand and see what is taking
place there. Remove reporting of sexual assault and harassment
from command jurisdiction and create an outside investigation
entity. Commands have proven that they are incapable of
investigating themselves and bringing accusers to justice.
Require all future DOD annual reports to include data
separated by installation to identify the problem posts for
readiness and compliance issues.
The culture of power and control creates and molds toxic
leadership. This system is so static it is Gorilla Glued to the
floor of the basement. We can't even see the glass ceiling when
it comes to elimination of harassment and sexual assault in the
military. If this is going to change, the DOD must take this
issue seriously. Zero tolerance means zero tolerance. Military
justice must be swift and it must be just.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Del Gaudio can be found in
the Appendix on page 76.]
Ms. Speier. Thank you for your powerful statements.
Ms. Del Gaudio, you referenced that there were 23 soldiers
at Fort Hood who have died or have been found dead. I'm deeply
troubled by the homicides that have taken place that are still
unsolved. You mentioned four homicides, seven suicides, and one
combat-related death. But there are 11 more. Do you have an
understanding of the other 11?
Ms. Del Gaudio. Ma'am, I don't at this time. We've gotten
reports from several different avenues. But I will give you
further--I will further--Melissa, if you want to address that.
Ms. Bryant. No, I don't have it, either. I was saying that
that is something that we do recognize, the permissive
environment of sexual harassment has seemed to have an impact
in a portion of those 23 deaths, those homicides that have
taken place. But we would have to get that back to you for the
record, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. So where did you get the data?
Ms. Del Gaudio. All over the news media, different reports
that we have seen from different individuals that did not want
to disclose who they are within the Fort Hood community.
Ms. Speier. All right. Ms. Bryant, you referenced that a
third of those who are harassed are separated, which was an
astonishing number that I hadn't heard before. Where did you
come up with that figure?
Ms. Bryant. Yes, Chairwoman. That is--excuse me. Pulling my
sources here.
I believe that that was pulled from one of the VA reports
that I have from the Veterans Benefits Administration. The one-
third that were separated under other than honorable conditions
has also been noted. Sorry, I am just looking for my exact
quote here.
Ms. Speier. Well, maybe you can just provide it to the
committee. It is certainly something that we have to look into
with greater detail.
Ms. Bryant. Absolutely.
Ms. Speier. I'm going to allow you each a minute of time to
talk to us without the benefit of notes or scripts. Tell us
what we should do.
Ms. Bryant. First and foremost, the amendments that are
currently within the FY 2021 NDAA that relate to changing the
reporting chain, that relate to allowing a removal of bias in
the chain of command, taking it to a special prosecutor to be
able to have impartiality in investigations and in prosecutions
of sex crimes in the military, it absolutely must pass within
the NDAA this year. This is the time where we must remove that
implicit bias.
I can speak as a former captain, a former commander, when I
was just 25, 26 years old and I had an NCO who came and spoke
to me and told me about her sexual harassment and assault, and
I didn't know what to do at the time.
This is in 2005, 2006 timeframe, and I didn't know what I
should have been doing at that point. I asked her repeatedly I
want to make this a public record and see if we can assist you
in any way we can, and she declined. And this has been repeated
over time; 15 years, 20 years. Nothing has changed. Since
Tailhook, nothing has changed. So we need that bias to be
removed. We need for reporting chains to be permissible for
soldiers and other service members to be able to speak with
comfort and without fear of retaliation.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Ms. Del Gaudio.
Ms. Del Gaudio. I have to say that, listening to the panel
before me, I felt that they were doing a lot of blame on the
SHARP program, and I don't think that's fair. I think we have
to look at NCOs, the toxic creation of their leadership,
because that's where it stems from. It's just a continual cycle
of toxic leadership that is the gratification of degrading
women, degrading men, degrading, you know, our LGBTQ [lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or questioning] community. It
is just the way the military works.
And, sir, when you said about ``it's not my Army,'' that
really affected me, because when I went into the Army I
followed my brother's footsteps. He was my recruiter, and he
assured me that his Army was going to take care of his little
sister, and it didn't. It didn't take care of me. We have to do
better by our women. We have to do better by our women
minorities, our black and browns, our Latinas. We're really
being affected. That E-1 to E-4 pool in the Army are targets.
We have to do better by them, because 9 out of 10 of those
women want to stay and their experience doesn't let them stay,
and retention is blown away.
I wanted to stay in the military. I wanted to make it a
career. My brother served in the Marines for 22 years. My
brother served in the Army for 32 years. I wanted that, and it
was taken away from me because I didn't feel safe.
Ms. Speier. Thank you very much.
Ranking Member Kelly, you are recognized.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chairwoman Speier. And, first of all,
I thank each of you for your service to this great Nation.
Thank you. It means something. Even if it was a bad experience,
I still thank you for choosing to serve our country. That is
very admirable.
I do want to talk about--it bothers me that we talk about
23 deaths and we relate all of those to sexual harassment but
we don't even know who the 23 are. That bothers me. That is a
statement that--I don't need numbers thrown out. I need actual
facts that have a basis. So, that bothers me.
And then I want to touch a little bit on Specialist
Guillen. An amazing human being and that should never have
happened. An amazing soldier. That should never have happened.
I don't think there's anybody on this panel, I don't think
there's anybody at Fort Hood, I don't think there's anybody in
the Department of Defense who in any way can justify her
unlawful and awful killing. My heart and soul goes out to that
family. When you serve your Nation you expect to be protected.
That being said, the sexual harassment and the murder are
two separate things. They are not connected in any way, and to
suggest otherwise is just not true. That is not what the
facts--now, there may be other facts later that reveal that.
But I can tell you, from my knowledge, and I've had people
testify on this--and I've been to Fort Hood. I spent over a
year of my life at Fort Hood and it is a large, sprawling
complex.
I thank each of you, but we have to be real careful,
because words have meaning and there are consequences to tying
things together that are unrelated, and I think they have a
negative impact on what we're trying to achieve. Because I want
to tell you what I am trying to achieve. I want a Department of
Defense that no sexual harassment or no sexual assault ever
occurs, that no racism, no extremism is ever allowed.
Now, I know that's a rainbow and cherry tree approach,
because there are bad people in this world and there always
will be, and some of those will become soldiers or sailors or
airmen and Marines. But that is my goal.
And so what can we do? What can we do to our NCO corps?
Because I think that's the key. I think that is the key. What
can we do to train or instill or inspire our service members at
the proper level to let people know, when you do this the
entire Army, the entire Navy is going to out you. We are going
to put you out there to shame you for doing these dastardly
deeds that you have done.
What can we do to train our NCOs, Ms. Bryant?
Ms. Bryant. In training our NCOs, I agree with you in that
that is key to this. But it's at all levels. It's at the
service academies. It's at the boot camp. It's at AIT [Advanced
Individual Training]. It needs to be continuous and it needs to
be iterative. That is what needs to happen. We need to
inculcate within our ranks that this will not be tolerated and
there will be consequences and repercussions for your actions.
I will not--I will simply say this: I do disagree, in that
the permissive environment that I have experienced, that Lucy
has experienced, that Vanessa Guillen experienced, if it's okay
to laugh and joke about how we look in our uniform, to grope
us, to say things, and then we laugh it off and then we're
shamed into being able to speak out loud----
Mr. Kelly. I understand, and you get to say that.
Ms. Bryant [continuing]. That is what creates--that creates
a hostile environment.
Mr. Kelly. I'm reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time. I
absolutely agree with what you just said. But that's not--what
I am trying to do is, what can we do for our NCOs, our junior
officers, our senior officers? What can we do to make sure that
this doesn't continue to happen? That's what I want to do.
Ms. Bryant. Public shaming.
Mr. Kelly. I agree there is a problem. So I'm not
disagreeing.
Ms. Del Gaudio. It's not a yearly discussion. It's a
continuous discussion. We just do, you know, a few hours in
basic training, a few hours in AIT. Maybe when they go to BNOC
[Basic Noncommissioned Officer Course]. Maybe when they go to
others.
It has to be continuous. It's a conversation. It's
happening all the time. We have to have the candid discussions.
We have to create a culture that if I say to Melissa, ``I'm
being harassed,'' it's--it has to be a courageous conversation.
We do not create a courageous conversation. We have to instill
that in our military. If a woman, a man, wants to go into the
military, we have to say okay, X, Y, and Z could possibly
happen and you could be courageous enough and we are going to
protect you. But we----
Mr. Kelly. I agree, and let me reclaim just a second,
because I agree and I think one of the keys is we've got to
teach them early. It has got to measure--like Mr. Crow said,
it's got to be in time. We've got to give hours and blocks of
instruction and it's got to continue, not online, but in
person, throughout a career.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, thank you again, and I
yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly.
I think the key is we've got to change the whole program,
because online is not cutting it. And I agree with you. I think
the NCOs need to have specialized training, as well.
Ms. Davis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Ms.
Bryant, Del Gaudio. I'm very pleased that you're here, thank
you, and for all that you have done to, certainly, highlight
and bring the attention to Specialist Vanessa Guillen.
I wanted to ask you a little bit about your look at what
happened regarding AWOL for Ms. Guillen. What did you see that
was done correctly, but what was wrong?
Ms. Del Gaudio. Thank you, ma'am. What blew me away is that
if a weapon went missing, nobody would have been allowed to go
home. Her property was still in her unit. That should have
indicated something. We were more accountable for the weapons
in that unit than for our own soldier. Right there, that blew
me away. And I still repeat it over and over in my head that a
weapon had more accountability than a young woman soldier.
So that, to me, was heart-wrenching. We have to do better
by us. If you had evidence that something possibly happened--
her stuff was there. Vanessa's stuff was there, and nobody had
any indication of, like, this is not AWOL. It's just not.
Mrs. Davis. And if I may, Ms. Bryant, too--I mean, what
comes to--why do you think that happened? And I understand, as
well, Private Gregory Morales, also under the same
circumstances. But is it because they just decided that there
was something about her?
Ms. Bryant. Ma'am, I think the issue that is the elephant
in the room in the military is addressing race. It is
addressing the intersectionality that impacts our service.
Those of us who are women of color who serve, we know that
double burden all too well.
And I would like to point out that I'm sure this committee
has heard many times over the 5 years that Bowe Bergdahl walked
off a fire base and went missing, and how much blood and
treasure the Army, the military, spent looking for him. But she
was missing, her stuff was there, and no one went looking for
her, because black and brown women go missing all the time and
no one cares.
Mrs. Davis. And there did seem to be a sense that they
believe that she had walked off, walked away. And that was
striking. Truly striking.
We are trying to get at some of the ways in which, as
people are recruited, come into the service, serve, whether
it's as a noncommissioned officer or even, you know, through
the ranks of officers, is there something in the way that we
conduct surveys, climate surveys, that doesn't allow people to
come forward and truly say what they know, as if you see
something do something. What can be done about that as
individuals, as you've experienced that. Some of our colleagues
have experienced that, as well.
Ms. Del Gaudio. I think having listening sessions with your
command is not acceptable. I think you have to have that
gender-specific conversation, because I know that if I am in
the room with my male counterparts I'm not going to be as
honest and open as possible to what happened to me.
I think there should be an independent party practice when
it comes to survey initiation. I think we have to also do
better what type of data we are aggregating; you know, age,
rank, and gender is just not enough. We need to know what type
of ethnic background you are. We need to know your sexuality.
We need to know all those factors. And I think that will do a
great justice when it comes to being more honest and open.
Mrs. Davis. Should there be a greater hand, when someone is
being considered for a promotion, that the members of the unit,
that the family, has an opportunity to weigh in in a way that's
different from what happens today?
Ms. Del Gaudio. I was plagued by promotion, of not getting
promoted because of my weight. The Army weight requirements I
never met. So the burden in 1992 of getting constantly tape-
measured was, A, horrible, but, B, was part of the harassment
that I endured, because when an NCO is tape-measuring you and
touching you in places that you don't want to be touched, it's
horrifying.
So, that alone, I missed two promotions because I was 2
pounds overweight and my BMI [body mass index] did not match.
That's absolutely absurd. I was a highly motivated soldier. It
shouldn't have meant that my 2 pounds were going to deny my
promotion.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. Thank you for that.
Ms. Speier. My understanding is now NCOs do not take those
kind of measurements, thank God.
Ms. Del Gaudio. Thank God for the BMI machines, because
those tape measures were just absolutely awful. Excuse me for
that comment.
Ms. Speier. Ms. Escobar, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you both to
our panelists for being here and for sharing your stories with
us.
We know that Vanessa Guillen told her family that she was
afraid of reporting sexual harassment. And you both have been
subjected to harassment and assault. I think it's very
important for this committee, as we continue to try to change
things that have been going on since women entered the military
ranks--and actually before that because men also are victims of
sexual assault and sexual harassment. Help us understand; when
you do report it, can you tell us what happens? What are the
actual moments, and what happens in the moments and the weeks
afterwards that creates an environment of fear and retaliation?
Ms. Bryant. I would say that what happens versus what
should happen is the problem, and that is that there are formal
reporting requirements. I understand that Colonel Wempe, you
know, explained that. It's articulated in a pretty detailed way
within SAPRO guidelines.
However, that is not what actually occurs, and that is what
we have experienced ourselves. And, over time, it's what we've
heard repeated by thousands of women, and male survivors, as
well, who say that they did speak to a command, they did speak
to someone, and it just didn't go any further. Or they were
told, well, why don't you think about this. Think twice.
Again, we constantly hear the refrain of think of so and
so's career. Sometimes, think of your own career. And that is
what happens where that fear of retaliation comes. It's a
hopelessness where you feel as though what's the point?
I also want to, very quickly, answer back to Congresswoman
Speier's question. The data on the third of victims who are
discharged after reporting came from an aggregate of Protect
Our Defenders. It's derived from the DOD SAPRO report from
2016.
Ms. Del Gaudio. For me, it was, ``Are you sure?'' ``Are you
sure that happened?'' And that shouldn't be a question asked:
``Are you sure it happened?'' I heard that statement for a
whole week: ``Are you sure it happened?'' And from multiple
members of my chain of command. And that's what's disheartening
is that they just don't believe us, or they're just protecting
the person who is higher ranking than you. I was an E-3.
Shouldn't have ever happened to me.
Ms. Escobar. And once you did--because both of you reported
and even after--clearly, the first step, you are discouraged.
You are told to think of your career, think of the person who
assaulted you or harassed you, think of their career. So that's
the first point where we need reform.
What happened after you reported, when you decided,
regardless of the consequences, it's important for me to
report? What happened then?
Ms. Bryant. In my case, unfortunately, I shrugged it off. I
was gaslit to believe that, as an officer, that that was the
price of admission to being in the Army. I was often the only
woman officer around. I also felt very much of a mama bear
protective mode for my fellow soldiers, and so I would try to
protect them when they would come to me and then further on
report. But in my own case, I wasn't strong enough to do the
same.
Ms. Del Gaudio. Mine was just completely swept under the
rug. I don't have anything. No justice. Being here today is
somewhat justice for me. Speaking to you all is justice for me.
Being able to speak about it honestly and openly is justice.
And a lot of us feel this way because nothing gets done.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you both. Madam Chair, this is very
similar to what I have heard in my own district from victims:
an inability to get information about why something was
dismissed, an accusation was dismissed, why there was no
further investigation, leaving victims even more confused,
leaving victims even more distraught, feeling like there is no
justice. And this is for assault, much less for harassment.
This is why I do support our efforts to look at innovative ways
to reform the system, which includes taking it outside of the
chain of command.
Thank you both very much. I yield back.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Ms. Del Gaudio, what happened to
your assailant?
Ms. Del Gaudio. Ma'am, I don't know. He just went going on.
Ms. Speier. He stayed within the military----
Ms. Del Gaudio. He stayed within the military. Again, when
I left, I left. I completely disconnected.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Ms. Garcia, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Madam Chair. It's good to see you
all again. And, you know, just hearing your stories just really
tears at my heart because, again, it just brings so many
memories of the Vanessa Guillen case and, of course, hearing
from her family members, her sister, her mother, about what she
shared with them.
And I can assure you that we shared this with her command
as soon as I was able to communicate with them. And I can also
tell you that it was disappointing, when I visited Fort Hood in
June 23rd, which already was 2 months after she had been
missing, that they admitted that they had not pursued
investigating the sexual harassment allegations because they
were doing a criminal investigation. And I still recall the
meeting because I pointed out that sometimes the sexual
harassment can be the motive, the motive, for a murder. But
yet, they said, well, we are only doing criminal.
So I think that there may have been a disconnect, because
it's possible that it could have been connected. They just
didn't pursue that line of investigation.
Now they have, but they continue to say that there's no
credible evidence. So, apparently, so far they have found
anything from the parents or friends not credible. But we are
still working on it.
So, thank you for being here and sharing. And, you know, it
is just so hard to even crystallize a question. You have heard
the previous testimony from the panel and the colonel saying
that he was looking at it quickly to get a snapshot of what was
going on. But we know she went missing the 22nd and they didn't
start until July 27th, 4 months later. Is that quick? I mean,
is that indicative of the inaction and response to these kinds
of allegations?
And that is a question for both of you.
Ms. Bryant. It's absolutely indicative of the lack of
caring for a soldier's life.
To also answer that question, I want to note back to the 23
others that have died, because this is a report from the Army
to CNN. Seven were off-duty accidents, seven were suicide, one
was combat, four were homicide, two natural causes, and one
undetermined.
Ms. Garcia. Does that include the--I mean, I think there
now is five soldiers from Fort Hood that have died within a
year. Of course, that also includes the alleged perpetrator of
this case.
Ms. Bryant. It does. And I think that when you talk about
especially suicide, when I talked about, in my opening remarks,
of what we experience even as veterans, as a veteran advocate I
deal with women and men who are survivors who have PTSD from
MST who have suicidal ideation, who often, sadly, succumb to
the sadness that haunts them.
And so there is correlation between that command climate,
that permissive environment for hostility, and then what
ultimately happens to our bodies when we can't take it anymore.
Ms. Garcia. Ms. Del Gaudio, your response to my question?
Ms. Del Gaudio. I will speak personally. The minute it
happened, for me, I became a different soldier, and my command
treated me differently and my behavior changed. And that's the
problem. They started looking at me as a behavioral problem,
not as an assault victim. And that's something that needs to be
addressed in this culture, because the minute we claim our
sexual harassment, the minute we claim our assault, then we
start the--it's PTSD right away. You become angry. You become
bitter. You become very responsive to things that are taking
place. You become defensive, and then you are the issue.
Ms. Garcia. Right. So, let me ask you the question I tried
to ask the colonel. What about this business between informal
and formal? You all are shaking your heads. What does that
mean?
Ms. Del Gaudio. You know, the formal is going through your
chain of command. They do all the paperwork, blah, blah, blah.
The informal is when I--when it happened to me is 1992. You
know, we didn't have social media. We didn't have mechanisms
to, you know, record something.
So, again, I would take that message that the parents have
received, the calls that she made to Lupe and Mayra, the calls
she made to his friends. To me, that's informal.
Ms. Garcia. But, apparently, it has been concluded it is
not credible, at least so far.
Ms. Del Gaudio. Yeah, it's not credible. But, honestly, if
she told her parents and she's not here right now to testify,
that should say something and speak volumes.
Ms. Speier. All right. Your time has expired.
Ms. Garcia. Yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Speier. Ms. Jackson Lee, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Speier. Is her microphone on? Is there a microphone?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I, certainly, thank the previous panel, as
well, for their service.
Would you kindly, both of you, just give me--Ms. Bryant, I
want to call you Captain. What was your time of service? What
years were you in?
Ms. Bryant. I served on Active Duty from 2001 through 2009,
ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And Ms. Del Gaudio?
Ms. Del Gaudio. Ma'am, from 1990 to 1998, Active and
Reserves.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So in the course of both of you, there
were conflicts, wars that this Nation was involved in, and I
would imagine every single soldier was valuable and should have
been considered as such.
As I understand Ms. Guillen's last days, she came in on a
day off or extended herself as any good soldier. Wasn't at a
picnic. Was there counting arsenal weapons, if you will, and
she was doing her job.
So I want to pose this line of questions. I understand her
family came up. As close as they are, not getting that regular
call the very day that she was missing, and arrived about 2:30
a.m. in the morning but did not get seen until 9:00 a.m.
So my question is--I understand discipline. I'm a civilian.
What does that culture do? To me, that looks offensive. It's
time lost in the investigation.
Obviously, 70 days, or however long it was that my
colleague indicated, that, too, seems to diminish human life
when all the movies that we see, military movies, says don't
leave one soldier behind.
Captain, and then I didn't get Ms. Del Gaudio's rank, I'll
call you that, as well.
Captain.
Ms. Bryant. It's absolutely a miscarriage of justice to not
have that investigation move forward. I raised about Bowe
Bergdahl earlier, and I can't help but think when he walked off
his fire base in 2009 I was in the Pentagon at the time. I was
a GS-14 by then. And we had meeting after meeting, battle
update brief after battle update brief, looking for this man
who walked off of a fire base and was captured by the Taliban.
Or the Haqqani Network, I should say. And no one cared where
Vanessa Guillen was for hours and she is right there in
garrison with the resources of both the Killeen Police
Department as well as the military police in Fort Hood? Ma'am,
that's UNSAT [unsatisfactory].
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Ms. Del Gaudio. And I have
other questions, so any comment on that point?
Ms. Del Gaudio. For me, again, I think it's disrespectful.
Her family went there to look for her. You should have worked
with urgency and immediacy, because I know my family would have
been really looking for an answer, and for them not to give it
to them is just disrespectful.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Discipline and war readiness shouldn't
have nothing to do with human decency, and I think one of the
issues in the culture of the United States military, overall,
is that they equate discipline and the toughness of the
military with dealing differently with human needs. I believe
Vanessa Guillen in terms of sexual harassment. I believe it in
terms of her parents. I believe it.
So, let me just get this question in. You mentioned that
CID, this is an internal process, closes cases. I think someone
mentioned they closed their case. I know there's been great
progress with Congresswoman Speier on the process. But I, too,
believe of an independent investigation and process. But
explain what that means, close it. And then someone said--I
don't know if it was you, Del Gaudio--what was your rank? I'm
sorry.
Ms. Del Gaudio. E-4, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. E-4. That they went on in their career.
They went on and got promotions. Someone said they went on and
got promotions. I think it's important for the military to hear
what that means when there's an investigation and then someone
went on. I know innocent until proven guilty, but then went on
and got promoted.
Captain, do you want to start with that, please? My final
question.
Ms. Bryant. It absolutely speaks to the culture within the
military, the very essence of what needs to change. It's
something where, when their career, when the offender's career
is more favored upon, when the preponderance of evidence is not
considered, oftentimes, you will hear that statements are
inconclusive. Sworn statements are inconclusive. We took an
oath to support and defend the Constitution. No one's going to
lie about their assault or their harassment.
And so that statement on its surface needs to be accepted.
We need to believe women. We need to believe survivors. And
that needs to be a zero tolerance of closing investigations
until you have turned over every stone.
Ms. Del Gaudio. So, the young lady that provided the
statement for me, when she found out I was testifying she had
someone contact me. And, again, she didn't know that CID closed
her case until--she was unnotified until she, you know, asked
what's going on. That's when they told her, oh, your case is
closed. And that just--it's like a common theme. When you talk
to survivors, all these statements that I made are common
themes. You know, CID closed the case without notifying me. He
got off--you know, he just had assault charge and then
promoted. And then you're the--we're just--we're made to be the
bad guy and----
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Ms. Del Gaudio.
Ms. Del Gaudio. I am sorry.
Ms. Speier. Her time has expired.
Thank you all for being here. Your testimony was
extraordinarily powerful. And I think for all of the members
who have participated in the panel it has been a very sobering
one and a very important one.
I want to say to the Guillen family that we are not going
to let Vanessa to have died in vain. And every step will be
pursued to find justice. There is legislation that will be
introduced. But, beyond that, I intend to lead a CODEL to Fort
Hood within the next month, and I invite all my colleagues to
join me. We are going to continue to investigate this.
Thank you again for being here. We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:19 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

July 29, 2020

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

July 29, 2020

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

July 29, 2020

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

July 29, 2020

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN

Dr. Galbreath. Each year, an estimated 0.3% of individuals aged 17
to 35 in the U.S. population become applicants for military service,
either enlisting or formally processing for enlistment.   [See page
14.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. SHERRILL
Colonel Wempe. Our inspection identified that approximately 36% of
the 53 female Soldiers we anonymously surveyed reported having been
sexually harassed in their current unit during the past year. Of those
Soldiers who reported experiencing Sexual Harassment, 74% stated that
they had reported the harassment. Our survey did not differentiate
between the three different methods of reporting sexual harassment
under Army Regulation 600-20: formal, informal, and anonymous
complaints. Our focus was on the unit climate with respect to
reporting. Data for the entire installation that is comparable to our
survey data is not currently available. The way the inspection
collected the survey data does not allow for accurate extrapolation to
determine sexual harassment incidence and reporting for all of Fort
Hood. Of the units surveyed in the inspection, we determined the
climate was conducive to reporting allegations of sexual assault or
sexual harassment.   [See page 20.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. CROW
Dr. Galbreath. Enclosure 10 to Department of Defense Instruction
6495.02 delineates the SAPR training requirements for all DOD
personnel. The instruction includes a requirement to ensure all new
accessions are trained and that training data is annotated.
Specifically, initial SAPR training is required within 14 days of
initial entrance to active duty or duty status with a Reserve
Component. Training topics include: DOD Sexual Assault Policy,
interactive scenarios to explain reporting options, and the resources
available. Accessions training shall occur upon initial entry and
annual training shall occur once a year and is mandatory for all
Service members regardless of rank or occupation or specialty. The
Secretaries and the Chief, NGB, are responsible for developing
dedicated SAPR training to ensure comprehensive knowledge of the
training requirements. The Undersecretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness through DOD SAPRO evaluates service training programs to
ensure compliance with those requirements (6945.05, enc 10,2.a.).
ARMY Initial Entry Trainees receive Sexual Harassment/Assault
Response & Prevention (SHARP) training within the first 48 hours of
arrival at reception with follow on training at Basic Combat Training
(BCT)/One Station Unit Training (OSUT), and Advanced Individual
Training (AIT). A total of 6.5 hours is dedicated to formal SHARP
instruction (Reception--1.5 Hours; BCT/OSUT--3 Hours; and AIT--2
Hours).
NAVY Enlisted Recruit Training Command (RTC) provides two lessons
of Sexual Assault Prevention and Response (SAPR) during the first three
weeks of Basic Military Training (BMT). The first lesson, Sexual
Assault Prevention and Response, is scheduled for 90 minutes during the
first week of training and is taught by one instructor holding the 805A
(Recruit Tactics Instructor) Navy Enlisted Classification (NEC). The
second lesson is from the Department of the Navy (DON) Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response Office (SAPRO) and is entitled, ``Not On My
Watch: SAPR Curriculum for RTC'' (Initial SAPR Follow-Up). This lesson
is scheduled in the third week of training for three hours and is
facilitated by a junior officer (O-3) and a senior enlisted (E-7/8)
staff member. There is a page within the recruit trainee guide that
recruits can reference during the RTC SAPR training. This training also
includes information on sexual harassment prevention. LifeSkills is a
32-hour training curriculum provided during A school and taught by
Lifeskills training instructors. The course curriculum covers a wide
variety of basic life skills topics such as smoking, drug and alcohol
use, healthy relationships, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
budgeting, using credits cards, buying a car, getting insurance,
healthy eating, weight management and using Tricare. The sexual assault
portion of the curriculum is scenario-based interactive training
containing approximately 2 hours of sexual assault specific training
and 3 Bystander Intervention scenarios, approximately 15-25 minutes
each. Naval Officers are assessed from three sources: the United States
Naval Academy (USNA), Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC), and
Officer Candidate School (OCS). On USNA Induction-Day (I-Day), all
Plebes (incoming freshmen) receive a brief overview and brochure of
SAPR definitions and resources. During the next 14 days, Plebes receive
approximately 2 hours of training while broken down into small groups
of 20-40 personnel. Plebes also have the opportunity to complete a SAPR
Survey during Plebe Summer. During NROTC New Student Indoctrination
(NSI), Midshipmen in NROTC units receive approximately 30 minutes of
SAPR Initial Training, which is provided by the local Sexual Assault
Response Coordinator (SARC) or SAPR Victim Advocate (VA). NROTC
Midshipmen also receive training entitled, ``Above Board,'' at the
beginning of their NROTC program. This training lasts approximately two
hours and is taught by the SAPR Point of Contact (POC) or another staff
member in the unit. Lastly, Midshipmen receive training on Title IX and
university-specific sexual assault and harassment policies from
university personnel. Prior to graduation/commissioning, units across
the country facilitate the DON SAPRO Pre-Commissioning training, ``Make
a Difference; Be the Solution,'' for approximately one hour. OCS
candidates receive SAPR Initial Training for one hour in the first week
of training, which is taught by the SARC or SAPR VA in a max class size
of 50. They also obtain two hours of the DON SAPRO Pre-Commissioning
Training, ``Make a Difference; Be the Solution,'' which is facilitated
by the Learning Standards Officer (LSO) or SAPR POC in week 12.
MARINE CORPS Training and Education Command facilitates the
Military Occupational Specialty and PME courses. Sexual assault is
discussed during PME. At recruit training (boot camp) and Marine Combat
Training/MOS schools, Marines receive SAPR Annual Training. At Officer
Candidate School (OCS), The Basic School (TBS), and Expeditionary
Warfare School, Officers receive SAPR Annual Training. At First
Sergeants Course and Commandant's Combined Cornerstone for slated
commanders and their Sergeants Major, these leaders each receive a 120-
minute training led by HQMC SAPR. The annual trainings offered to
Marines are as follows:

``Step Up'' Bystander Intervention Training for Junior
Marines. SAPR VAs lead this 90-minute annual training for Marines
ranked E1-E3.

``Take a Stand'' Bystander Intervention Training for Non-
Commissioned Officers. SAPR VAs lead this 90-minute annual training for
Marines ranked E4-E5.

SAPR Annual Training for Staff Non-Commissioned Officers
and Officers. SARCs or SAPR VAs led this 60-minute annual training.
AIR FORCE The Department of the Air Force (DAF) has four accession
gateways. All officers enter through the United States Air Force
Academy (USAFA), Officer Training School (OTS), or DAF Reserves Officer
Training Course (AFROTC). Enlisted personnel enter through Basic
Military Training (BMT). At USAFA: Cadets receive virtual Sexual
Assault training prior to arrival. Following this, within fourteen days
of arrival, all new Basic Training Cadets receive initial sexual
assault prevention and response (SAPR) training. Additionally, during
the first year, all Cadets receive Initial Cadet Bystander Intervention
Training (CBIT). New cadets receive a total of two hours and forty-five
minutes of SAPR training in their first year. Cadets also receive
virtual Sexual Harassment training prior to arrival. All cadets then
receive Equal Opportunity (EO) training within thirty days of arrival
on station. New cadets receive a total of two hours and forty-five
minutes of EO training in their first year. Due to the impact of COVID,
that is currently reduced to one hour and forty-five minutes.
OTS: Officer candidates receive SAPR training within fourteen days
of arrival on station and then within the first five weeks of training.
It is instructed by the installation SAPR office (SARC and SAPR VA).
Officer candidates receive three hours and thirty minutes of SAPR
content. Officer candidates receive Sexual Harassment/EO training prior
to arrival and within the first five weeks of training. This content is
taught prior to arrival, and over the course of two sessions within the
first five weeks of training. Over the course of their education,
AFROTC officer candidates receive a total of five and a half hours of
SAPR training. SAPR content is spread out over five different courses/
terms. Officer candidates receive Sexual Harassment training during
multiple courses. Over the course of their education, officer
candidates receive a total of one hour of training on Sexual
Harassment. Sexual Harassment content is spread out over two different
courses/terms.
During BMT: Trainees receive SAPR training within fourteen days of
arrival and two other times while at BMT. Training is provided in four
sessions throughout BMT. Trainees receive Sexual Harassment training
during their initial arrival briefing, and during six other briefings
while at BMT. Trainees receive a total of fourteen and half hours of
Sexual Harassment related content over the time of their training.
[See page 23.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

July 29, 2020

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER

Ms. Speier. In the case of Vanessa Guillen, she told her family,
her friends, and fellow soldiers about the harassment. Does this meet
the standard of reporting for an informal complaint? If not, shouldn't
it? And if it does meet the standards of an informal complaint, Vanessa
was right, as her claims were found not credible by CID.
Colonel Wempe. The manner in which sexual harassment complaints are
documented, received, and resolved is established by DOD and Army
policy. There are several ways in which a Soldier can make an informal
complaint and trigger the sexual harassment complaint resolution
process under Army Regulation 600-20. This includes reporting to the
chain of command, a sexual assault response coordinator, a victim
advocate, a local Inspector General, a member of the Staff Judge
Advocate's office, the military police, a local Criminal Investigation
Division office, or a health care provider. If a Soldier reports sexual
harassment to family, friends, or peers it would not ordinarily trigger
the sexual harassment complaint resolution process. However, SPC
Guillen's unit has initiated an administrative investigation
specifically looking into the allegations of sexual harassment that
were reported by her family. The administrative investigation remains
open and has not been approved by the command at this point in time. Of
note, the FORSCOM Inspector General Inspection of Fort Hood's Sexual
Harassment Assault Response Prevention (SHARP) Program looked for
systemic problems within the program at Fort Hood, but did not examine
specific allegations involving any individual Soldiers.
Ms. Speier. If Vanessa shared her concerns with others, who were
supposedly interviewed, how could the investigation have found no
credible evidence of harassment by Vanessa?
Colonel Wempe. The command has initiated an administrative
investigation which is specifically looking into the allegations, as
reported by her family, that Vanessa Guillen was sexually harassed. The
administrative investigation remains open and has not been approved by
the command at this point in time.
Ms. Speier. Why were the statements made by her family, her sisters
and fellow soldiers found ``not credible''?
Colonel Wempe. The administrative investigation, which is
specifically looking into the allegations of sexual harassment, as
reported by her family, remains open and has not been approved by the
command at this point in time.
Ms. Speier. What standard is being used by investigators and SHARP
in determining ``credible'' evidence?
Colonel Wempe. A complaint investigated by the Command would be
conducted as an administrative investigation in accordance with Army
Regulation 15-6, which applies a ``preponderance of the evidence''
standard. This means that the findings must be supported by ``a greater
weight of evidence than supports a contrary conclusion.'' Findings
should be based on evidence, which, after considering all of the
evidence obtained, points to a particular conclusion as being more
credible and probable than any other conclusion.
For criminal investigations, CID uses, the ``credible information''
standard as defined in DOD Instruction 5505.07, ``[i]nformation
disclosed or obtained by a criminal investigator that considering the
source and nature of the information and the totality of the
circumstances, is sufficiently believable to lead a trained criminal
investigator to presume the fact or facts in question are true.'' Once
a criminal investigation uncovers ``credible information'' that a
suspect has been involved in the commission of a crime, that individual
is then recorded as a ``subject'' who has committed a criminal offense.
Ms. Speier. Understanding that NCOs are many times the individuals
preying on the young service members, are soldiers empowered to report
outside their chain of command, in order to not involve their harasser
in the reporting? If not, that means there is no way for a solider to
report harassment by an NCO, without that NCO being involved in the
reporting process, is that correct?
Colonel Wempe. Yes, a Soldier can file a sexual harassment
complaint without the alleged harasser being involved in the reporting
process, even if the harasser is in the chain of command. Individuals
who are victims of sexual harassment can file an informal, formal, or
even an anonymous complaint to a range of official reporting agencies
or individuals that include a local Inspector General, a member of the
Staff Judge Advocate's office, the military police, a local Criminal
Investigation Division office, a health care provider, or a sexual
assault response coordinator or victim advocate. Additionally, the
sexual harassment complainant, or another person familiar with the
incident, may call the SHARP Hotline, 24 hours a day, seven days a week
and request assistance with the matter. A Soldier who has experienced
sexual assault can file a restricted or unrestricted report through
their sexual assault response coordinator or victim advocate. If they
desire to participate in the military justice process, victims may also
go directly to the Criminal Investigations Division office on their
installation. There is also a Department of Defense ``Safe Helpline''
available to help victims of sexual assault identify their reporting
options as well as military and civilian support services in their
local area.
