- [H.A.S.C. No. 116-88] REVIEW OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 116-88]

REVIEW OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS

OF THE CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM COMMISSION

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JULY 30, 2020

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-410               WASHINGTON : 2021

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island, Chairman

RICK LARSEN, Washington              ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                SAM GRAVES, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii                RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland           K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
RO KHANNA, California                AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
JASON CROW, Colorado, Vice Chair     DON BACON, Nebraska
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             JIM BANKS, Indiana
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Eric Snelgrove, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................     1
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M., a Representative from New York, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................     3

WITNESSES

Cilluffo, Frank, Commissioner, Cyberspace Solarium Commission....    11
Gallagher, Hon. Mike, Chairman, Cyberspace Solarium Commission...     7
King, Hon. Angus, Chairman, Cyberspace Solarium Commission.......     5
Murphy, Hon. Patrick, Commissioner, Cyberspace Solarium
Commission.....................................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

King, Hon. Angus, joint with Hon. Mike Gallagher, Hon.
Patrick Murphy, and Frank Cilluffo.........................    34
Langevin, Hon. James R.......................................    29
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M.......................................    32

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Houlahan.................................................    49

REVIEW OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM COMMISSION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and
Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Thursday, July 30, 2020.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:01 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James R.
Langevin (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM RHODE ISLAND, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND
EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

Mr. Langevin. The subcommittee will come to order.
I would like to begin by welcoming the members who are
joining the hearing remotely.
Just a bit of housekeeping before we get into the actual
hearing itself.
To those members--those members are reminded that they must
be visible on screen within the software platform for the
purposes of identity verification when joining the proceeding,
establishing and maintaining a quorum, participating in the
proceeding, and voting. Members participating remotely must
continue to use the software platform's video function while
attending the proceedings, unless they experience connectivity
issues or other technical problems that render the member
unable to fully participate on camera. If a member who is
participating remotely experiences technical difficulties,
please contact the committee staff for assistance, and they
will help you get recognized.
When recognized, video of remotely attending members'
participation will be broadcast in the room and via television
internet feeds. Members participating remotely are asked to
mute their microphone when they are not speaking. Members
participating remotely will be recognized normally for asking
their questions--for asking questions, but if they want to
speak at another time, they must seek recognition verbally. In
all cases, members are reminded to unmute their microphone
prior to speaking.
Members should be aware that there is a slight lag of a few
seconds between the time you start speaking and the camera shot
switching to you.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platform's video function on for the entirety of
the time they attend the proceeding. Those members may leave
and rejoin the proceeding. If members depart for a short period
for reasons other than joining a different proceeding, they
should leave the video function on. If members will be absent
for a significant period or depart to join a different
proceeding, they should exit the software platform entirely and
then rejoin if they return.
Members are also advised that I designated a committee
staff member to, if necessary, mute unrecognized members'
microphones to cancel any inadvertent background noise that may
disrupt the proceeding. Members may use the software platform's
chat feature to communicate with staff regarding technical or
logistical support issues only.
Finally, remotely participating members should see a 5-
minute countdown clock on the software platform's display, but,
if necessary, I will remind members when their time is up.
So, with the logistics verified, I will want to begin by
welcoming everyone to today's hearing on the findings of the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission, a congressionally mandated
commission created in the fiscal year 2019 NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act] that was charged with developing a
consensus on a strategic approach to defending the United
States in cyberspace against cyber attacks of significant
consequence.
Inspired by Project Solarium, a task force assembled by
President Eisenhower in the early 1950s, the Solarium
Commission brought together representatives from academia and
the private sector with representatives of the executive branch
and legislative branches.
In the spirit of transparency, I want to make clear that I
had the distinct privilege of being selected by Speaker Nancy
Pelosi to serve as one of the four elected Members of Congress
to serve as a commissioner and one of two from the House of
Representatives, along with our distinguished subcommittee
colleague, Congressman Mike Gallagher, who is appearing as a
witness before us today.
Mr. Gallagher, along with Senator King, the junior Senator
from Maine, also was a member of the Senate Armed Services
Committee and Senate Intelligence Committees, is also with us
today. They serve as co-chairs of the Commission, and I am very
proud to call them both colleagues and friends.
This subcommittee, more than most, has heard from numerous
individuals on the centrality of cyberspace to our modern
lives. The novelty of the Solarium's work and its findings is
in examining how to secure cyberspace with an emphasis on a
whole-of-government approach. Congress is methodical in its
views of jurisdiction, and we are often too focused on viewing
our oversight responsibilities exclusively through the lens of
committee jurisdictions.
What the Solarium Commission has presented in its final
report, completed on March 11th of this year, is a blueprint
for legislative and executive actions that force the country to
break apart the institutional stovepipes.
In this respect, I see the findings of the Solarium
Commission as being similar to those of the 9/11 Commission, in
that both bodies recognized government silos that had been
artificially constructed and harmed the national approach to
addressing cost-cutting issues. Whereas the 9/11 Commission
applied this to the problem of terrorism, Solarium applies it
to cyberspace.
The Commission's recommendations have resulted in more than
20 provisions in this year's National Defense Authorization
Act, passed just last week by the House of Representatives. In
that one bill, this chamber was able to address matters as
diverse as Reserve support for military cyber operations to the
cyber insurance marketplace to the establishment of a Senate-
confirmed national cyber director.
While we obviously have more work to do, I am proud of the
NDAA--that the NDAA reflects the whole-of-government action
called for by the Commission. I applaud the example set by our
European partners in particular in approaching cyber in novel
and holistic ways, as recent as today with the announcement of
the first-ever cyber sanctions issue--issued--passed--that
issued through the European Union against six individuals and
three entities responsible for the WannaCry, NotPetya, and
Operation Cloud Hopper attacks.
This is going to be essential going forward in enforcing
international norms, and this is a concrete step toward making
sure that there are consequences to actions that violate norms
in cyberspace on the international front.
As I noted earlier, we have four witnesses appearing in
front of the subcommittee today. In addition to the
distinguished gentlemen from Wisconsin and Maine, we are also
joined by two additional commissioners.
The Honorable Patrick Murphy, a former member of the House
of Representatives from Pennsylvania, is here today.
Commissioner Murphy has served with distinction as an Acting
Secretary and Under Secretary of the Army, is a former member
of the House Armed Services Committee, and today continues his
service as distinguished chair of innovation at the United
States Military Academy. Commissioner Murphy was the first
veteran of the war in Iraq to be elected to Congress.
Finally, we have Commissioner Frank Cilluffo, who, in
addition to his service with the Solarium Commission, serves as
the director of Auburn University McCrary Institute for Cyber
and Critical Infrastructure Security. From 2001 to 2003,
Commissioner Cilluffo served as special assistant to President
Bush on Homeland Security, and then led the Center for Cyber
and Homeland Security at George Washington University.
So I welcome all of our witnesses here today. I thank them
for their extraordinary work on the Cyber Solarium Commission.
Your input and your insights were absolutely invaluable.
Before we hear from our witnesses, I do want now--want to
turn to Ranking Member Stefanik for her opening comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. ELISE M. STEFANIK, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW
YORK, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND EMERGING
THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Chairman Langevin.
Welcome to our witnesses, Senator King, Congressman
Gallagher, Congressman Murphy, and Mr. Cilluffo. It is great to
have you before the subcommittee today. I thank you not only
for your leadership and service to the Cyber Solarium
Commission, but your long and distinguished records of public
service to this country.
And although you are not testifying today, I also want to
thank Chairman Langevin for his service on the Commission as
well, as all of the other commissioners who are not
participating today.
It is truly remarkable how much ground the Cyber Solarium
was able to cover in such a brief period of time. In 11 short
months, the Commission developed over 50 legislative proposals,
22 of which were included in the House-passed version of the
National Defense Authorization Act. This impressive commitment
reflects the hard work of the commissioners and the staff, and
also recognition that we must address these issues immediately.
As is often the case, our Nation's strategy, policy, and
laws trail the advent of new technology. This is especially
true of many emerging disciplines, but none quite as
consequential as cyberspace. The debilitating cyber attack on
Estonia in 2007, the devastating Office of Personnel Management
data breach in 2014, and the cyber attack on the city of
Atlanta in 2018, all should have served as wake-up calls for
the need of a comprehensive strategy to bolster our cyber
defenses, to deter hostile action in cyberspace, and to build
more resilient public and private cyber infrastructure.
The threat actors in cyberspace are as diverse as the tools
and tradecraft they employ to infiltrate and attack our
networks. And while we must maintain a flexible and adaptable
approach to meet the evolving threat, we must also communicate
an unequivocal position that demonstrates our willingness to
defend the United States in cyberspace and impose costs on our
adversaries if and when deterrence fails.
I firmly believe we must simultaneously strengthen our
cyber defenses and demonstrate our unwavering resolve to
challenge our adversaries in cyberspace. I appreciate the
Commission's recognition of this as well. Deterrence alone is
not sufficient, especially with the challenges of timely
attribution and the notional fog of war in cyberspace. The
United States must proactively take steps to increase the
resilience of our networks and our Nation's critical
infrastructure. This task is not one that the Federal
Government can take on alone. Any effort to bolster our
cybersecurity must be done in partnership with the private
sector, our cities and States, and our critical infrastructure
operators.
The Commission's recommendations that were included in the
NDAA address this reality. Accountability, information sharing,
collaboration, and more timely response and mitigation to cyber
incidents are all critical attributes that we must reinforce
and strengthen.
While the Commission is coming to an end, the work is not
done. We have a long road ahead to see through conference and
fully implement these changes. I look forward to ensuring the
Cyber Solarium's recommendations are translated into concrete
policy action.
We have a lot to talk about today, so thank you to our
witnesses, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stefanik can be found in the
Appendix on page 32.]
Mr. Langevin. I want to thank the ranking member for those
comments.
And before we turn to our witnesses, I would be remiss if I
didn't acknowledge the extraordinary work of the staff of the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission, starting with Mark Montgomery
and the entire team that he assembled that serve the Commission
so well. And I also want to, of course, mention on my own
staff, my legislative director, Nick Leiserson, as well as on
the committee staff, Josh Stiefel, for their subsequent work in
seeing that the findings were put into action and getting them
into the NDAA, but extraordinary effort all the way around. I
can't say enough about the work of the entire staff, again, led
by Mark Montgomery. We thank them for their contributions and
their service.
So, with that, we will turn to our witnesses now.
Senator King, we will begin with you. The floor is now
yours for any comments you may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. ANGUS KING, CHAIRMAN, CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM
COMMISSION

Senator King. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to
the ranking member for those eloquent statements. You stated
the case. I can save part of my remarks. I do have written
remarks, which I would like to submit for the record if--
subject to your approval, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. Without objection, so ordered.
Senator King. And I will have some informal remarks now.
First, I want to thank this committee and thank the full
committee for the work that you have already done on this
critically important subject, the work that went into the
National Defense Authorization Act that, of course, has now
passed both Houses.
Both bills from the Senate and the House have a number of
our recommendations. They are not in 100 percent overlap, so
there will be some work to do in conference, but we certainly
have made a substantial start in really putting these
recommendations--implementing the recommendations, because if
it is just a report that sits on a shelf, it is not going to
serve the public interests.
Just a bit about the Commission. You talked about it, Mr.
Chairman. There were 14 members. There were four Members of
Congress, four members from the executive branch, and six from
the private sector. Our work was entirely nonpartisan. There
wasn't a moment of partisan discussion in the 30-plus meetings
that we had. In fact, I couldn't tell you the partisan
affiliations of pretty much anyone that was in the room,
except, of course, the ones--the Members of Congress. And that
was the spirit with which we approached this incredibly
important problem.
I don't really need to outline for this committee how
serious this is. This is one of the, if not the most serious
international relations problem that we face. The ranking
member listed the attacks that we have already endured, and
there will certainly be more to come.
We are the most wired country in the world and, therefore,
we are the most vulnerable country in the world. And as we have
learned in the pandemic, something which strikes at our
essential economy and government poses a grave danger to this
country.
So let me just give you a brief outline of how the work of
the Solarium sort of breaks down. There are really three
pieces. One is reorganization, one is resilience, and one is
response.
Reorganization means trying to develop a coherent structure
in the United States Government so that we can respond to cyber
threats and cyber attacks. The problem, as is often the case,
is that the authority for cyber is scattered throughout the
government. It is in the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].
It is in Cyber Command. It is in CIA [Central Intelligence
Agency], DHS [Department of Homeland Security]. It is in all
areas of the government. So one of our primary focus was on
bringing some coherent organizational strategy to that silo
problem which the chairman mentioned.
The principal recommendation there is one that you have
already adopted in your committee, which is the creation of a
national cyber director to oversee and coordinate all of these
various functions throughout the Federal Government.
The second piece is resilience, which is building up our
cyber defenses, and it goes from simple cyber hygiene to being
just more secure in how we deal with the cloud, how we certify
home routers and all of those kinds of things in order to be
more resilient to make it less likely that an adversary will
succeed.
The third piece is response. How do we respond to a cyber
attack and, more importantly, how do we notify potential
adversaries that we will respond? And we will be talking about
that. And all of these four--three pieces come into what is
called a layered cyber deterrence.
The intention is to shake behavior--we will be talking
about that--in the international field of norms and standards.
The second is to deny benefits. That is the resilience that I
was talking about. And the third piece is impose costs.
The truth is that we haven't done a very good job of
imposing costs. We have become a cheap date in cyber. We can be
attacked, as we were with the OPM [Office of Personnel
Management] breach the ranking member mentioned, or other
attacks on our democracy, and there is no real consequences.
There are no real results. There is no cost paid by our
adversary.
We have got to make adversaries go through a cost
calculation saying, well, if we do this, they might do this--
something else to us, and it may not be cyber. It may be
sanctions. It may be other kinds of a response. But we have to
establish that there will be a response. Otherwise, because
cyber is a relatively cheap form of aggression, it will
continue to happen.
So that is the overall focus of our Commission. And I have
to say, working with the two members from your subcommittee,
Jim Langevin and Mike Gallagher, has been one of the great
pleasures of my life. We have had a fantastic experience
working together with the other 12 members of the Commission,
really wrestling with some difficult issues, working hard,
concentrating, and coming up with what we feel is a solid piece
of work that will really help our country move forward in this
critically important area.
So I thank the subcommittee for your attention and look
forward to the hearing.
[The joint prepared statement of Senator King,
Representative Gallagher, Mr. Murphy, and Mr. Cillufo can be
found in the Appendix on page 34.]
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Senator King, for those
remarks, and, again, for your extraordinary leadership in co-
chairing the Cyber Solarium Commission and your commitment to
public service. The citizens of Maine have chosen wisely in
having you as their Senator.
With that, let me now turn to our colleague on the House
Armed Services Committee, the co-chair of the Cyberspace
Solarium Commission, Chairman Mike Gallagher--Co-Chairman Mike
Gallagher.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE GALLAGHER, CHAIRMAN, CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM
COMMISSION

Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Chairman Langevin.
Let me state at the outset that this is the most nervous I
have ever been sitting in this room with all of you, but thank
you, Chairman Langevin, for your leadership, and, particularly,
you know, there was a 2-week stretch when NDAA was happening
where I was not--I was out of commission because my wife had a
baby, and Jim stepped up and really led the way in terms of
making a forceful argument for a lot of our recommendations and
getting them included in the NDAA, and really Project Solarium
or the Cyberspace Solarium Commission represent the culmination
of a lot of work that Jim has been doing for decades. And so it
was an honor to work with you.
Ranking Member Stefanik, thank you for your input into the
report and all of your contributions in this space and your
leadership.
I too have an official written statement that I would like
to submit for the record, if that is okay.
Mr. Langevin. Sure. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Gallagher. And in an attempt to be brief, I will just
say a few things.
When I first approached then Speaker Paul Ryan and asked
him to consider me for this Commission, I got about 10 seconds
into my spiel, and I had printed out my journal article I wrote
on the original Project Solarium, I was really proud of myself,
when he cut me off and said, Mike, no one else has asked me to
be on it, so if that holds, you will have the spot on the
Commission.
And I just bring that up to say I came into this not with a
particular expertise on cybersecurity, but a desire to, if
nothing else, to demystify a lot of what we talk about in
cybersecurity, because while we all have an interest in the
space, it is my experience that this can easily devolve into a
complex discussion of technology and acronyms. And so I hope
you will see reflected in the final report an attempt to speak
in plain language, not only to each other and to the executive
branch, but to the American people about the threats we face in
cyberspace.
And I also came with a desire to demystify a lot of what
happened with the original Project Solarium. And by that I mean
I think it is--we have this tendency to look back on the early
days of the Cold War and think, well, we just had a bunch of
like-minded people that were able to come together and agree on
everything and join hands and sing kumbaya, and that is how we
beat the Soviets and laid the foundation for successful
containment.
I don't believe that is the case. We had very vicious
disagreements at that time. We went through multiple variants
of containment, even within the Truman administration before we
got to Eisenhower. But there was this persistent willingness to
challenge each other in good faith to think through the
unthinkable, think through the consequences of a nuclear
exchange with the Soviets in order to ascertain what we needed
to do to avoid that exchange.
And I just want to highlight that, because I think, among
the many recommendations in this report, one that I think is
absolutely critical is a similar effort today that is needed to
think through the unthinkable in cyberspace, think through the
consequences of what a massive cyber attack on the United
States would look like, what a so-called cyber 9/11 would look
like, and that is why you see a lot of recommendations in here
on why Congress should mandate the executive branch do
continuity of the economy planning. So we think through how we
can get the economy back up and moving when we are faced with
such a significant cyber attack.
And so I just wanted to highlight that, because I really
think it gets to what was the genius at the heart of the
original exercise, which really reflected Eisenhower's style of
making decisions. He had this beautiful phrase where, you know,
we always remember he said, you know, in times of war, the
plans are nothing, but the planning is everything, and that is
reflected.
But he also said to his subordinates frequently when they
are sitting around the National Security Council, there can be
no nonconcurrence through silence. In other words, you had to
speak up. You couldn't claim after the disaster that you
actually had the right answer the whole time but you failed to
share it with your colleagues. And, similarly, we have tried
not to suppress disagreement in this report but to surface it
and, if nothing else, provoke a more thoughtful debate among
our colleagues.
So I thank you for your attention, I thank you for your
engagement, and I thank you for your pushback on our findings.
And I yield the rest of my time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Chairman Gallagher.
The chair now recognizes Commissioner Patrick Murphy for
his opening comments.

STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK MURPHY, COMMISSIONER, CYBERSPACE
SOLARIUM COMMISSION

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Representative Ranking Member Stefanik. I do have written
opening testimony that is brief. If it is okay, I would like to
submit it for the record.
Mr. Langevin. So ordered, without objection.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Murphy. Terrific. And to my other commissioners, thank
you so much.
You know, today is a great day to be back in the House
Armed Services Committee, where I used to serve, and I am
honored to testify today along with my fellow commissioners on
the recommendations from the Cyber Solarium Commission's
report. Our report has been a lot of blood, sweat, and tears
over a year in a bipartisan, bicameral, public-private sector
approach.
And before I was in political public service, I did serve
in the United States Army and am a veteran of the Iraq war, and
I now chair innovation at the United States Military Academy at
West Point.
But when I was appointed to this special bipartisan
commission, I was naturally interested in how the United States
could preserve and employ the military instrument of power to
impose costs on our adversaries and defeat the ghosts in our
networks. And I want to concentrate my comments today on this
important aspect of our Commission's work, because at the end
of the day, it is our United States military that is
responsible for keeping our families safe here at home.
I am firmly in support of our Commission's choice to expand
upon the concept of defend forward as described in the 2018
Department of Defense Cyber Strategy, to incorporate both
military and nonmilitary instruments of power as part of our
Commission's strategy of defend forward and layered cyber
deterrence.
I believe that this strategy, if endorsed and appropriately
resourced by our United States Congress, will ensure that the
United States is prepared to impose costs on our adversaries to
better deter and, if necessary, fight and win conflicts. It is
no secret that our adversaries are using cyberspace to steal
national security, intellectual property, and hold U.S.
military systems and functions at risk. The latter, in
particular, threatens to undermine our deterrence across all of
our instruments of warfare.
The conventional and nuclear technologically advanced
military capabilities that form the bedrock of America's
military advantage also create cyber vulnerabilities that our
adversaries could exploit to their own benefit. And so whether
it is nuclear, conventional, or cyber, the United States must
be confident that its military capabilities will work as
intended.
Moreover, across a spectrum of engagement from competition
to crisis and conflict, the United States must ensure that it
has sufficient cyber forces to accomplish our strategic
objectives in and through cyberspace. This demands sufficient
capability, capacity, and streamlined decision-making processes
enabling rapid and effective cyber response options to impose
meaningful costs against adversaries and to respond to
adversary action.
You know, while our Commission's final report--it boasts
over 80 recommendations, but I would like to draw this
committee's attention, this committee in particular's
attention, to ensure that you give serious consideration to the
following 3 items as it involves defending our Nation.
First, Congress should direct the Department of Defense to
conduct a force structure assessment of the Cyber Mission Force
to ensure that the United States has the appropriate force
structure and capabilities in light of mission requirements and
expectations that are growing in both scope and scale.
Additionally, this assessment must also include ensuring
sufficient resources for entities within our intelligence
community that do play critical combat support agency functions
for our U.S. Cyber Command, particularly the NSA [National
Security Agency].
Second, currently, the CMF, the Cyber Mission Force, has
133 teams comprised of 6,200 incredible individuals. However,
these requirements were determined over 7 years ago in 2013,
before the United States fully appreciated the scope and the
scale of the threat in cyberspace, which has increased mission
requirements on the CMF. A force structure assessment of the
CMF is the first step to make sure that we get it right to
ensure that the CMF has appropriately sized forces and
sufficiently capable--is sufficiently capable to achieve its
objectives.
And last, as it relates to defense, Congress needs to
direct the Department of Defense to conduct a cybersecurity
vulnerability assessment of all these segments of the nuclear
command and control system, continually assess weapons systems'
cyber vulnerabilities.
Now let me go to the economy.
I thought our co-chairman, Senator Angus King, said it
great and appropriately when he said we are the most wired and
vulnerable country in the world. And whether it is my time in
the Pentagon, as a soldier overseas, or in the Congress, we
understand that the greatness of America is that we do have the
number one economy in the world, and we have the number one
military in the world, and it is up to us to make sure we keep
it that way.
And as it goes to our economy, I want to make sure that we
comment and address the continuity of the economy. I believe
the United States must prepare for the cyber day after. The
government needs a continuing plan to ensure that critical data
and technology remains available after a devastating network
attack.
You know, during the height of the Cold War, the U.S.
Government had a plan for the day after. The government did
what it needs to ensure that after a massive nuclear strike,
how do we ensure that our government and how do we get the
private sector operating, especially when it comes to critical
infrastructure, getting it back online, and even how to put
hard currency back into circulation and begin regenerating our
economy.
Similar to the necessary plans to manage a pandemic, we
currently have no such reconstitution plans for such a cyber
event. I strongly believe this Congress should direct the
executive branch to develop and maintain this plan in
consultation with the private sector to ensure the continuous
operation of critical infrastructure of the economy in the
event of a significant cyber disruption.
Like COOP [continuity of operations] and COG [continuity of
government] before it, this will be a critical piece of our
national planning. And in similar vein, you know, Congress
should codify a cyber state of distress tied to a cyber
response and recovery fund to ensure that the CISA
[Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency] and
appropriate Federal agencies have sufficient resources and
capacity to respond to significant cyber incidents before they
turn into major disasters.
You know, while the NDAA functions to provide the DOD
[Department of Defense] with an annual health and wellness
checkup, Congress must not ignore the underlying national
security threats that could damage our infrastructure that is
owned and operated by the private sector, because these digital
foundations drive the American economy. They spur technological
innovation and they support our United States military. The
status quo in cyberspace and this lack of a COOP plan is
unacceptable, and we need your help to protect the key elements
and enablers that make our military and our country it serves
the best in the world.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman and the ranking member, for this
opportunity to testify before you today, and we look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Commissioner Murphy, for those
comments.
And now the chair recognizes Commissioner Frank Cilluffo,
Frank, for any comments that you would like to make.
You are still muted.

STATEMENT OF FRANK CILLUFFO, COMMISSIONER, CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM
COMMISSION

Mr. Cilluffo. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. Gotcha.
Mr. Cilluffo. Thank you for the privilege, Chairman
Langevin, to join you today, Ranking Member Stefanik,
distinguished representatives, and my fellow commissioners. It
really is a privilege to be able to spend a little bit of time
with you and share some of our thoughts on the recommendations
of our Commission's report.
The strategy that we have laid out, as Senator King said,
is the modern credible deterrent that the United States
urgently needs in cyberspace. The current status quo in which
China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea conduct malicious cyber
campaigns against the country is, simply put, unacceptable.
As my colleagues addressed, it is imperative we move fast,
starting with a national cyber strategy and a national cyber
director who will focus government efforts on cybersecurity. I
also second the call that Patrick was espousing to establish
continuity of the economy planning. There can be no more
important efforts than the ones to make our Nation resilient to
cyber attacks.
But I thought I would highlight a couple of other
recommendations that are equally as important.
First, to foot stomp what Patrick had mentioned in terms of
the Cyber Mission Force, we really do need to conduct that
force structure assessment, which is dated in terms of what the
gap and the need is today from when that was initially
established. And the scope of the threat obviously grows
exponentially. And since the bulk of capabilities within DOD to
counter malicious adversary campaigns and impose costs are
within the CMF, we simply have to ensure that they are
resourced and have the authorities to fulfill its job.
I think, as Ms. Stefanik rightly put, we must continue to
lead and innovate by integrating cyber into our warfighting
strategies and doctrine. We need to ensure that we can bring in
both the offensive capabilities and the defensive capabilities
to lead.
Second, as Patrick also mentioned, conventional and nuclear
weapons systems. They need to work when--when needed and as
intended. And I just want to double tap the recommendation in
terms of conducting a cybersecurity vulnerability assessment of
all segments of not only our NC3, our nuclear command and
control systems, but continually assess our conventional
weapons system cyber vulnerabilities as well, and we need to do
this in a systems-to-systems approach. You can't look at it in
isolation. You need to look at it in its totality.
And I also highly support the recommendations that Congress
should require defense industrial base [DIB] participation in
threat intelligence-sharing programs and threat hunting on the
DIB networks.
And as I said before, to preserve and employ the military
instrument of power, we must also maintain resilience in our
economy and critical infrastructure. And, again, I just want to
foot stomp the continuity of economy recommendation. I hope
Congress can act upon that.
Third, the public and private sectors, along with key
international partners, must collaborate to build resilience
and reshape the cyber ecosystem in a manner that enhances
security. This means partnering with the private sector and
especially those that are ideally positioned to scale their
impact on the ecosystem, such as IT [information technology]
companies, ISPs [internet service providers], and cloud service
providers, and to better secure the services and products that
they offer.
The Commission recommended a number of important actions
that Congress should take now to that effect. One, Congress
should establish and fund a national cybersecurity
certification and labeling authority for information and
communications technology funnels, and a bureau of cyber
statistics to provide a foundation for decision makers to base
policies and programs on empirically based evidence. This
statistical information also serves as a platform to facilitate
market-based solutions and mechanisms, such as cybersecurity
insurance.
I also want to thank the committee for including demark
standards in the NDAA. This can go a long way in securing email
from phishing and malware attacks. And while we obviously need
to be focused on advanced persistent threats, often the first
way into one system is through phishing expeditions and the
like.
And, lastly, we need to ensure that our supply chains are
trusted, and Congress should direct the U.S. Government to
develop and implement an industrial base and manufacturing
strategy, again, for information technologies and
communications technologies.
Finally, I would like to focus on a topic that is critical
to mission success. We must, must invest in our Nation's
cybersecurity workforce. The shortfall between supply and
demand in this area is staggering. And it is all the more
concerning because the threat continues to expand
exponentially, and the gap gets greater, not lesser.
And we need to--as a matter of national and economic
security, we need to redouble our efforts to pull in more
veterans and get serious about recruiting and retaining more
women, people of color, and neurodiverse individuals.
Leveraging different perspectives and diversifying a
cybersecurity workforce is not only the right thing to do; it
is the smart thing to do. The time to act is now.
Mr. Chairman, I hope I didn't go over my time, but thank
you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I look
forward to questions. And I really do appreciate your
leadership, not only through the Solarium Commission, but for
many, many years on cyber-related issues. So thank you, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you very much, Commissioner Cilluffo,
and for your longstanding contributions to the issue of
cybersecurity in your own right.
So, with that, I thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony today. We are now going to move to our questions.
Before I do that, though, I was remiss in not recognizing a
couple of other people that were very involved in certainly
helping us to get the recommendations through the Armed
Services Committee and into our mark and to the floor. I want
to recognize Chairman Smith and Ranking Member Thornberry for
their support, as well as Ranking Member Stefanik and staff
director Paul Arcangeli and many others.
Let me also recognize my team, Allison Browning, my--you
know, my colleagues, military fellows, along with Caroline
Goodson and Matt Lake, my other military fellow. And I know
that Eric Snelgrove as well on the minority side was very, very
helpful.
So, with that, let me now turn to questions. And if it is
conducive, Senator King, if I could start with you. If I could
ask, which defense-centric recommendations strike you as the
most urgent, whether directed at the executive branch or the
legislative branch?
You are muted. You just need to unmute.
Senator King. If I seem a little out of breath, it is
because I just voted. I had to go upstairs for a vote, but I
was able to listen to Frank's testimony, so I appreciate it.
I think, Jim, our probably the most significant
recommendation that relates indirectly to defense but is--
overall is the national cyber director. The reality is that,
right now, we have enormously capable people throughout the
Federal Government, but there is no central point of oversight.
There is no central point of coordination. There is no central
point of defining strategy. And I really think that that is--
that is one of the critical recommendations. It is one that is
already in your committee bill, which I think is really
important.
I think, secondly--and Patrick Murphy mentioned this--the
force structure assessment. We haven't really looked at the
force structure of--in the Defense Department on cyber since
2013, and I think we all know that there have been dramatic
changes since then. There have been dramatic changes in the
risk, in the complexity, in the adversaries, in the target
space. So I think that is probably--I would put that next in
line.
And then the development of the cyber workforce, because we
can have--we can talk about force structure, but if we don't
have the people to fill those positions with the skills, then
we are just not going to make it. For example, a cyber
workforce, there is a--we have a scholarship program now that
is very effective, but it has graduated, I think, 2,000 people
in the last 4 or 5 years. We need to--or 3,600, I guess. We
need to graduate 2,000 a year. I mean, we have a tremendous
need for these skilled people.
So I would say national cyber director, assess the cyber
force, and develop workforce would be my first three priorities
in the--in that--in the military area.
Mr. Langevin. Yeah. Very good. Very insightful. I
completely concur. Thank you for those observations. And we
need to grow the size of the cyber pie, not just competing for
a bigger slice of it from a government standpoint. We need to--
it helps both government and private sector to grow the size of
the cyber workforce pie. And I concur with the other
recommendations you highlighted.
How about Chairman Gallagher, same question to you, what do
you see as the most urgent and important of the 82
recommendations, if you would like to comment?
Mr. Gallagher. Well, I agree with Senator King that I
think, over time, we will realize that the force structure
assessment of the Cyber Mission Force will end up having
perhaps the biggest impact on DOD over the next decade if we
come back with a finding that suggests that we do not have
enough personnel dedicated to the issue.
But I do think perhaps more urgent, and it is an area where
I know there is still some debate, is to get the authorities
right that would allow us to do threat hunting on defense
industrial base networks. I think one of our biggest findings
in the report was that, while we are getting a better awareness
of our own systems, we still, down to the level of some of our
DOD contractors, subcontractors, all the small companies that,
you know, work with the big defense primes, don't have the
level of visibility on the threat picture and the security of
their networks that we need.
And so we have a lot of recommendations in chapter 6
towards that end. And I just would argue that we need to figure
that piece out, because we just can't be in the process of
reacting to cyber intrusions after the fact. We have to
identify those threats at a quicker timeline than that at which
our adversaries can break out on networks.
So I just would highlight some of what my colleagues have
talked about in terms of threat hunting, not only on DOD
systems, but on the whole defense industrial base network.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you for that.
Let me turn to Commissioner Murphy now. Commissioner
Murphy, based on your time within the Department of the Army as
a soldier, as an officer, and a civilian leader, what are your
views on the Solarium's recommendation on evaluating different
models for their Reserve Component? Are you optimistic that the
Army, as an institution, can accommodate a different model for
their Reserves than existed, say, for the last several decades?
Mr. Murphy. I do, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate that
question. Can I just address something? I think this is the
first time in American history we had someone testifying and at
the same time voting in the U.S. Senate when Senator King did
that about 15 minutes ago.
But to your question, Mr. Chairman, absolutely. We all know
that the largest fighting force we have in America is our U.S.
Army. We have got a million soldiers strong, 300,000 civilians.
But of those a million soldiers, unlike the other services, the
majority of our soldiers are actually in a Reserve Component,
in the National Guard, in the Army Reserves. And that is why it
is critical that when we say we have in the CMF 133 teams, you
know, Chairman Milley and I, when we were running the Army, we
made it a point that we didn't talk about just the 10 Active
Duty divisions. We were one Army, and we made sure that we
fought as one Army. We trained as one Army. And that includes
with cyber.
So, yes, I think our Army, now being led very well by my
battle buddy from Fort Bragg, Secretary Ryan McCarthy, and also
General McConville, they get that, and they are trying to
really do what they can to partnership with the HASC [House
Armed Services Committee] and the Congress to make sure that
they had that proper balance between the Reserve and Active
Component as it relates to cyber, as it relates to CMF. But we
need to make sure that as we address this assessment, which we
critically need, because, remember, Mr. Chairman, in my
statement, 7 years ago is when we did the last assessment. That
was before we even had defend forward. That is before we even
had layered deterrent.
So now that we have a bigger footprint digitally and we are
still vulnerable--and I said, as Senator King mentioned, we are
the most vulnerable country in the world because we are so
wired. And when we look at the pandemic of coronavirus and what
it has done to our economy, imagine the destruction which cyber
would do. And that is why, to your point, we need to make sure
that we have this assessment and make sure that assessment
absolutely positively incorporates the Reserve Component of our
military forces.
Mr. Langevin. Well said. Well said. Thank you.
Thank you all for your--the answer to those questions. They
are all very insightful answers, and I thank you again for your
work on the Commission.
With that, now I want to turn to Ranking Member Stefanik
for any questions she may have.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Chairman Langevin.
I wanted to ask Senator King, both in my opening statement
and many of our witnesses have touched upon this, and that is
the importance of establishing deterrence in cyberspace that
was featured very prominently in the report, but the Commission
also notes that true deterrence must be adapted from how it is
applied in other domains.
What actions can we take to better deter our adversaries,
including state actors like Russia, China, Iran, and North
Korea, from conducting cyber attacks on American interests?
Senator King. Well, I think there are a series of steps,
and one that hasn't really been mentioned very strongly so far
is the international community. We are in the infancy of the
law of cyber war, if you will, and we need to be more active
participants in setting the standards and the guardrails and
the norms for activity in cyberspace so that when we do act,
whether it is the imposition of sanctions or other responses,
we are not acting alone or unilaterally.
Winston Churchill said the only thing worse than fighting
with your allies is fighting without allies. And that is one of
our major advantages on the world stage with regard to our
principal near-peer adversaries of Russia and China. I was in
Asia about a year ago, and the--someone said, America has
allies; China has clients. And I think that is--so that is step
one, is to develop an international set of norms that will
themselves be at least some level of deterrent.
Secondly, we have to have a clear declaratory policy. I
emphasize the word ``declaratory,'' because if you don't tell
your adversary that you will respond, then it is not a
deterrent. And so I think we need to have a much clearer
statement of our doctrine, of our strategy, so that adversaries
know that they will, in fact, pay a price.
The problem has been you can argue that we have done a good
job of deterring catastrophic cyber attacks. Of course, there
is no way to measure something that doesn't happen, but we
haven't deterred lower--below the threshold of the use of force
cyber attacks, whether it is the OPM breach that you mentioned,
or the attacks on our election, our election infrastructure, or
the kind of intellectual property theft. We haven't done a very
good job of deterring that. So I think the important thing is
to establish, (a), the means, the credibility, the credible
response; and, secondly, to declare it, to make it clear that
you will not attack the United States and not have a
significant cost imposed upon you.
So I think international norms and a clear declaratory
strategy. It is not exactly, as you note, I think, as you
understand, it is not exactly analogous to the nuclear
deterrent. It is a different and more subtle kind of issue. But
I do believe that unless we make it clear to our adversaries
that they have a--they have to calculate that there will be
costs imposed, and it may--it doesn't have to be cyber for
cyber. It may be sanctions or other kinds of responses. Until
they make that calculation, they are going to keep coming after
us.
So that would be my response to that very good question.
Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Senator King.
And my next and final question I am going to address to
Congressman or Chairman Gallagher. As you know, oftentimes it
is not the DOD or even the Federal Government that is the
target of our adversaries in cyberspace. It is often our
cities, our States, universities, or private-sector businesses.
And many of those entities are ill-suited and, frankly, ill-
prepared to protect against cyber threats from nation-states.
How do we address this capability gap, and what are some of
the Commission's recommendations that address this really
important issue where we tend to have siloing within our
Federal agencies?
Mr. Gallagher. That is a great question. I would connect it
to your previous question, actually. Actually, I think this is
the primary difference between the logic of strategic nuclear
deterrence and the logic of deterrence as we see it in
cyberspace, which is that so much of what we are trying to
protect and so many of the actors that we are trying to get to
buy into that logic are not card-carrying members of the
Federal Government and certainly don't wear uniforms.
And so we had a private-sector commissioner, Tom Fanning,
who runs a major energy company, and he would remind us
constantly that 85 percent of the critical infrastructure in
this country is owned by the private sector.
I think what we also see, to get to the heart of your
question, is the good-faith effort to thread the needle in this
report between the recognition that the Federal Government has
to compel the organizations you identify, be they universities
or companies or major banks on Wall Street, against the
unwillingness to saddle them with a bunch of counterproductive
and onerous regulations that might stifle innovation and
entrepreneurship in this country, which, as Senator King and I
say at the outset, is our best path to beating China over the
long term.
So the approach we took, whether it is through
recommendations like mandating penetration testing for major
publicly traded companies or requiring companies that are part
of the defense industrial base to participate in threat
intelligence sharing or establishing a joint planning office
within CISA in order to more proactively engage with the
private sector so they are actually integrated into our
defensive planning process, we get their input on the front
end, is a mix, I would say, of carrots and sticks.
We want the C-suite executives to take cybersecurity
seriously, and we are prepared to sort of nudge them in that
direction. But we also want them to view the Federal Government
as a valuable partner, a partner that understands that, in many
ways, the private sector is the main effort in cyberspace and
the Federal Government is the supporting effort.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Ranking Member
Stefanik.
Mr. Larsen is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you--thank you.
My first question is for Representative Gallagher, and this
gets to the business of the private sector side of things,
because we have the Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification
[CMMC] process now working its way through the Pentagon and
being utilized, mainly focused on smaller businesses within the
defense industrial base.
Did you look at how that could be or should be integrated
with what your recommendations are for private-sector cyber
hygiene?
Mr. Gallagher. I think our view is that it needs to be more
expansive than that, and that--I think it needs to take a prior
step of even understanding who is included in the phrase
``defense industrial base.'' We have actually gone through this
process before, not in a cyber context, where the Pentagon has
actually tried to have what I would call total defense
manufacturing visibility. Who are all the companies that are
part of this ecosystem? And for whatever reason, we haven't
gotten there. It is now even more complex in cyberspace.
So I view our recommendations as perhaps building upon the
efforts you reference. I know that those--there are a lot of
companies who may not want to participate in that, but I just
would say, if you are working with the Pentagon, if you are
working on systems that are critical to our national defense,
and if we know that you are a target for foreign actors, be
they state-sponsored hackers from China or cyber criminals, you
are going to have to demonstrate a higher level of
cybersecurity than those companies have right now.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. Yeah.
For Commissioner Murphy, good to see you again,
Commissioner. Recommendations recommend that the U.S.
strengthen existing bilateral and multilateral relationships.
Can you talk specifically how the U.S. could partner with NATO
[North Atlantic Treaty Organization] to enable and help the
member countries strengthen their systems against cyber
attacks?
Mr. Murphy. Absolutely. And, Congressman Larsen, it is
great to be with you again, and I hope your home State of
Washington is doing great.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. On your earlier question, really quick, on the
private side sector, I know with the CMMC, what we need to do
also is that data. Data is king, as you know. And that data and
that--really that what we are calling the CSET, the Bureau of
Cyber Statistics and Emerging Threats, that is critical,
because we need that to make sure that we have a more robust
insurance program, et cetera. So I just wanted to dovetail on
that.
But to your question directly, no doubt what makes America
the shining city on the hill is our diplomatic power. You look
at the symbol, the American eagle, 1 talon, 13 arrows
signifying the 13 colonies and our military might, the other
talon with the olive branch showing our diplomatic power and
using smart power.
And so, with that, and with our very specific
recommendations that we were tasked to do is asking for a new
Assistant Secretary of State. And this one is very, very
important, because we need to make sure that we strengthen the
norms, we make sure that we use that diplomatic power to let
other nations, like China, like Russia, like Iran, know that
this is not acceptable, and establishing those norms and making
sure that we bring everybody to the table. And I think that is
critically important, and we do that by also advocating,
frankly, in the White House for the NCD, the national cyber
director.
You know when we worked together in the HASC that I am a
big believer in leadership and one throat to choke, and by
having one person, one quarterback within the Executive Office
of the President, that national cyber director will help make
sure we are streamlining within our government and also in the
private sector, what we need to do to protect our military, to
protect our economy and our companies, and also to make sure we
are keeping our families and our economy safe.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Thanks. Final question will be for
Commissioner Cilluffo, because you shouldn't be exempt from
having to answer questions while you are here.
Senator King mentioned paying the price. I think it is an
attribution. So can you talk a little bit more deeply about
what the Commission considered with regards to a policy of
attribution? And, second, would attribution apply only to those
countries that are specifically listed in the National Security
Strategy or would it be any country that is participating in
cyber intrusions, which sometimes are not those countries that
we consider adversaries?
Mr. Cilluffo. Thank you, sir, for the excellent question. I
mean, for starters, attribution has improved dramatically over
the years. We are not fully where we want to be, but I think we
are in a much better place. And I think it is worth noting--and
this transcends all of the various questions we have seen
here--is that cyber is its own domain, but it transcends all
the other domains, whether air, land, sea, space, and there are
other means of collection that can be brought to bear to
enhance our attribution, whether it is through technical means
or through human sources. So the bottom line is our attribution
is improving.
You have probably noted a big uptick in at least Five Eyes
countries coming together and doing joint and shared
attribution. I think this actually is having some very positive
net effect in terms of some of our adversaries and actually
putting them on notice, as Senator King was discussing earlier.
So we need to be able to have some declaratory sort of impact.
And I might note our transatlantic partners with NATO, you
have also seen an uptick in joint attribution.
Bottom line is, just the facts, ma'am. We have got to be
going where the facts arise. Obviously, there are other
potential diplomatic questions when discussing allies, but I
think that in terms of informing our USG [United States
Government] entities and some of our dot-com entities, we have
got a responsibility to do that as the U.S. Government.
So longwinded way of saying I think you are going to see us
moving out from our Five Eyes to our NATO partners to allies
that don't exist in any of those organizations, such as South
Korea, Japan, Israel, and a handful of others, and then build--
India, and building out from there. So I think we have made
some progress, we have got to continue to do more, and we have
got to hold our adversaries to account. There have to be
consequences. There has to be impact.
And I think it is worth noting that we do suggest we lean
forward in a lot of these issues. We do support the defend
forward concept, persistent engagement concept, but not only
through the lens of the military, that is a crucial element of
it, but all instruments of statecraft.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
Before we go to Mr. Bacon, I will comment and say that Mr.
Cilluffo's answer is absolutely right that we are getting
better at attribution. What we do need to do, though, is
shorten the timeline between incident and our response. I
applaud the Europeans who are--the sanctions that they put on
the entities that were responsible for several high-profile
attacks or intrusions, but those things happened, you know,
several months ago. There is such a long lag between action and
consequence. If we can, I think both United States, Europeans,
our partners, need to work more quickly to close that gap
between action, between incident and response. So we punish the
bad actors, and they realize it is relevant to the action.
With that, Mr. Bacon is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you there, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank the Commission for their hard work, a very thoughtful
discussion. Great product. I appreciate it.
I am not sure who to target the questions to, so I will
just--whoever feels best to answer them, just jump in there. I
am curious to hear more about the national cyber director, and
the reason is our cyber attack is under Cyber Command
primarily. Cyber intelligence is primarily under NSA, but what
is most worrisome is the cyber defense. It is really no--there
is no single authority.
So is this national cyber director and the team that were
put in the executive branch or that you are proposing, is it
primarily focused on the defense end or does it involve all
three: attack, intelligence, defense? And if it is all three,
how will that impact the chain of command for a cyber attack?
Is it that command goes through the Cyber commander, Secretary
of Defense, and the President? So I am just sort of curious to
hear more. Thank you.
Senator King. Mr. Chairman, perhaps I can take that. That
is a really good question. The purpose of the national cyber
director is planning and coordination, not operations. So the
chain of command between the--between Cyber Command, Secretary
of Defense, and the President would not be interrupted. That is
not the purpose of this new office in the Executive Office of
the President. We want this person to be accountable for the
coordination, but does not--would not have an operational role.
Also, a piece of it is planning, as we have been talking
about, and coordinating planning throughout, whether it is in
CISA in Homeland Security or in other--in NIST [National
Institute of Standards and Technology] or wherever it is in the
Federal Government. But I think the specific answer to your
question is we are not talking about operations for this
position but coordination, planning, and budget coordination.
This person would have an oversight over the budgets of the
various agencies, not a veto but a recommendation and a
certification through the OMB [Office of Management and Budget]
process.
Again, the whole idea is to bring some level of--I guess I
would call it just sensible organization because, right now,
there is nobody in charge. But to answer your specific
question, it is still Cyber Command, Secretary of Defense,
President of the United States.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you very much, Senator. I appreciate that.
I surely see a need on the defense side. There is very
diffused responsibilities on defense, and it just seems to me
that there is a definite need at least on that part of our
cyber operations.
Change in topics. I have a little experience with cyber,
being in the Air Force for a long time. It seems, if I could
generalize, Russia was more focused on military cyber, IO
[information operations]; China a lot more on the economic
intelligence. Is that generalizations or is that still
considered, by and large, still the case?
Mr. Gallagher. Well, I think that is largely right, though
neither, you know, Russia would ignore the economic domain, nor
would China ignore the military domain.
I think if you read the report, in particular the threat
analysis portion of the report, it is clear that we agree with
the fundamental finding of the National Security Strategy and
the National Defense Strategy that China is the pacing threat.
China is the pacing threat in cyber in terms of the sheer
resources they are devoting to this issue. I think we are--we
are concerned about Russia. We talk about Russia. We are
concerned about non-state actors. But China really comes out as
a threat that organizes a lot of our response.
I am not disagreeing with your analysis, but at least a lot
of what I realized in the course of participating in this
Commission was that we are insufficiently concerned with the
actions of the Chinese Communist Party in cyber.
Mr. Bacon. I appreciate that. And my generalizations were
going back, not necessarily current. So just curious if it was
still the case.
I think the areas that concern me most is the energy sector
and the financial sector, you know, whether it is Wall Street.
I really think China or Russia would really create havoc with
focused attacks on those areas, and we have obviously got to
raise our game if we want to defend those two critical parts of
our country.
Mr. Gallagher. Maybe I can connect it to your first
question. I think, you know, under the doctrine of civil-
military fusion, China is not making these clear siloed
distinctions between military operations and sort of economic
warfare. And I do think that is an area where we hope the
national cyber director can step up and lead that defensive
effort.
One of our biggest findings in the report was that a lot of
the work that this committee has done in recent years and the
fiscal year 2019 NDAA to make cyber surveillance and
reconnaissance a traditional military activity and then to have
NSPM-13 [National Security Presidential Memorandum-13] layered
on top of that has really been a positive development and
helped us on the offensive side. We need similar attention paid
to the defensive side, so that someone in the Federal
Government is the single belly button we can push and is
proactively reaching out to the banks and the financial
community to say, hey, here is what we are thinking. What input
do you have for us?
Mr. Bacon. Chairman Gallagher, I agree. I yield. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you very much, Mr. Bacon.
Next on my list I have Congressman Khanna, but I don't know
that he is still there.
Are there any members that have not been recognized that
would like to be recognized?
Ms. Stefanik. We are all good in the room, Jim.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. I guess I have one more question on
continuity of the economy. And would anybody like to comment
on--and I agree that the comments that were made earlier about
continuity of the economy are very important. Commissioner
Murphy addressed a lot of these. But what role do you see, say,
the Department of Treasury, Department of Commerce, and then
independent agencies like the Federal Reserve in a continuity
of economy plan proposal, and any thoughts on how that should
work?
Senator King. Jim, let me start off on that--or I should
say Congressman. Sorry.
I think one thing the pandemic has taught us is that the
unthinkable can happen. If you had told us all a year ago we
would be wearing masks and it would be--we would have large
part of our economy having severe difficulty, all the things
that are happening, it would have sounded like science fiction.
The unthinkable can happen, and that is really what we are
talking about here.
And I think one of the problems that our Commission tried
to attack head on was the fact that has been alluded to today,
and the prior questioner mentioned this, in terms of the
financial sector, the energy sector. The target is mostly in
the private sector. So the continuity of the economy, the
planning has to engage the private sector. We have to determine
what are the crucial elements? What are the crucial sectors
that need to be functioning, no matter what? And how do we
ensure their protection?
I think this is one of our most important recommendations.
This is one that is in the Senate bill. I don't think it is in
the House bill, and hopefully we are going be able to pull it
through in the conference committee. But we have really got to
be thinking about--you know, an ounce of prevention is a pound
of cure. I mean, we have got to be thinking about how to react
when the unthinkable happens. And if every--if everybody is
pointing at one another and there is no plan on the shelf, we
are going to be--it is going to be infinitely worse and take
infinitely longer to recover.
So I think this is one of our most important
recommendations. And, overall, I think one of the most
important insights of the Commission was the extent to which we
had to really forge a new relationship. We have to think in a
new way about how we relate, how the government and the private
sector relate in terms of sharing intelligence, sharing attack
data, cooperating, talking to allies. I mean, it is really a
very comprehensive approach to this. And I think that is one of
the significant insights that we bring to the table in the
report.
Thank you.
Mr. Cilluffo. Mr. Chairman, can I add a thought on that?
When we talk about the continuity of the economy, it did, as
Senator King said, it became loud and clear just how important
that is in a post-COVID environment, both directly and
indirectly. And one of the things we did really zero in on, if
you think about an x- and a y-axis, you have our critical
infrastructures, and some are even more so critical than
others, and we mentioned a couple of them already here today:
energy, financial services, telecommunications, and, obviously,
the defense industrial base.
But then also on a y-axis we have got these critical
functions. So agnostic to the particular sector, whether it is
the cloud or whether it is timing and signaling from a GPS
[Global Positioning System] perspective or a PNT-assured--
positioning, navigating, timing, and signaling kind of
perspective--this is how we have got to start racking and
stacking some of these issues.
And I might note, for the Armed Services Committee as a
whole, the challenge around mission assurance or the ability
for DOD to rely upon civilian entities and critical
infrastructures to project power, deploy forces, this is a
tough--we have got to put--this is a tough circle to put in a
square sort of peg. So I think this is where the interaction
between DOD and CISA at DHS and FBI, as well from an
investigatory standpoint, becomes so important, and I think
that just makes the case for a national cyber director that
much more important. So we at least have the visibility across
the various playbooks that can come together to be able to make
sure that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
And this was a point that came up in various questions as
well. I mean, at the end of the day, what I think is so
important is also on the intelligence side. The new national
cyber director that was stood up at NSA is going to play a very
important role in enabling CISA, in--so CISA can better reach
out to our State, local, Tribal, territorial partners and, of
course, the private sector, and same thing in terms of FBI.
So this, again, may not sound sexy, but it is the org--it
is the spaghetti org [organizational] chart right now that
needs to be brought--tamed a little bit and brought under
control.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Chairman, can I just put a stamp on what
Frank just said real quick, sir----
Mr. Langevin. Sure.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. If that is okay with you? One
minute. Two things. One, we are going to get caught with our
pants down if we don't focus on continuity of the economy,
period. And that is why, you know, in my opening statement, I
talked about making sure that we have Congress codifying a
cyber state of distress that is tied to that cyber response and
recovery fund, so, you know, that we need to direct the
executive branch and make sure that we do have that continuity
of the economy planning that is in consultation with the
private sector. We absolutely need to do that.
I would also say to you, when we talk about the NCD,
national cyber director, why that is critically important. As
Frank just said about, when he was talking about DHS and CISA
and making sure State and local, we also need to ensure that
our allies--that is why we were calling for that Assistant
Secretary of State--that our allies aren't a launching pad to
hurt us here or hurt our private sector clients or our military
but, secondly, so that it can more quickly do attribution.
Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Commissioner Murphy and
to all of our commissioners, for those answers on the topic.
That concludes my questions. I will turn now to Ranking
Member Stefanik for any final questions she may have.
Ms. Stefanik. I am all set, Jim. Thank you to our
witnesses.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. All right. Are there any members in the
room that I can't see that have not been recognized and would
like to ask a question?
Ms. Stefanik. No. We are all set.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Well, with that, let me conclude by
thanking all the members of the Commission. You did an
extraordinary job here today but an even more extraordinary job
in the--on the Commission, both Senator King and Congressman
Gallagher, our two co-chairs, and Commissioner Murphy,
Commissioner Cilluffo, and the rest of the commissioners. Thank
you all for your extraordinary work. You have made a major
contribution to better protecting the country in cyberspace
with your combined efforts, and it is an honor and a privilege
to be one of the four Members of Congress joining you on the
Commission. It was one of the highlights of my 20 years in
Congress to be a part of this effort, and I just--I found it so
meaningful and, again, time well spent.
And I like the fact from the very beginning that we
determined that we were not going to allow just this to be a
report that would sit on a shelf somewhere, but we wanted
actionable findings, recommendations that we could implement
and, again, achieve meaningful change.
So with that, I thank you all for your participation today,
your service to the country.
With that, the hearing now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:14 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

July 30, 2020

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

July 30, 2020

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

July 30, 2020

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN

Ms. Houlahan. The Commission's recommendation #1.5 regards
recruiting and retaining a strong cyber workforce. I really appreciate
what you've put forward. A different congressionally mandated group,
the National Commission on Artificial Intelligence recommended the
establishment of a U.S. Digital Service Academy that would be a
dedicated effort to train the next generation of tech talent. Is this a
recommendation you would agree with?
Mr. Gallagher and Mr. Cilluffo. The government workforce is short
more than 33,000 cybersecurity workers in a workforce of nearly
100,000. Simply expanding government recruitment efforts is not
sufficient to provide the cybersecurity workforce needed to protect
national security. Rather, the nation's cybersecurity workforce
development ecosystem must grow as a whole. Currently, innovative
programs are taking the first steps toward addressing this need by
building partnerships between educators, government, and industry, but
we need to do more. The Cyberspace Solarium Commission studied many
federal government hiring programs, private sector initiatives, and
educational efforts, and recommended that it should invest in existing
programs such as the CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service (SFS), which
is a program ripe for expansion, as well as the FBI Cyber STEM program
and CISA's Cybersecurity Education Training Assistance Program on a
national scale.
The SFS is a joint program between OPM, the NSF, and DHS that helps
students finance their education in cyber-related topics in exchange
for a term of service working for a federal or state, local, or tribal
government upon graduation.\1\ The program works much like the Reserve
Officer Training Corps (ROTC) program on many U.S. campuses, only
better--it awards grants to participating universities, which then
award scholarships to students while also using a portion of the
funding to build out the university's cyber-focused programming. As a
result, the program strengthens educational offerings on cyber topics
at the same time that it recruits and develops students who are
prepared for federal cyber service. Currently, there are 85
participating universities and community colleges offering SFS
scholarships. The program requires that students may pursue degrees
that are a ``coherent formal program that is focused on
cybersecurity,'' and it has supported students working toward a
bachelor's, master's, or research-based doctorate degree focused on
cybersecurity.\2\ The recent expansion of the SFS program through the
Community College Cyber Pilot Program extends eligibility to students
pursuing an associate's degree or specialized program certifications in
the field of cybersecurity as well, provided that the students already
have a bachelor's degree or are military veterans.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service,'' Office of Personnel
Management, accessed July 7, 2020, https://www.sfs.opm.gov/
default.aspx.
\2\ ``CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service, Overview,'' Office of
Personnel Management, accessed August 4, 2020, https://www.sfs.opm.gov/
ProspectiveStud.aspx; ``CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service, Students:
Participating Institutions,'' Office of Personnel Management, accessed
August 4, 2020, https://www.sfs.opm.gov/ContactsPI.aspx.
\3\ ``Community College Cyber Pilot Program (C3P),'' National
Science Foundation, Division of Graduate Education, https://
www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=505573.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The program has graduated about 275 students per year in recent
years,\4\ and since its creation in 2000, it has placed 3,600
CyberCorps graduates in public-sector cybersecurity jobs in more than
140 different government organizations.\5\ These graduates have brought
cyber expertise to the government across a variety of cybersecurity
areas, including cyber policy and strategy, security architecture, and
cyber operations planning. Because a limited percentage of students can
fulfill their service obligation in state, local, or tribal governments
as well as in the federal government, the program also provides the
opportunity for a limited percentage of graduates to work in public
education. This helps address the national dearth of teachers able to
provide cybersecurity instruction.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ More specifically, CyberCorps SFS is projected to graduate 380
students in 2020. It graduated 307 students in 2019, 324 in 2018, 290
in 2017, 245 in 2016, and 211 in 2015. Data provided by NSF.
\5\ OPM, ``CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service: History/Overview.''
At the time of access, the data cited was available at https://
www.sfs.opm.gov/Overview-History.aspx; it now can be found at https://
web.archive.org/web/20200608183458/https://www.sfs.opm.gov/Overview-
History.aspx and https://www.nass.org/sites/default/files/
2019%20Summer/presentations/presentation-sfs-sum
mer19.pdf.
\6\ In fact, legislation has been proposed for inclusion in S.4049,
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, explicitly
permitting up to 10 percent of SFS graduates to fulfill their service
obligation in education roles in higher education institutions that
participate in the SFS program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the program has an impressive track record, the Commission
believes that--given the country's inability to fill tens of thousands
of cybersecurity jobs in both the government and private sector--the
number of SFS participants should be much higher (Report Recommendation
1.5). Accordingly, taking practical steps toward increasing the number
of students also requires increasing the number of participating
institutions and expanding university- and federal-level outreach about
the program. The Commission recommends a goal of graduating 2,000
CyberCorps students per year. To reach that target, the Commission
advocates for SFS's budget to be increased 20 percent above inflation
annually over a 10-year period to support scholarships to additional
students and the programmatic efforts needed for expansion. To help
jumpstart that budget growth, the Commission recommends increasing
funding for the CyberCorps SFS program by $20 million in FY2021.
As your question stated, another Congressionally-mandated group,
the National Commission on Artificial Intelligence recommended the
establishment of a U.S. Digital Service Academy that would be a
dedicated effort to train the next generation of tech talent. A brick
and mortar effort similar to the service academies. We believe this
idea has exceptional merit and should be studied and, if all
expectations are met, funded. This USDSA would service as a ``service
academy'' partner to the ``ROTC'' like efforts of the CyberCorps SFS
program The U.S. military benefits from both--the ROTC graduates are on
the whole significantly cheaper, but the service academy graduates come
with a better grounding in government (service) processes and efforts.
An unusual twist is that we would need to consider whether USDSA would
have the same flexibilities as CyberCorps SFS--graduate degrees,
associate degrees, and limited year scholarships--many SFS are two and
three year scholarship students, who are not selected until they have
demonstrated some college success. A USDSA study should review and
identify the unique attributes that the USDSA would bring to the
effort. Moreover, it is important to weave this program into the
existing policy proposals and efforts ongoing at various agencies,
including DHS, which has proposed a Cyber Workforce Institute. The
nation needs one cohesive strategy with streamlined implementation and
funding to ensure that agencies pull in the same direction, instead of
at cross purposes.
With the high number of annual openings required to be filled, it
is likely that the U.S. government needs both an expanded CyberCorps
SFS and a brick and mortar cyber institute.--A study to work out the
details on all these proposals would provide needed strategic direction
as would efforts to determine how to grow the CyberCorps SFS to 2000
plus graduates a year as recommended by the Cyberspace Solarium
Commission.
Ms. Houlahan. Did you look into current contracting procedures, and
do you believe the Department is missing out on innovative cyber
solutions due to current contracting policies?
Mr. Gallagher and Mr. Cilluffo. Government contracting is an
extremely difficult and complex area, and while it was not our primary
focus, we did attempt to make some recommendations which would enhance
and streamline government contracting for the cyber domain.
The Commission recommends the executive branch direct the Federal
Acquisition Regulation Council (FARC) and the Office of Management and
Budget to update its cybersecurity regulations in the Federal
Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and cybersecurity guidance under Federal
Information Security Management Act at least every five years, to
account for changing cybersecurity standards, and explore ways to
integrate and fully account for existing models and frameworks, such as
the Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification, in the FAR. In
addition, the FARC should be directed to update the FAR to require that
federal civilian agency contractors adhere to the contractor-exclusive
Binding Operational Directive issued by DHS.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ The Binding Operational Directives (BODs) identify requirements
for federal agencies in the executive branch. Each BOD prescribes a set
of actions that agency chief information security officers or their
equivalents must take to manage their enterprise networks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commission also recommends the executive branch update to
Federal Procurement Regulation and Guidelines, including the FAR, to
require National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority
certifications and labeling for certain information technology products
and services procured by the federal government to enable the broader
adoption of Certification and Labeling across the nation. The executive
branch should be required to report to Congress on its decision to
require National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority
certifications and labeling within the FAR, the extent of these
requirements, or an explanation if no action was taken. This
recommendation is necessary because the U.S. government is
institutionally and legally limited in its ability to attest and
certify that products adhere to security standards, and third-party
efforts to fill this gap lack sufficient scale, funding, and maturity
to enact meaningful change in the marketplace.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Several nongovernmental initiatives, such as Digital Standard
and the Cyber Independent Testing Laboratory, are aimed at testing and
providing security information for consumer IT and IoT devices. NIST,
under Section 401 of the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014, is
tasked with coordinating the development and dissemination of standards
and best practices for cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federally procured information technology fully accounts for
identified good security practices for building secure software and
systems, such as those offered by NIST's Secure Software Development
Framework \9\ and the ISO/IEC 27000 standards family.\10\ When
developing requirements, the council should take into account lessons
learned with NIST Special Publication 800.171, comments from DOD's
Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification, rulings or comments of the
Federal Acquisition Security Council, and the ISO/IEC 27000 standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Donna Dodson, Murgiah Soppaya, and Karen Scarfone, ``Mitigating
the Risk of Software Vulnerabilities by Adopting a Secure Software
Development Framework'' (National Institute of Standards and
Technology, 2019), https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/white-
paper/2019/06/07/mitigating-risk-of-software-vulnerabilities-with-ssdf/
draft/documents/ssdf-for-mitigati
ng-risk-of-software-vulns-draft.pdf.
\10\ International Organization for Standardization, ``ISO/IEC
27001 Information Security Management'' International Organization for
Standardization, https://www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-
security.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Providers of information technology submit software transparency
and software bills of materials for the systems they provide in support
of government missions in line with the certifications and labels
developed by the National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling
Authority (recommendation 4.1).\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``NTIA Software Component Transparency,'' National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, September 5, 2019,
https://www.ntia.doc.gov/SoftwareTransparency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Upon the development of cybersecurity insurance policy
certifications (recommendation 4.4), U.S. government contractors
maintain a certified level of cybersecurity insurance and explore
whether the Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification should be
updated to require cybersecurity insurance.
Additionally, to enhance the flexibility and agility of U.S. Cyber
Command in a dynamic operating environment, Congress should direct in
the FY2021 NDAA that the Department of Defense submit a budget
justification display that includes a Major Force Program (MFP)
category for the training, manning, and equipping of U.S. Cyber
Command. According to 10 U.S. Code Sec. 238, DOD is required to submit
to Congress a budget justification display that includes an MFP
category for the Cyber Mission Force. However, this law was enacted in
2014, before U.S. Cyber Command was elevated to a unified combatant
command. Therefore, there is a need for a new budget justification
display that establishes an MFP category for U.S. Cyber Command. A new
MFP funding category for U.S. Cyber Command would provide it with
acquisition authorities over goods and services unique to the command's
needs. It should also provide a process to expeditiously resolve
Combatant Command/Service funding disputes, consistent with the intent
of DOD Directive 5100.03.\12\ This would be analogous to the MFP
funding category for U.S. Special Operations Command, which was created
to support comparable needs for operational adaptability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ U.S. Department of Defense Directive 5100.03, ``Support of the
Headquarters of Combatant and Subordinate Unified Commands'' (February
9, 2011; incorporating Change 1, September 7, 2017), https://
www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodd/510003p.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
