- LEGISLATION TO REFORM THE FEDERAL RESERVE ON ITS 100–YEAR ANNIVERSARY

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATION TO REFORM THE

FEDERAL RESERVE ON ITS

100 YEAR ANNIVERSARY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 10, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 113-89

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

91-153 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California, Vice     MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman    CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
Emeritus                         NYDIA M. VELAAZQUEZ, New York
PETER T. KING, New York              BRAD SHERMAN, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  RUBEEN HINOJOSA, Texas
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          AL GREEN, Texas
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
BILL POSEY, Florida                  KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
Pennsylvania                     JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DENNY HECK, Washington
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
LUKE MESSER, Indiana

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 10, 2014................................................     1
Appendix:
July 10, 2014................................................    57

WITNESSES
Thursday, July 10, 2014

Calabria, Mark A., Director, Financial Regulation Studies, the
Cato Institute.................................................    10
Johnson, Simon, Ronald Kurtz Professor of Entrepreneurship, Sloan
School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology....    14
Peirce, Hester, Senior Research Fellow, the Mercatus Center,
George Mason University........................................    12
Taylor, John B., Mary and Robert Raymond Professor of Economics,
Stanford University............................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Beatty, Hon. Joyce...........................................    58
Calabria, Mark A.............................................    61
Johnson, Simon...............................................    75
Peirce, Hester...............................................    84
Taylor, John B...............................................    89

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Maloney, Hon. Carolyn:
Excerpt of testimony of Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke
from a Financial Services Committee hearing held on July
18, 2012...................................................    93
Mulvaney, Hon. Mick:
Letter to Representative Scott Garrett from Hon. Sheila C.
Bair, dated June 30, 2014..................................    96
Sherman, Hon. Brad:
Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993..................    99

LEGISLATION TO REFORM THE

FEDERAL RESERVE ON ITS

100-YEAR ANNIVERSARY

----------

Thursday, July 10, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hensarling, Capito,
Garrett, Neugebauer, McHenry, Campbell, Bachmann, Pearce,
Posey, Fitzpatrick, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Stivers,
Stutzman, Mulvaney, Hultgren, Ross, Pittenger, Wagner, Barr,
Cotton, Rothfus, Messer; Waters, Maloney, Velazquez, Sherman,
Green, Cleaver, Himes, Sewell, Foster, Kildee, Delaney, Beatty,
Heck, and Horsford.
Chairman Hensarling. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
This is a legislative hearing to examine a bill put forth
by the vice chairman of our Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee, Mr. Huizenga, to make certain reforms to the
Federal Reserve System.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
When this committee first embarked on the Federal Reserve
Centennial Oversight Project last year, we promised a thorough
review of America's central bank. Today's hearing is this
committee's 11th hearing on the Federal Reserve in the 113th
Congress. Certainly, our understanding of the Fed has been
enriched through discussion and debate among our colleagues and
complemented by the knowledge and perspective of many
distinguished witnesses and scholars, including those who are
here today.
As the hearing schedule for the 113th Congress begins to
wind down, I do wish to thank all of our colleagues and
witnesses for their contribution to this project and the risk
they undertook to provide such contribution. I say ``risk''
because I am reminded that Senator Nelson Aldrich, one of the
legislators behind the Federal Reserve Act, noted that, ``The
study of monetary questions is one of the great causes of
insanity.'' Hopefully, we can avoid that fate. Regardless, we
do expect to issue a full report on our findings from the
Centennial Oversight Project in the fall.
Today, we consider the first piece of legislation to arise
from this process, legislation to begin to reinvigorate the Fed
with the type of accountability to Congress and the people that
the Founders expected of all Federal agencies when they drafted
the Constitution. I, again, say the ``first'' piece of
legislation because reforming an institution as old,
entrenched, important, and as powerful as the Federal Reserve
will be a work in progress. But it is work we must not ignore.
There are many excellent, capable public servants at the
Fed who have served our Nation well and are currently serving
our Nation well. But I believe a critical examination of the
last 100 years of the Fed's actions reveals a mixed bag at
best. And, most recently, we have seen a radical departure from
the historic norms of monetary policy conduct, from an
unprecedented use of Section 13(3) exigent powers to select
intervention in distinct credit markets, to the facilitation of
our unsustainable national debt, to a blurring of the lines
between fiscal and monetary policy, all of which presents large
and unwarranted risk to our economy.
Clearly, our work must be thoughtful, it must be careful,
and it must be deliberate, but much is at stake, so we must not
ignore it. Thus, I fully expect the legislative effort to
continue in this Congress and the next.
A recurring theme throughout our hearings has been that
monetary policy is at its best in maintaining stable, healthy
economic growth when it follows a clear, predictable rule or
path free from political micromanagement, as it did in the
Great Moderation of 1987 to 2002.
Earlier in her career, Chair Yellen said at an FOMC meeting
that following one type of rule, specifically the Taylor Rule,
is ``what sensible central banks do.'' I agree.
Let me make one thing clear at the outset. We do not
suggest for a moment that Congress, much less the White House
or Treasury, should conduct monetary policy operations. We
continue to respect the Federal Reserve's independence in
monetary policy.
But that independence and discretion must be paired with
appropriate transparency and accountability. What we require
today in this legislation is that the Fed use a clear map of
its own choosing to set the course for monetary policy and
share that map with the rest of us.
Additionally, the case for Federal Reserve independence
when it sets monetary policy does not hold up when we consider
the Fed's new powers under the Dodd-Frank Act to regulate an
ever-increasing share of the American economy. The Fed should
not be permitted to hide its prudential regulatory actions
behind its monetary policy independence cloak.
So today, we consider a requirement, among others, that the
Federal Reserve conduct cost-benefit analysis as it adopts new
regulations. Even President Obama has issued two Executive
Orders reaffirming the importance of thorough cost-benefit
analysis by both Executive Branch and independent regulatory
agencies.
Today's legislation includes a number of other additional
transparency and accountability provisions which are badly
needed for the Federal Reserve. It is clearly time to hold the
Fed to the same openness and transparency that we demand of
other Federal agencies.
In closing, two final points.
First, I want to thank Chairman Campbell and his
subcommittee for all the great work they have done and will
continue to do on the Federal Reserve Centennial Oversight
Project. I want to thank Chairman Garrett, whose ideas have
formed the bulk of the bill that will be before us today. And I
want to thank Vice Chairman Huizenga for his work on this bill,
as well.
Second, I want to emphasize again that I expect further
pieces of legislation to follow. For example, we continue to
examine the Fed's Section 13(3) powers as modified by Dodd-
Frank. Also, many in the public have inquired about H.R. 24,
the ``Audit the Fed'' bill. Counterintuitively, that bill falls
under the jurisdiction of the House Oversight Committee, not
our own. And we look forward to Chairman Issa bringing that
bill to the Floor.
And I would note that today's bill contains a provision
requiring the GAO to ensure that the Fed complies with our
statute by auditing the monetary rule they submit to Congress
and, thus, complements the ``Audit the Fed'' bill.
Again, our goal today is to begin the process of developing
legislation that will ultimately strengthen the Federal Reserve
in fulfilling its mission to maintain stable prices and job
growth and ensure that the Fed's rulemaking process is
transparent and predictable.
I appreciate our panel today for coming to the hearing.
I now yield 5 minutes to the ranking member.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Today, under the guise of reform, my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle have put forth legislation that will
cripple the Federal Reserve's ability to promote growth,
stabilize the economy, and, in times of extraordinary crisis,
take decisive action to avoid an economic collapse.
This legislation is a concession to the opponents of the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act by making the Fed's
rulemaking more tedious, more expensive, and subject to endless
legal challenges by those who do not agree with its decisions.
Unfortunately, this proposal follows a Republican roadmap
we have seen too often on this committee: First, find a
regulator charged with withholding Wall Street accountable or
routing out the risky behavior that led to the worst economic
crisis in 80 years. Next, claim that regulator lacks
transparency or accountability and, therefore, must be
reformed. Finally, push legislation purported to address these
issues through unnecessary obstacles like cost-benefit
analyses, new rules, and GAO audits, all of which are carefully
designed to gut the agency's ability to do its job.
We have seen this play out with legislation impacting the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Securities and
Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission--cops on the beat that protect average Americans and
our economy from bad actors in the financial system.
Today, Republicans take aim at the Federal Reserve, which
played an integral role in stabilizing the economy at a time of
intense crisis and which has continued to play an essential
role in growing our economy and promoting full employment.
When the crisis hit, the Federal Reserve challenged
conventional thinking on the limits of monetary policy and
appropriately took quick and decisive action that kept our
Nation from slipping into a depression. But the legislation we
consider today seeks to prevent the Federal Reserve from taking
such innovative action in the future, creating rules that would
prescribe monetary policy based on a rigid set of circumstances
and factors, ignoring the best judgment of experts.
Mr. Chairman, the Fed's Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) contains many of the Nation's most respected economists
from across the Nation. Its Governors of the Board are subject
to democratic accountability through the process of Senate
confirmation, and the overwhelming majority were confirmed by
the Senate with bipartisan support. But this legislation would
discount the experience, judgment, and discretion of these
experts, instead putting decisions related to inflation and
employment on autopilot based on a set of abstract factors.
If the Federal Open Market Committee did deviate from the
rule, the legislation requires the Government Accountability
Office to conduct a costly and time-consuming audit, one that
would undermine the independence of the Fed, shake public
confidence in its decision-making, and create unnecessary
uncertainty in monetary policy.
Such a process needlessly politicizes the Fed's decision-
making process, compromises its role as a pillar of the global
financial system, and, ironically, creates more market
volatility, not less.
Recently, Donald Kohn, 40-year veteran of the Fed, formerly
Vice Chairman and a George W. Bush appointee, expressed his
concern with this approach, stating, ``I don't think this is a
good idea. I am highly skeptical that adhering to a
preconceived rule will be appropriate to achieving the Fed's
objectives under many circumstances.''
In addition, this legislation brings back the time-honored
Republican tactic of cost-benefit analysis, imposing heavy
administrative hurdles and new litigation risk that will
significantly impair the Fed's ability to do its job in a
timely manner. Like efforts with other regulators, this
provision allows Wall Street to tie up the Fed's rulemaking in
endless litigation, draining resources and impeding its ability
to guard against risk to our financial system.
Mr. Chairman, this legislation does nothing to promote
economic growth, create jobs, or ensure a more stable financial
system. In fact, it enshrines a regulatory policy that lets bad
actors run amok while regulators waste time dithering with
audits and frivolous lawsuits. And it does so at a time when,
post-Dodd-Frank, we have asked and need the Fed to do more than
ever before.
I thank you, and I look forward to the witnesses'
testimony.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, the vice chairman of our Monetary
Policy and Trade Subcommittee, and coauthor of the legislation
before us, for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And this is a special day, not just because we are talking
about this piece of legislation, but because I get to share it
with a family member.
And sorry, buddy, this is what dads live for, embarrassing
their kids.
My oldest son, Garrett, is here with us today, and I am
thrilled that we could have him here.
[applause].
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, add another 10
seconds to the gentleman's time.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Garrett, don't worry about it. There are a lot of
other people who are going to be hanging on, trying to follow
all this, as well, because it is very complicated.
But I appreciate this hearing today because, over the past
several years, the Federal Reserve has gained unprecedented
power, influence, and control over the financial system while
remaining shrouded in mystery to the American people. This
standard operating procedure cannot continue. We must lift this
veil of secrecy and ensure that the Fed is accountable to the
people's representatives.
That is why, along with Capital Markets Subcommittee
Chairman Scott Garrett and my own chairman, Chairman Campbell,
I introduced H.R. 5018, the Federal Reserve Accountability and
Transparency Act, pulling back the curtain of the Fed by
increasing accountability and transparency by limiting Fed
officials' blackout periods to discuss policy with Congress,
opening the rulemaking process, and requiring the Fed to
provide a cost-benefit analysis for every regulation that it
issues.
Additionally, this legislation urges the Fed to adopt a
rules-based approach to monetary policy, as Dr. Taylor had
talked about for a number of times, instead of the continued
improvisation strategy currently being employed. Should the Fed
fail to adopt a rules-based approach, it would then trigger an
audit of the Fed's books.
I think it is important to note that our bill is
complementary to H.R. 24, the Federal Reserve Transparency Act,
which is before the Oversight Committee. It was introduced by
our colleague, Paul Broun, and I am a cosponsor of it.
But Mr. Chairman, again, I appreciate you calling attention
to this important issue. And I am looking forward to hearing
comments from the distinguished panel on my legislation to rein
in the Federal Reserve.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from New York, Ms. Maloney, the ranking member of
our Capital Markets Subcommittee, for 2\1/2\ minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chairman and all the panelists.
Oversight of the Federal Reserve is important, but the
Federal Reserve Accountability and Transparency Act goes far
beyond oversight. It attempts to blatantly influence the Fed's
monetary policy, undermining the independence that economists
believe is vital to a central bank's success. This bill also
goes far beyond the ``Audit the Fed'' bill that this House
voted on last Congress. As one newspaper described it, it is
``Audit the Fed'' on steroids.
Under this bill, every time the Fed deviated from the
Republicans' desired monetary policy formula, the Fed Chair
would be hauled up in front of Congress to explain herself.
And, even more troubling, the Fed would be subject to a GAO
audit and report of the monetary policy decisions, with
Congress setting the parameters of the audit.
As previous Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke said, allowing the
GAO to audit the Fed's monetary policy decisions would create a
chilling effect and ``would prevent the Fed from operating on
the apolitical, independent basis that experience shows has
been so successful in lowering inflation and promoting a strong
economy for our country.''
I would like to place in the record his statement before
this committee on the prior bill, on ``Audit the Fed.'' This
goes far beyond that. But he explains the chilling, terrible
effect it would have on the independence and the ability of the
Fed to make economic decisions that are separate from politics
but are good for the overall economy of this country.
The Fed's independence is very important and crucial. Its
credibility with the markets as an independent operator that is
committed to achieving the goals of price stability regardless
of political consequences would be compromised.
So, while it is true that this bill doesn't force by law
the Fed to follow a particular formula for interest rates, it
does attempt to bully the Fed into following the Republicans'
preferred monetary policy. This inappropriately interferes with
the Fed's independence on monetary policy matters, and I find
it deeply, deeply troubling.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Garrett, the chairman of our Capital
Markets Subcommittee, and coauthor of the legislation before
us, for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
And I begin by thanking the chairman for holding this
hearing to consider the legislation to reform the Federal
Reserve as it passes its 100-year anniversary.
I want to thank the witnesses for appearing before the
committee, as well.
I would also like to recognize the gentleman from Michigan,
the vice chairman of our Monetary Policy and Trade
Subcommittee, for taking the lead and working on this
legislation to reform the Federal Reserve. And I thank you very
much for taking that effort.
As the Fed passes its centennial mark, Dodd-Frank will soon
mark its own 4-year anniversary. It is timely that this
committee is currently considering how the Fed and Dodd-Frank
have transformed our financial regulatory environment. I would
submit that an already-muscular Federal Reserve bolstered by a
3,000-page financial reform law has resulted in a central bank
that is on steroids.
Since Dodd-Frank's passage, the Fed has adopted a new
mission of ensuring financial stability and serving as a macro-
prudential regulator over our Nation's entire financial system.
And while some raise a question about the appropriateness of
granting such vast authority to a single regulatory body,
especially an authority charged with the conduct of monetary
policy, everyone should agree that great power must be
accompanied by robust oversight.
Unfortunately, there has not been a corresponding increase
of much-needed transparency at the Fed. The Fed's regulatory
activities have taken place behind a fraternity-like veil of
secrecy, obstructing openness and preventing proper
accountability.
For this reason, today we will consider legislation that
would take a step forward to establishing an appropriate level
of transparency considering the bank's monetary, prudential,
and supervisory functions. In particular, the FRAT Act would
require the Fed to increase its responsiveness to Congress,
increase the transparency of its regulatory activities, and
foster accountability in its international negotiations.
And I would just add, Mr. Chairman, that in light of the
fact that Fed Chair Yellen testified before the committee back
in February, it has taken 4 months for her to respond to us, as
we have just now received her responses at this period in
time--
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Ohio, Ms.
Beatty, for 2 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters.
And thank you to our witnesses.
In addition to the comments, Mr. Chairman, that my
colleagues have made in their opening statements, I must add
that I am a little disappointed this morning, as I sit here
wondering why we aren't working to improve our Nation's
economy, rather than trying to find ways to hamstring the
primary regulator responsible for overseeing the operations of
our Nation's financial markets.
While I always welcome witnesses, I am disappointed that we
continue to hold hearings on issues which are not at all time-
sensitive to this committee. For example, with only 23
legislative days before the expiration of the Export-Import
Bank, it seems a little shortsighted to hold a legislative
hearing on a bill to reform one of the most effective agencies
in the Federal Government, when what we should be doing is
holding legislative hearings on H.R. 4950, a bill to
reauthorize the Export-Import Bank, which would protect and
create American jobs, help lower Americans' trade deficit, and,
importantly for my conservative colleagues, reduce the Federal
deficit.
I therefore encourage the chairman to strive to advance
consensus-built legislation that can drive forward economic
growth in a meaningful, policy-oriented way that helps, not
harms, our Nation.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from Minnesota, Ms. Bachmann, for 1 minute.
Mrs. Bachmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Tragically, the Federal Reserve's policies have facilitated
deficit spending, encouraged the accumulation of $17.6 trillion
in national debt, caused market volatility, failed to
reinvigorate the sluggish American economy, and will cause
inflation that will harm American families and businesses.
Fortunately, our colleagues, Mr. Huizenga and Mr. Garrett,
have introduced bills to encourage the Fed to use a rules-based
monetary policy, opening the Fed's decisions on international
regulatory negotiations to public comment, bringing
transparency to the Dodd-Frank stress test, clarifying the
Federal Open Market Committee blackout period, and requiring
cost-benefit analysis for all Fed regulations. I am pleased to
cosponsor these bills.
The ``Audit the Fed'' bill will provide Congress with
necessary tools to provide additional oversight to the Fed's
ever-growing powers.
It is high time and long overdue for us to pass these bills
and get this done. I congratulate my colleagues on getting this
done.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Indiana, Mr. Stutzman, for 1 minute.
Mr. Stutzman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you also to our witnesses today.
Mr. Chairman, you and I and our House Republican colleagues
have a long history of pushing tax and regulatory relief for
families and small businesses. We do so in pursuit of long-term
economic growth but also in the pursuit of fairness.
The question is whether monetary policy reflects our goals.
The Fed's massive and growing impact on everyday Americans'
lives and its $4-trillion balance sheet is at least as
impactful as tax and regulatory policy.
Consider that the typical legislation in front of Congress
is judged by a score from the CBO. The Fed, on the other hand,
regularly weighs policies that can be judged by their impact on
GDP.
It is critical that we preserve Americans' confidence in
the objectivity of their central bank for the 21st Century and
beyond. That is why the Fed must adopt a rules-based approach
to monetary policy and focus on the long term.
I look forward to today's discussion and again thank the
chairman for calling this hearing.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. We will now turn to our panel of
witnesses, each of whom, I believe, has testified before this
committee in the past, so I will provide very brief
introductions.
First, we welcome Professor John Taylor, the Mary and
Robert Raymond Professor of Economics at Stanford University
and author of the ``Taylor Rule.''
Second, we welcome Dr. Mark Calabria, the director of
financial regulation studies at the Cato Institute.
Third, we welcome Ms. Hester Peirce, a senior research
fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University.
And finally, we welcome Professor Simon Johnson, professor
of economics at MIT.
Without objection, each of your written statements will be
made a part of the record. Again, since I think you all have
testified before, you will be familiar with our lighting
system.
Dr. Taylor, you are now recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JOHN B. TAYLOR, MARY AND ROBERT RAYMOND PROFESSOR
OF ECONOMICS, STANFORD UNIVERSITY

Mr. Taylor. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the committee, for inviting me to
testify.
I would like to compliment Congressman Huizenga for
bringing his son to this hearing. I always like to bring family
members to my classes at Stanford. It really helps illustrate
things. I was thinking of bringing my grandchildren today, but
they are only 5 and 3. But, to tell you the truth, it is their
future we are talking about here, so it is very important.
I want to focus my remarks on Section 2 of the Act, which
is the requirements for policy rules for the FOMC.
Many people for many years have shown that when monetary
policy is conducted in a rule-like way, economic performance is
better. There is price stability, unemployment comes down,
growth is stronger, and productivity growth is stronger.
That research is continuing. Just a few weeks ago, there
was a conference at Stanford, where a whole slew of experts,
some currently on the Federal Open Market Committee, spoke in
favor of a rules-based policy because they know, they have seen
that it works better.
And there is experience that shows that. As Chairman
Hensarling mentioned, when policy has been rules-based, the
economy has performed well. And the example of that is the
1980s and 1990s until recently. When it has not been rules-
based, the economy has floundered and we have had higher
unemployment. The 1970s are an example of that, and, quite
frankly, roughly the last decade is another example.
So, the stakes are huge. I don't think this should be a
partisan issue in any way.
Central-bank independence is very important, but it doesn't
seem to have been enough to prevent these swings towards more
interventionist discretionary policy compared to a rules-based
policy. So that is why I think that some legislation that goes
beyond central-bank independence is important, and that is why
I welcome especially Section 2 of this Act.
Section 2 would simply require that the Federal Reserve
stipulate its policy rule or its strategy for setting the
instruments of policy. The Congress would not tell the Federal
Reserve what policies to follow. That is the job of the Federal
Reserve.
The Congress, of course, has responsibility of oversight.
And so the idea of this legislation is, when the Fed deviated
from its own rule, it would be required to explain why. It
seems to me to be the essence of transparency and
accountability. How could someone object to that?
I think the legislation is quite well-balanced, well-
crafted, and well-designed. It definitely takes into account
all the research I know about. And I have been doing this for
40 years, as you can tell by the color of my hair.
I think it reflects the fact there are differences of
opinion of how monetary policy works. But, in that context, it
puts limits on the degree of excessive intervention that takes
place in, I think, a transparent and accountable way.
It certainly allows enough flexibility for the Federal
Reserve to react during a panic like in 2008 the way they did.
There is nothing in here that restricts the Federal Reserve's
lender-of-last-resort responsibilities. Don't let people tell
you that.
It also provides flexibility in the sense that the
instruments of the Fed don't have to be fixed. They move
around, but they do it in a predictable, understandable, rule-
like fashion.
Moreover, the legislation is written in a way that if the
Fed finds itself in a predicament because the world has changed
or there is a special event, it can actually deviate from its
own rule, as long as it explains why to the Congress and to the
American people. It just seems so reasonable to require that.
The legislation builds on experience of previous attempts
of requiring the Fed to report. Actions that were removed from
the Federal Reserve Act in 2000, this essentially replaces
them.
So I think it provides the appropriate degree of
Congressional oversight without in any way restricting the
independence of the Federal Reserve.
Of course, some will object. I have already heard some of
the objections right here. But if you look at the transcripts
of the Fed, if you look at the speeches of Federal Reserve
Members, if you look at what they have written, there is almost
universal support for the concept of a rules-based policy. It
is hard to find exceptions to that.
Of course, they will say, well, maybe not now, we are not
quite ready. But that is a difference of timing, really, not a
difference of whether or not we should do it.
I believe the Fed could really improve this legislation if
it had constructive comments to make. But even as it exists
now, I believe this legislation could be made to work by the
Fed, it would improve economic performance, and they would make
it work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Taylor can be found on page
89 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Dr. Calabria, you are now recognized
for a summary of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MARK A. CALABRIA, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL REGULATION
STUDIES, THE CATO INSTITUTE

Mr. Calabria. Thank you. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking
Member Waters, and distinguished members of the committee, it
is a pleasure to be back here. I hope I haven't started to wear
out my welcome yet.
Let me first say that neither Cato nor I actually endorse
specific pieces of legislation, but, with that in mind, I do
think the general principles behind the Act are laudable.
I am going to try to touch on each section, but I am going
to just quickly say about Section 2, Professor Taylor has
literally written the book on the topic. There is not really a
lot I could add. I will just say that I would associate my
remarks and very much support pretty much 95 percent of what he
said in Section 2.
So, with that, let me go to the other sections very
quickly.
I think Section 3's changes on the blackout period are very
reasonable. It certainly would help Congress do its oversight
in terms of nonmonetary policy.
Let me say that Section 4 that covers the stress tests, I
am worried because, since the stress tests are becoming such a
core of bank prudential regulation, that they deserve scrutiny.
I think they have repeatedly rested upon questionable
assumptions. I would go so far as to say that I don't actually
think they have been all that stressful, and so I do think they
need more transparency. I am worried they are becoming a
substitute for sound risk management and regulation rather than
a complement.
More importantly, I am worried that the stress tests are
encouraging greater uniformity across bank balance sheets. We
saw this with the Basel Capital Accords, where they nudged
banks into herding into similar assets, such as mortgage-backed
securities and sovereign debt. Now, when everybody--that is,
all banks--hold the same assets, then nobody is really a buyer.
When everybody wants to be a seller, I worry that this
contributes to fire sales and can cause, actually, shocks that
would not be systemic to become systemic.
So I am very concerned about the direction of the stress
tests. In my opinion, a robust financial system would be one
with a greater diversity of asset holdings, business models,
and funding sources. I would prefer that the Federal Reserve
reduce its reliance on stress tests and instead focus on
simple, verifiable measures of bank safety, such as actual
unweighted levels of common equity that actually can absorb
loss.
I will note as an aside, we were doing stress tests for
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac long before we were doing them for
banks, and we saw how well that turned out.
Let me quickly say on Section 5, the shift from a minimum
2-year appearance by the Federal Reserve to a quarterly
appearance I think would really help improve communications
between this committee and the Federal Reserve.
Particularly, I think it would help a lot of junior
Members. Obviously, the Chair and the ranking member have a
tremendous amount of access, maybe not as much as they would
like, but a tremendous amount of access to the Federal Reserve
Chair. That does not hold true for Members across the
committee. So I think having the Fed up here--and it is
certainly worth saying that the Fed Chair is usually up here
about 4 times a year anyhow.
The additional reporting requirements in Section 6, to me,
are fairly reasonable and welcomed, certainly on the rulemaking
side.
One of the things that has gotten the most controversy is
Section 7's requirement for cost-benefit analysis. I feel that
this would nudge the Fed to be more explicit about the
assumptions that go into rules, which would encourage clearer
thinking about the impact of those rules.
Of course, some would object that subjecting the Fed to the
cost-benefit analysis would stifle the regulatory process. I
will note that if you go back and look at the legislative
history in the 1940s of the Administrative Procedure Act, the
same things were said about notice and comment, that if you had
to put rules out for notice and comment and public input, it
would slow the process. Obviously, it does slow the process. It
takes a minimum of almost a year to really do a rulemaking
seriously. But I think our objective should be not speed but
quality. And just as notice-and-comment has improved the
regulatory process, I believe cost-benefit analysis would
improve the regulatory process. I certainly, however, don't see
it as a panacea.
One of the things that I want to emphasize that I actually
think hasn't gotten much discussion but I actually think is one
of the more important parts of the bill is that Section 8 of
the bill allows individual Fed Board Members to have their own
staff. This is the case at the SEC; this is the case at the
CFTC. The Fed Board Members are far too dependent on the Chair,
and they are far too dependent on the Fed staff. I would ask
the Members of Congress here today to imagine what their lives
would be like if they had no staff and they were dependent on
the staff of the chairman of the committee. As much as I am
fond of this chairman's staff, you know that you would be at a
disadvantage. The Members of the Fed Board are the same thing.
So, again, this is a very small thing, but I think it actually
would have a very big impact in the long run.
Let me also emphasize, while several provisions of the bill
address transparency in Federal Reserve rulemaking in the area
of financial regulation, I believe our ultimate objective
should be to get the Fed out of financial regulation. To me,
that would increase the independence of monetary policy, but,
just as importantly, and I think it is beyond dispute, the Fed
has a lousy record at financial regulation. Despite its own
problems, I would rather transfer those responsibilities to the
FDIC. They have had their own problems, certainly, but I think
they would do a far better job at it.
I will also note that I have a few suggestions for
qualifications of Fed Board Members in my written testimony
which I believe would increase the Federal Reserve's
independence and reduce the degree of groupthink that so
dominates the Board most of the time.
I also want to end with saying, a lot of the conversations
are about independence from Congress. I think the far more
pressing concern in my mind is that we have to increase the
degree--and this is not a partisan thing. I want the Fed to be
independent of every Executive Branch President. We all know
the history of Arthur Burns and the Nixon Administration; they
were far too close, by any measure. I think this Fed and I
think the previous Feds have acted as adjuncts of the Executive
Branch, and I find that far more problematic than any insights
and any influences that this body might have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Calabria can be found on
page 61 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Ms. Peirce, you are now recognized for
a summary of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF HESTER PEIRCE, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, THE
MERCATUS CENTER, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Ms. Peirce. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to be
here today.
I will focus my remarks on regulatory as opposed to
monetary policy. Regulatory and supervisory practice are areas
where the Fed does need greater transparency, accountability,
and more rigor in their processes.
Before we look at these issues, we should think about some
basic questions. Do we think that the Fed should be supplanting
the private market in allocating capital and in designing the
financial system? And do we think that it should be doing those
things behind closed doors?
Dodd-Frank expanded the Fed's regulatory mandate over banks
and non-banks, and the Fed has been aggressively pursuing that
mandate. And as a consequence of that, the Fed has been
changing the way it approaches regulation and using a macro-
prudential approach, which allows it to intervene in private
decision-making and direct private financial institutions in a
way that it thinks will enhance financial stability.
But, as Dr. Calabria alluded to, that sort of push from the
government towards the private sector has not always worked
very well in the past. And to make matters more complicated and
more troubling, the Fed has a penchant for nontransparency.
What that means is that it is making these major decisions
without the input from outside the Fed that might say, you are
making a mistake, or you are taking an action that might
actually be destabilizing the financial system.
We can take steps to improve the situation. One would be to
enhance the Fed's accountability to Congress. And that could be
done by having the Fed Chair appear more frequently before
Congress. Another approach is to make sure that their
regulatory agenda is being made clear and transparent to
Congress so that Congress knows what regulations are in the
pipeline.
Another step that we can take is that the Fed's rulemaking
can be more rigorous, transparent, and accountable and afford
more opportunities for public input. One way to do this is to
have economic analysis. The Fed is an independent regulatory
agency, and so, unlike Executive Branch agencies, it is not
subject to Executive Orders that require economic analysis.
And so, in asking the Fed to do economic analysis, what you
are really asking them to do is identify the problem they are
trying to solve, identify some solutions to those problems, and
then do a cost-benefit analysis to figure out what are the
costs and benefits of each solution. And then, once you are
ready to adopt a rule, you establish metrics so that you can go
back several years later and see if your rule is actually
working the way you intended it to work.
It is important for this process to be done transparently
and in the public eye so that the public can weigh in and
sharpen the Fed's analysis. Public input is also important in
international discussions that the Fed is having. Of course,
the Fed needs to be in constant communication with its
international counterparts, but there is a concern that,
internationally, decisions are being made and then they are
being imported here without an opportunity for people here to
weigh in.
And, aside from external accountability, the Fed should
have some more vigorous internal dialogue, which Dr. Calabria
alluded to. I think that is very important. And one way to do
that is to enable each Governor to have a small staff of his or
her own who can work on issues that are important to him or her
and not be responsible to the Chair.
The Fed is turning 100, and it is an important time for us
to think about reforms. I think we need to frame those by
asking some fundamental questions. Do we feel comfortable with
having the Fed supplant and override market decision-making?
And if we do feel comfortable with that, what is the proper
level of accountability and transparency and oversight?
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Peirce can be found on page
84 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Dr. Johnson, you are now recognized
for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SIMON JOHNSON, RONALD KURTZ PROFESSOR OF
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, SLOAN SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT, MASSACHUSETTS
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
emphasize three points that I expand on in my written
testimony.
First, I liked a couple of the statements that you made in
a recent speech, I guess it was published in the Cato Journal.
The first was that the Fed must maintain its independence with
respect to monetary policy. And the second was the Fed must
always be led by experts trained in the science of economics,
including, you mentioned, the Austrian and Chicago schools of
economics. I know quite a few of these people, and they
certainly have plenty of that training.
I think those are laudable objectives and exactly the right
goalposts to set. I think there is a tension, Mr. Chairman,
between those goals and what you have in this legislation.
As Professor Taylor has said, and as he and many colleagues
have established with a lot of research, there are some
advantages to rules with regard to monetary policy,
particularly the predictability that you hope the central bank
will bring to the economy and bring to its communications.
Central banks have moved a great deal in the direction that Mr.
Taylor and others have urged over recent decades.
But what you have in this legislation is not going to make
things predictable. This is worse than monetary policy by
Congress; this is monetary policy by some sort of Spanish
Inquisition. You are going to have the GAO come in and order
these monetary policy decisions on a decision-by-decision basis
on a fast timeframe subject to terms of reference drawn up by
either the House or the Senate committee.
I am just guessing that control of the House and the Senate
will pass back and forth between the two parties in coming
decades, based on recent history. So someone else will control
one of these committees, someone not aligned with the current
Republican majority on this committee. What pressure are they
going to be putting on the central bank? Is that what you want?
I think, as Ms. Waters said, you want an independent
central bank with experts making the decisions. You need,
certainly, to have accountability, absolutely. I think that is
a very important goal. But the experts have to have the ability
to make these decisions.
What you are going to get from this is a massive amount of
volatility in financial markets. Imagine the research reports
that people are going to be putting out. Remember when TARP was
turned down the first time of asking in the House? Remember the
volatility that came out of that? That is what you will be
getting on a week-by-week basis under this legislation. Why
would anyone who is pro-business, who is pro-private-sector-
investment want that? I don't understand.
The second set of points are with regards to the cost-
benefit analysis, the stress test, and the points about
international negotiations. These are just designed to hamper
effective regulation of any kind.
The Federal Reserve does already go for extensive public
comments on any major rule. Take, for example, the Volcker
Rule, about which I testified before this committee not too
long ago. There was a very detailed, extensive period, there
was a lot of oversight. And when there was a particular part of
the Volcker Rule that was not satisfactory to both Republicans
and Democrats--you had the hearing in January--they fixed it.
That is how the system is supposed to work. That is how it
works.
What you have with a cost-benefit analysis is a set of
traps and snares that are designed to trip the regulators in
front of the courts--procedural traps. The cost-benefit
analysis doesn't even consider the major costs of excessive
risk-taking in the financial system. It never has--the CFTC
version, the SEC version, the versions put forward for the Fed.
Massive financial crisis, loss of 1 year's GDP at least, damage
across the American economy, from which we are still struggling
to recover, doesn't figure in any of those tests.
The stress-test proposal would simply allow the banks to
game the system more effectively. The details, the
specifications, the scenarios are given out by the Fed in
advance. What they don't tell you is the details of their
models. Why do the banks want to know the models? So they can
game the models.
Go back and read the documents that came out in the
``London Whale'' case. Look at the very detailed micro way in
which the JPMorgan executive was telling a trader how to game
the reporting in order to pass the various Fed requirements.
Look at that language. That is what they would be doing on a
regular basis.
And the international negotiations, you are putting a
requirement in here that would completely prevent any attempt
by the Fed to deal with an international crisis. Mr. Taylor
says we should be able to do that, and I think he is absolutely
right. You can't agree on a swap line without all this
notification period. You can't have any of the regular daily
conversations that I used to participate in when I was chief
economist at the International Monetary Fund, at least as
witnessing those negotiations. The Fed wouldn't be able to do
any of that.
I do think the points about a Vice Chair for Supervision in
the legislation make sense. I do agree that Governors having
their own staff is sensible.
But I would say, particularly to Mr. Garrett, on these
points about accountability and transparency, which are very
good points and which were also in the earlier version of your
legislation, you should be focusing more on the Reserve Banks.
That is where there is an anachronism in the system. The
Reserve Banks, the Presidents of which are sitting on the FOMC,
are separate from, and not accountable to, Congress. Their
Presidents are not appointed by anyone who is--not appointed in
a direct fashion that is accountable to Congress. It is quite
an anomaly which is left over from the 1913 Act.
And, particularly, I would emphasize the New York Fed. The
New York Fed is a terrible problem, Mr. Garrett, from your
perspective. And the head of the New York Fed is the Vice Chair
of the FOMC. He has a quasi-fiscal responsibility. He is not
appointed by the President of the United States. He is not
subject to confirmation by the U.S. Senate. He doesn't come and
testify to you on a regular basis. That job, President of the
New York Fed, should become a Presidential appointment, like
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Johnson can be found on page
75 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. I thank each of the panelists for
their testimony.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Dr. Taylor, what are the risks to our economy if we do not
pass Section 2 of this bill?
Mr. Taylor. I think, in many respects, you can look at the
last few years to see the risks. It would be a period where we
could again have the kind of bad economic performance we had.
Remember, we had a serious financial crisis, we had a Great
Recession, and we have had, unfortunately, a slow recovery. And
that is during this period where people have assessed the
policies have not been predictable and rule-like. And I would
go back to 2003, 2004, and 2005, where the rates were held very
low for too long. It is a period where people are saying, is
that happening now?
So I think the most likely risk is we would continue with
this subpar economic performance, which no one wants to have
again. I can't believe we would like to go through that again,
but we run that risk very greatly.
Chairman Hensarling. Dr. Calabria, a portion of your
written testimony that you did not deliver orally since you did
not focus on Section 2 says, ``Section 2 does not require a
specific model. In no way does it limit the Fed's choice of
model. It simply requires the Fed to publicly share the model.
All of the Fed's actions in recent years would have still been
possible had Section 2 been in place. There is nothing in
Section 2 that is inconsistent with the Fed's dual mandate, nor
is there anything in Section 2 that would require the Fed to
raise or lower rates. There is no compromise of the Fed's
operational independence.''
Dr. Taylor, do you agree with Dr. Calabria's assessment?
Mr. Taylor. Yes, very much so. I think the idea here is to
exercise oversight that is the responsibility of the Congress
but to continue to allow this independent agency to conduct
monetary policy.
The difference from current law is that the central bank
would be required to describe its strategy for setting its
interest rate, for example, in a manner that can be understood
and be analyzed. And that is frequently called a policy rule,
which is simply a way to describe how the interest rate changes
under certain circumstances. It is used all the time. The Fed
is always looking at policy rules right now, but they just
don't articulate it or talk about it very much.
So I agree very much with this. This doesn't really change
the independence of the Fed. It has the ability to set its
policy.
Those at the Fed who may disagree with this but are
sympathetic to policy rules say, well, we will just do this on
our own. But I think the truth is, if you look at the history,
they have gone back and forth, and that has not been enough. So
I think the experience is that we have to do something more. We
have to--you have to hold them accountable to follow the kind
of policy that works.
Chairman Hensarling. In my opening statement, I quoted
Chair Yellen from an earlier point in her career, where I
believe she said rules-based monetary policy--I think she was
actually speaking specifically of your rule--is ``what sensible
central bankers do.''
I questioned her about this in her last Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony. I don't have her testimony right in front of me. I
hope I can do it justice. I think the essence of her answer was
that she does not disagree with herself, but I think she
believes that the timing is wrong.
Do you have a comment on that? And when might the timing be
right if it is wrong today?
Mr. Taylor. I have talked to Chair Yellen for many, many
years, decades probably, about this issue, and she has always
been supportive of this kind of approach.
What she says now is the time is not quite right; we are
still not in a normal situation, we are still too close to that
financial crisis. And I just disagree with that. I think it is
time to get back to the kind of policy that worked well in the
1980s and 1990s until recently. And, in a way, that is, to me,
promising, because if the disagreement is about when, not if,
then we are making progress.
This legislation goes further, in thinking not just about
the current Chair but about the future of the Federal Reserve
and how it operates. So I think it is very important to put in
place something that provides the continuity in this very
sensible way with which she has had so much experience.
Chairman Hensarling. Dr. Calabria, in your written
testimony, again, that you did not deliver orally, with respect
to Section 2, you also said, ``Why is it important to reveal
the Fed's current operating model? So that it can be examined
and tested by those outside the Fed. Only under such
examination can we learn how accurately that model captures the
real world.''
Would you please elaborate?
Mr. Calabria. Let's start out with the observation that all
policy choices entail some rule. It is either implicit or
explicit. You have a model of how you believe the world works
when you decide that A is going to result in B. So, certainly,
the Fed is operating by a rule today.
The question is whether or not that rule is effective. I am
sure that if Chair Yellen was here, she would probably express
some concern that the last few years have not exactly worked
out how the Fed anticipated it would. And I certainly think
that is evidenced by how far off their forecasts have regularly
been.
So if we are going to try to figure out exactly why have
they been off--and my suspicion is certainly, within the
Federal Reserve Board, they are asking themselves this question
every day, why have our forecasts wildly been off every time--
it is because they have to rethink the model.
So we could either rely on a small number of people across
town to evaluate that model or we can try to incorporate all of
the rest of us to try to figure out why that model works or
does not work.
My point would be that we really don't know ahead of time.
Economists have spent a lot of time--I think, with all modesty,
we should probably, all economists, admit we don't 100 percent,
maybe not even 50 percent know how the economy works. And you
are not going to figure that out unless you put models out
there, unless you test them, unless you disprove them and move
on to other models.
And, again, I would emphasize, the Fed is operating under a
model. It is time they shared it with the rest of us. I think
it is, again, fairly clear that model has not successfully
predicted the responses of the economy and that we all try to
figure out what actually would work.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the ranking
member.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Johnson, you expressed a number of concerns with the
impact of requiring the Fed's monetary policymakers to
prescribe a detailed rule for setting monetary policy which
would then be subject to audits by the Government
Accountability Office.
First of all, I am absolutely intrigued by the fact that we
have our witnesses here today talking about why the Feds should
have independence and how it should not have interference by
the Congress of the United States. On the other hand, the
testimony here by Dr. Taylor and others is basically a
prescription for interference by prescribing a rule.
But I would like you at this time, Dr. Johnson, to
elaborate a bit on why the imposition of GAO audits on a
monetary policy rule would have a chilling effect, creating
obstacles to productive work and bringing more partisan
pressure to bear, as you put it in your testimony, and at the
same time our witnesses have said, oh, the Feds will have all
the flexibility that they want and they need. So, there are
some contradictions here.
Could you comment on these GAO audits?
Mr. Johnson. Certainly, Congresswoman.
What we have learned over 100 years and what has also been
learned in other industrial democracies is that you can and
should have specification of the objectives of monetary policy
coming from the legislature, in our case, coming from
governments in other different kinds of democracies. So you
tell the central bank what objectives you want. In our case, we
have a so-called dual mandate. And then the central bank
decides how to achieve those objectives, using the expert
analysis that Mr. Hensarling accurately described in his
article.
What you are doing with this GAO structure is you are
putting in a set of people, as I read the law, who have this
sort of prosecutorial power. They are auditing; they are going
through everyone's emails. They are reconstructing exactly the
base on what has happened. They are understanding the models
that were used or were not used. They are doing this on a very
rapid basis, according to the timeline in this legislation.
The exact terms of reference of those audits actually will
be specified on a case-by-case basis, according to the
legislation, so you don't know exactly what is happening on
this fishing expedition. What are they going after? What are
they looking for? What is the issue?
And it would introduce a huge amount of uncertainty for the
individuals. Do individual Federal staffers need to obtain the
advice of legal counsel, for example, which is what happens
when GAO goes in or Inspectors General look at actions at the
SEC and other places.
All of this has to affect how these experts interact. Are
they just arguing about the substance, or are they thinking,
okay, how is this going to look to the GAO? What is the
pressure that is coming to us from different people in
Congress, from the House committee and presumably from the
Senate committee?
I really don't see how that is going to help you get the
best expert analysis and decision-making to obtain the
objectives that you, Congress, have set for the central bank.
Ms. Waters. Ms. Peirce, do you believe that the individuals
on the Open Market Committee of the Fed, whether they rotate or
not, have the expertise that is necessary to do the job? Or do
you think that the confirmation that they have been given is
sufficient for them to be able to have good judgment?
Ms. Peirce. I certainly wouldn't question the judgment of
the members of the FOMC. I would say that I think we all
benefit from getting input from other people. And so putting
out a rule to say what you do and getting other people to give
you feedback on that is generally helpful for any expert in
making a decision.
Ms. Waters. So what you are basically saying is that in
addition to their expertise and their backgrounds, perhaps
those of you in academia should have more input and more advice
and more influence on the Feds?
Ms. Peirce. I certainly wouldn't weigh in on monetary
policy since I am a lawyer, and I think I would get killed by
my co-panelists if I said that I would. So I would stay out of
that.
Ms. Waters. I will let Mr. Johnson weigh in on this, too.
Mr. Johnson. I think it is good to discuss Members of the
FOMC. There is a range of opinions, and that is how Congress
has decided, I think correctly, that monetary policy should be
resolved, through this process of deliberation on the Open
Market Committee.
These people communicate all the time. They are always
giving speeches, they are always interacting. If you talk about
the regional Feds, they have various kinds of advisory
committees with which they are engaged. The same thing is true
at the Board.
Perhaps we might wish for more openness, certainly at the
regional Fed level. That is a fair question. But they are
absolutely engaged in communicating, and people are pressing
them all the time with these opinions. That is a very healthy
part of our democracy.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from California, Mr. Campbell, the chairman of our Monetary
Policy and Trade Subcommittee.
Mr. Campbell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you.
Rather than me really asking some questions here, Dr.
Johnson, you have given your very spirited opposition. While
ostensibly agreeing with Dr. Taylor on lots of things, you have
a very emotional and spirited disagreement with the elements of
this bill, particularly Section 2, I guess. There are some
elements that you agree with.
So Dr. Taylor, can you respond to some of his objections,
please?
Mr. Taylor. Yes. I think that, as I hear Simon Johnson
talk, his focus is not so much on whether we should have a
rules-based policy; it sounds like there is agreement there.
But it is just on how the accountability is brought into play.
Now, I think you--
Mr. Campbell. Can I stop you a second, Dr. Taylor?
Dr. Johnson, would you agree with that?
Mr. Johnson. If the Federal Reserve, the Board of Governors
and the FOMC, were to decide to have a rule or to move closer
towards Mr. Taylor, I am not going to raise objections to that,
and I don't think that will be particularly a politically
contentious question. You are decentralizing the decision-
making to the experts. That is the principle under which we are
operating.
It is the imposition from the outside of the rule with this
GAO--
Mr. Campbell. But, Dr. Johnson, if I can, we are not
telling them what the rule should be. How is that any
different, then--the Federal Reserve is chartered by Congress.
It is the elected body here and the President who have to set
these things up, and we have to provide some accountability.
That is the way the Constitution works.
So we are not telling them what the rule should be. We are
just saying, do a rule, because history shows that is more
effective and also provides more accountability in the market.
Mr. Johnson. Well, Mr.--
Mr. Campbell. One of the things that frustrates me, I will
just say, is that I see today, out in the real world, it seems
like we used to, when rules were in play, sit around and ask,
what is going to happen to the economy, what is happening in
the markets, what are my customers saying, what are my
suppliers saying, et cetera, et cetera. Now all anybody cares
about is, what is the Fed going to do? It is like the Fed is
running the whole show. And to me, that is a distortion of the
way the economy and the private sector should work.
So we are not telling them what the rule should be. We are
not even telling them they have to follow it. But we are
saying, please give the market some stability here, please give
people--so that there is some basis upon which you are
operating other than tomorrow morning the Fed wakes up and
decides: let's do more quantitative easing; let's suck it back;
let's put more in; let's do this and that; and throws everybody
for a loop.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Campbell, if you know, given the rule, why
are you specifying in this detail the reference policy rule
that has these specific ingredients?
And then why are you putting all this pressure on them to
have this directed policy rule that needs to be in alignment
with or close to or you have to come and explain on a regular
basis why it deviates and then you send the GAO in to check,
why this deviation? It is like a police state for the central
bank.
Mr. Campbell. The GAO? Having the GAO audit a government
agency is a police--come on. The police state is the government
they are auditing. That is the police state.
Mr. Johnson. So is the Department of Justice. That's a
government agency.
Mr. Campbell. The police state is the IRS. The police state
is the EPA. The police state is all that. That is the police
state.
Auditing is not a police state. Now you are really ticking
me off. But I am going to go to Dr. Taylor here, who is itching
to respond to your comments.
Mr. Taylor. This idea of the reference rule--as you
remember, the reference rule is the Taylor Rule. In fact, I
kind of like the idea of ``reference rule'' rather than
``Taylor Rule'' because it allows me to sound more objective
when I talk about it.
But it doesn't require them to be following the reference
rule by any means. It simply says, hey, there is this reference
rule out there that there have been thousands of papers written
about. And it appears--if you go to any market discussion that
is out there being discussed, anybody who talks about a policy
rule compares it to this reference rule.
So what is so harmful in just saying, as a reference, the
Fed ought to do that? It is not required to follow it. It is
just required to have a discussion like everybody else is
having a discussion. And so I think it is a good idea to have
it in there, but it doesn't really say the Fed should follow
it.
Actually, if I could just add, the current Chair of the Fed
recently gave a speech comparing what she thinks the policy
should be with the reference rule. And so it is just a
continuation of that thing, which I think is a healthy way to
do it, and they would have to do that as part of their
analysis.
Mr. Johnson. If the central bank--I think it is the central
bank. And if the Chair of the Fed can persuade the Congress to
move in the direction of having this rule or making these
comparisons, I am in favor.
I am in favor of delegation to the experts, as Chairman
Hensarling said in his article. That is what has served us
better over the past 100 years than some other arrangement that
we have tried and other countries have tried.
Mr. Campbell. All right. Thank you both for that.
And in my last 10 seconds, I will just reiterate what I
said before. I am in support of this legislation, but it can be
modified. That is why we are having this hearing. Maybe it
needs some tweaks. Maybe there are some other things.
But we really need--it will be best if we can get the
economy out of operating only on Fed action and, instead,
operating on the action of the real economy, and that is what I
hope this can move us to do.
I yield back
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney, the ranking member of
our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Dr. Johnson, I would like to ask you about the restrictions
that the bill places on U.S. regulators'--the Fed and
otherwise--ability to negotiate with their international
counterparts, having to inform Congress and so forth.
As someone who used to work at the IMF, can you give us
some insights on whether these kinds of international
negotiations are important, especially in a globally integrated
market such as finance.
And would the restrictions in the bill put the United
States at a competitive disadvantage in finance and being part
of these negotiations?
Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think it is a very
important issue.
It depends, of course, on what you mean by ``negotiation.''
The legislation is somewhat vague on that. But if you mean
entering into discussions of substance about policy and about
what we are going to do, what you are going to do, and how
there might be some quid pro quo, this happens all the time.
Particularly if you are talking about financial regulation,
you are talking about large, complex banks and other kinds of
financial institutions operating across borders.
For example, to the extent to which they comply with
capital requirements in different places, to the extent that
they are generating or not generating systemic risk in various
places, to the extent that you are providing support or not
providing support to various aspects of the system, these are
things that central banks talk about all the time.
Now, this is a delegation to experts again. There should be
accountability. When there was a financial crisis, they were up
here a lot; I think they testified before Congress 37 to 39
times in 2009. Those are the numbers that I have seen.
But this would tie their hands. This says you have to give
90 days' notice to Congress and in various other ways and
getting public comment before you have any kind of negotiation
with other--anyone, including central banks. That is going to
make it much harder to operate central banking in any
reasonable fashion.
And your point about competitive disadvantages is a good
one. I think, if other central banks are able to operate in a
better, more functional way, for example, within Europe between
the Bank of England and the European Central Bank, for example,
and the Swiss National Bank, and were excluded from that--at
the moment we are in that inner core of the most credible,
well-run central banks in the world.
If we had to step back from that, if our central bank can't
go there or has to be mute in all of those meetings, that is a
serious disadvantage to the broader competitors, not just of
our financial sector, but much more broadly of our economy.
Mrs. Maloney. All right. Could you elaborate more? How do
you see that would hurt our economy and our jobs and our
country?
Mr. Johnson. I think the most important issue that comes up
on a daily basis is with regard to capital, for example, and
there is a lot of agreement across the political spectrum that
we need high, strong capital requirements or whether they
should be Tier 1 common equity so it is fully loss-absorbing
and so on.
Now, these financial institutions that we have allowed to
operate across borders are very complicated. They have
different capital requirements in different places. They are,
frankly, gaming the system on an hour-by-hour basis, if not
more frequently than that.
And the central bankers and other regulators need to be in
constant communication with regards to, is there sufficient
underlying capital protecting the taxpayer against the risks
that have been generated by these various financial
institutions?
If you run your capital requirements in a sensible way and
recognize all the cross-border dimensions, then you get a safer
system, not, I am afraid to say, a completely safe system, but
a safer system.
If you have to exist in isolation, if you can only look at
that part of JPMorgan Chase or that part of the BNP Paribas in
your jurisdiction--because you are not allowed to talk to
anyone else because that would be considered a negotiation--
that is going to be a much less effective regulatory system.
And everyone across the political spectrum agrees we should
regulate capital. There has to be minimum levels of equity
capital in this business.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Do you think that the cost-benefit
requirements that this bill would impose on the Fed and the
FSOC would just slow the rulemaking process down by suing in
court? And, in your opinion, would this lead to better
regulatory outcomes from a systemic risk perspective?
Mr. Johnson. I think that the cost-benefit analysis, as
formulated here, is designed to trip up the regulator to--the
courts, as you know, only test on procedural grounds, whether
you checked every single box. If you didn't respond to a single
report that was put at the behest of a single lobbyist on the
industry side, you have trouble with that.
There is no standing for the public in these cost-benefit
analyses. If the public thinks that the regulation is too weak,
you don't have standing to sue.
The people who have standing to sue are the industry who
filed a thousand comment letters and another thousand technical
reports and you didn't get to the 999th one of them. Then the
whole thing is going to get thrown back to you.
Of course, regulation becomes less effective and you are
going to have, over the medium term, more systemic risk, more
danger, more risk of a massive financial crisis and another
deep global recession.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, vice chairman of our Monetary Policy Subcommittee,
and coauthor of the legislation.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Man, there is a lot to cover. So first of all, I am going
to talk a little bit about oversight. And I, like Mr. Campbell,
was finding myself getting more and more steamed.
I cannot figure out, Mr. Chairman, why so many of my
colleagues are willing to hand over their constitutional
standing, I would argue their constitutional duty to fulfill
oversight responsibility. All right?
So I started Googling ``oversight.'' A CRS report popped
up. CRS says, ``Congressional--oh, but this is Wikipedia; so,
we are not going really deep here--we can go even further--
oversight refers to oversight by the United States Congress on
the Executive Branch, including the numerous Federal agencies--
U.S. Federal agencies. Congressional oversight refers to the
review, monitoring, and supervision of Federal agencies,
programs, activities, and policy implementation. Congress
exercises this power largely through its Congressional
committee system.''
I then went even deeper. My son Garrett, who we have
referred to and talked about, just got done with AP Government.
So, guess what, I went to the AP Government flash cards on
oversight. They say roughly the same thing.
What I can't figure out is why colleagues here are willing
day in and day out to hand that responsibility over to an
Administration, regardless of whether there is a ``D'' or an
``R'' behind it. What happened to the people who are going to
go and fight for their legislative standing, constitutional
standing? I don't understand this.
Second, let's get specific about my bill and Mr. Garrett's
bill. Section 2(c)--all right?--page 5, for those of you
following in the program. All right? Page 5 through page 8 is
where we talk about this stuff. All right? We clearly lay out
that--submitting a directed policy, requirements for the
directed policy rule, and then going into what that GAO report
is.
It says, when a rule is materially changed--that means
significant--right, Ms. Peirce, the attorney?--significantly
changed, then and only then will they go in. And, oh, by the
way, that is after the open rules market submits--next page, on
page 8--GAO approval of the update.
The Federal Open Market Committee shall submit an
explanation for that determination that it either, A, cannot or
should not be achieved.
They submit an explanation for that determination and an
updated version of the directed policy to the Comptroller of
the Currency of the United States and the appropriate
Congressional committees. Oh, yes. By the way, that is us doing
our oversight.
I think we have to look at this, and it seems to me that it
is clear. If the Fed complies with the law and submits a real
rule, none of what Dr. Johnson is describing can happen.
Submit a rule and then explain it. That is all we are
saying. We are not saying what the rule is. We are not saying
what the final goal is. Explain yourself.
Now, having gotten that out of my system, Dr. Taylor, I am
curious who and what other central banks around the world use a
rules-based policy and what has been their experience.
Mr. Taylor. I would say many have, during particular
periods, and when they have, things have worked quite well. I
would put it this way: they sometimes deviate, some more than
others.
But there are quite a lot of studies that, as best we can,
determine when a central bank is coming close to a rule or
their policies are described by a rule like this or others
and--
Mr. Huizenga. And have they experienced a Spanish
Inquisition within their own oversights, structures?
Mr. Taylor. There are different approaches. Some countries
require that the central bank follow a particular inflation
target. Others, the banks adopt that themselves. But, no, I
don't know of this inquisition problem occurring at all.
Mr. Huizenga. Let the record note that he is smirking while
he is saying that.
I am curious, Dr. Taylor, and Dr. Calabria, do other
central banks do the regulatory function to the level that we
are seeing under this change with the Federal Reserve because
of Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Calabria. It is certainly mixed. Some central banks
around the world have no bank regulatory function. Some do not.
There--
Mr. Huizenga. How about the ones that are more successful
than others? They are not--
Mr. Calabria. There is actually a recent study by Barry
Eichengreen at UC Berkeley--certainly no free-market radical--
who came to the conclusion that those central banks that do not
do bank regulation have less inflation and more economic
stability.
So I go back to an earlier point I made, which is that I
think we need to rethink whether the Federal Reserve should be
the primary bank regulator here.
I do want to make a point before we end, though.
A lot of the conversation has painted the GAO--let me say,
as someone who has often disagreed with the GAO, but as someone
who has requested GAO reports as a staffer, someone who in the
Executive Branch has been on the receiving end of GAO audits, I
know of few parts of the Federal Government that are less
political than the GAO.
They are a very unbiased organization. They are not like
Inspectors General. They do not have subpoena power. They don't
go around carrying guns. As you know, lots of agencies ignore
them all the time. But I think that they are a very apolitical
organization, as apolitical as you get in the Federal
Government.
Mr. Huizenga. All right. And, unfortunately, my time has
expired. But thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Velazquez, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Johnson, at the height of the financial crisis, small
businesses were severely impacted by a lack of access to
capital.
There wasn't a day when this committee held a hearing where
we didn't hear Members from both sides of the aisle talking
about the fact that small businesses in their districts were
having trouble accessing capital.
So I would like to hear from you, how could this bill
impact the supply of credit for small businesses during periods
of economic instability?
Mr. Johnson. Congresswoman, I think it is an important
question and, obviously, not a hypothetical one. We have
recently had this experience.
The point of delegating to experts is so that they can, at
various points, decide that you need to take some actions
different from what would be standard.
And in the case of a financial crisis, I think all the
experts I know would argue in favor of extraordinary measures
to try and preserve exactly the kind of thing you are talking
about, which is credit available to small business, small
business which has probably not been a big part of causing the
crisis and which is a big part of getting the economic
recovery.
Ms. Velazquez. Correct.
Mr. Johnson. So this is where we come to the issue of the
chilling effect. I am completely in favor of oversight by
Congress, and that, of course, was the point of all the
hearings that you had not just with small business, but also
with the Federal Reserve. That is why they were here so often
explaining what they were doing.
We have a lot of very effective oversight built into the
American system. But when does that oversight shade over and
become a chilling effect? When do the experts feel that they
can't make the decision on the basis of that apolitical expert
knowledge? When do they feel that there is some sort of
political agenda hanging over them?
I agree that the GAO, in some instances, is apolitical. But
here in this legislation they would get specific instructions
on the terms of each audit from this committee or its Senate
counterpart. That has to have a chilling effect.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Peirce, Section 7 imposes cost-benefit provisions
similar to those that were being imposed on the Securities and
Exchange Commission, and it will require conducting cost-
benefit analysis.
This unfairly ignores the extensive analysis that
economists and experts of the Federal Reserve already do. They
have to comply with the Paperwork Reduction Act, the
Congressional Review Act, and the Regulatory Flexibility Act.
So although cost analysis is a similarly common-sense
requirement, in practice, this provision will be highly
unworkable.
And I would like for you to explain to me, how should the
Federal Reserve value the benefits of preventing a financial
crisis or averting a market failure associated with the absence
of a particular regulation?
How would the Federal Reserve prove in court that the
estimated benefits are reasonable if the crisis the Federal
Reserve seeks to prevent through its regulation has never
occurred? Will you explain that?
Ms. Peirce. Yes. I think that you raised a really important
question, which is tying a particular rule to a crisis. We
often try to justify rules by pointing to a financial crisis
and saying, ``Well, surely we want to prevent another crisis.''
And we can all agree on that.
But I think that the discipline of an economic analysis
requires the Fed to look at a particular rule and say this is
the role that it would play in preventing another financial
crisis, and it can make predictions about what the costs would
be of a crisis and what benefits you would get.
And so then having that very rigorous and clear, you make
your assumptions clear so that other people can challenge your
assumptions. And you make the data clear that you are using,
and then people can provide you additional data to challenge
that.
And then, if that does get challenged in court, then the
court can look and they can--it is more of a procedural thing
to see what the Fed actually did.
Ms. Velazquez. So, Ms. Peirce, you don't feel--and, Dr.
Johnson, if you would like to answer--that this type of
regulatory requirement will prevent the Federal Reserve from
acting accordingly when we are facing an economic crisis?
Ms. Peirce. Not at all. And it gives the Fed--it may take
the Fed a little bit longer to adopt a rule, but these rules
are in place for years and years.
And so what we will end up with is we will end up with
higher quality rules that enable--that stand the test of time
better because it will have gone through a rigorous process.
Ms. Velazquez. So you don't feel that it will be an attempt
to bring the Federal financial regulatory oversight to a halt?
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from West Virginia,
Mrs. Capito, chairwoman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the panel, too.
One of the issues that I have discussed with current and
former Federal Reserve Chairs is the effect that this low-
interest-rate environment has had on our savers, and
particularly our seniors.
I represent West Virginia. We have an elderly population.
And a lot of our folks are trying to live within the boundaries
of what they had planned for and those fixed-income products
like CDs and everything to support their income.
So my question is: Would a rule-based monetary policy
produce a more balanced approach that doesn't overly penalize a
saver, particularly those in their senior years who have
actually saved and planned for the future? Do you see this
rules-based monetary policy having any effect on that?
And, Dr. Calabria, I see you shaking your head. So I will
give you a shot first.
Mr. Calabria. First, let's start out--because I think it
has been implied that a rules-based policy would necessarily
always result in higher rates. That is not necessarily the
case. There are certainly times in the past when a rules-based
policy would have suggested lower rates.
But I would be the first to say that certainly my read of
the evidence--and I will defer to Dr. Taylor on this--seems to
suggest that a rules-based policy would, on average, have
suggested higher rates over the last decade and certainly over
the last few years.
Mrs. Capito. Would it--Dr. Taylor, go ahead, and then I
will ask a follow-up.
Mr. Taylor. First of all, it is very important to realize
that a policy rule doesn't necessarily mean higher rates or
lower rates. It means that the rates are adjusted in accordance
with the state of the economy--
Mrs. Capito. Right.
Mr. Taylor. --the way this works.
Right now, I would say most policy rules that are out there
would suggest rates would be not zero, but positive--at least
slightly positive.
I never would say we go there instantly, but it would be--
should have been something that we could have been prepared
for. So, in that sense, the zero rates would not still be
there.
Mrs. Capito. I would say--
Mr. Taylor. I believe, to some extent, that would be
because the economy is doing better.
Mrs. Capito. Right.
Mr. Taylor. It is a different policy, a better economy,
and, therefore, higher rates. But even without that, they would
be higher. And the zero rates cause other problems besides the
ones you are mentioning.
The money market doesn't operate very well at that point.
To the extent that quantitative easing is part of that policy,
it is a massive intervention into the capital markets. Price
discovery is affected.
And so there are a lot of unintended consequences as well
as the fact that it is affecting frequently older people,
causing them to take extra risks, et cetera.
Mrs. Capito. One of the things I think that--correct me if
I am wrong here--would provide for would be the predictability
of where to go.
So if you are looking for buying short term, long term, or
somebody is helping you with financial planning, you may be
able to plan slightly better. That is one of the advantages I
see.
Dr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. I think, though, the reason interest rates are
so low and the reason that your constituents are having so much
trouble, the elderly ones, is because we had this massive
financial crisis.
And we should be addressing that through other measures,
including much higher capital requirements that would be
complementary.
Mrs. Capito. Which I think they are. Correct?
Mr. Johnson. So I just--and I like to quote John Allison,
who is the head of the Cato Institute and a former BB&T
executive, who was arguing recently for a 20 percent capital
ratio.
I think that is something you can agree on across the
political divide here that would exactly address your problem,
Mrs. Capito, which is to make the world safer for people who
rely on those fixed-income products to finance their
requirement.
Mr. Calabria. Mrs. Capito, if I can make a point?
Mrs. Capito. Yes.
Mr. Calabria. Because I do agree with this, but I do want--
this ties back to an earlier point because Professor Johnson
has repeatedly told us that we need to rely on the expertise of
experts.
I would remind him that a decade ago, the Federal Reserve
was arguing for eliminating any sort of leverage ratio in the
Basel Capital Standards.
And certainly, when I was a staffer on the committee--and I
am going to applaud the efforts then of Senator Shelby and
Senator Sarbanes to push back on the Fed--we would have not
have heard that if it weren't for the FDIC telling on them,
basically.
So, having this advance notice of what is going on
internationally delayed the implementation of Basel II, which
meant that American banks actually had--as little capital as
they had, they had more capital than they would have had they
implemented Basel II.
Mr. Johnson. There is no question--
Mrs. Capito. I am going to--I will let you guys debate when
you--
Mr. Calabria. My point is that--
Mrs. Capito. I want to ask one more question on the cost-
benefit analysis because this is something that I think is
being held out as some sort of villain here when I really
think--we have heard repeatedly in this committee in testimony
from all kinds of employers and financial institutions, et
cetera, on the--not so much one--the burden of one additional
regulation, but the cumulative burden.
And I think if you are looking at a cost-benefit analysis
of adding a new regulation rule, that is where the value could
really be, not looking so much at one singular rule or
regulation, but looking at how it is reacting and interacting
with all the other ones that are already in place.
And, with that, I see I have lost the rest of my time. But
thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses for being here.
I just have one question, but I want to preface it by
expressing a personal opinion, which is that after 6 years
during which our economy teetered on the very edge of collapse,
our country is moving forward.
And I think most of the economic news that we are seeing
and reading about is positive, and we seem to have climbed out
of the depths of the Great Recession.
We are increasing our GDP, lowering the rate of
unemployment, although the unemployment numbers seem to be a
bit stingy. I think there are some socioeconomic reasons for
that, but we can see that we are improving the state of an
almost-devastated housing market.
Now housing sales, at least based on what I am hearing from
my REALTORS--the REALTORS in my district, are the strongest
they have been since 2006.
And so I am applauding the economic growth, and I believe
that the Fed has taken many proactive and, yes, unconventional
steps to resuscitate our economy.
And so, Dr. Johnson, I am wondering whether or not you
think--and, frankly, all of the members of the panel--that, had
the proposed reform been effective during the beginning of the
2008 financial crisis--do you think the Federal Reserve would
have been able to do what they have done in the midst of being
constrained from taking proactive measures to get us back on
track?
Mr. Johnson. I think that is a very good question,
Congressman, exactly on target.
Now, I understand that, hypothetically, you could read the
legislation to say there wouldn't be a constraint, that they
could just say, ``It is a crisis. We are going to do these
dramatic things.''
But if you think back to 2007, 2008, as the crisis began to
develop, how much controversy there was about what the Fed
should be doing, how it should be doing it, the pressures that
they faced, you could add this on top of all of that--and there
was appropriate oversight. Right? So there were plenty of times
that Mr. Bernanke and his colleagues appeared before this
committee and other committees to explain what they were
doing--but you would add another layer on top of here, which
could potentially have been about multiple audits and creating
this uncertainty, for example, for financial markets, is this
or that Fed decision going to be second-guessed or is there
going to be pressure to overturn it from a particular House or
Senate committee.
I don't think having Congress involved in this kind of
micromanagement, which is what it is, of the Federal Reserve is
a good idea, in general. I am particularly worried about what
would happen at times of national emergency, including
financial crisis.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. I would like for you to respond. I just
need to say before you, sir, my thought was, because I was here
during that time--I think everybody on this committee is
reasonably sharp. Some of us have degrees in geography and
physical education.
I am just wondering how impactful and positive
Congressional interference would have been.
Mr. Taylor. Congressman, I think it is very important to go
back in time to before the crisis hit to answer your question.
There was a period, especially 2003, 2004, and 2005, where
the interest rate was very low and then was raised very slowly.
By most analyses--and there is disagreement--that was a period
where the Fed deviated from the kind of rule that worked well
in the 1980s and 1990s until that time.
I believe that was one of the reasons for the search for
yield, the excesses in the housing market, not everything, but
which ultimately led to the bust and, therefore, to this
terrible situation we had in the crisis, in the recession, and
the slow recovery now.
So, to me, if this kind of legislation had been in place
then--and, remember, in the year 2000, the legislation is
reformed to take out reporting requirements.
But if in 2000 say, for example, this kind of legislation
was put in place instead, at least the Fed would have been up
here explaining and being questioned about why it deviated from
its policy.
And I think, ultimately, it would have deviated less and we
would have been in a much better situation. The economy would
have performed much better in the last decade than it has.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Garrett, chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee, and
coauthor of the legislation.
Mr. Garrett. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
So let's look to see where we all agree. And it sounds
like, actually, there are a number of points on which the
entire panel agrees on the underlying legislation.
Mr. Campbell from California raised a point. He said that
businesses should not be so focused on what the Fed is doing
every day. They should be focused on what the markets are
doing, what consumer demand is, what is the volatility of the
markets, what suppliers are, and that sort of thing, and not so
much on the Fed.
And I think, if I looked at the panel, you would all agree
with Mr. Campbell's assessment that we are too focused on the
Fed's activity daily as opposed to--do I get a nod sort of like
that? Sort of.
So then the question is: How do we turn that around? Now,
one piece in the bill simply asks that the Fed Chair, instead
of coming up to Congress twice a year, that he or she comes up
here 4 times a year, quarterly.
Does anybody disagree about having the Fed Chair come up
here quarterly as opposed to twice a year? Is that a bad thing
as far as--just say yes. Does anybody disagree with that?
Mr. Johnson. Yes. I disagree with that.
Mr. Garrett. Oh. Okay. See, here I thought we could get
over saying that we agree.
Because my next question was going to be: Does anybody
disagree with the next provision, Section 6, which says, on the
supervisory and regulatory side, we have that the Fed Vice
Chair of Supervision should also--it is their responsibility to
come up semi-annually to testify as far as regulations?
Does anybody disagree that he or she should be coming up
and testifying semi-annually on what they are doing? Does
anybody disagree with that one?
Mr. Johnson. I do more than agree, Mr. Garrett. I think you
have very good language in there about who should testify when
there isn't a Vice Chairman of Supervision.
Mr. Garrett. Yes. All right.
Mr. Johnson. In terms of implementing Dodd-Frank, that is
essential.
Mr. Garrett. So there is some disagreement as to how often
the Fed Chair should be coming here. And the question there is:
What good does it do actually when the Fed Chair does come
here?
Because, as you know, the Fed Chair was here--when was it,
Mr. Chairman?--about 4 months ago. And, at that time, we had
some specific questions as to what she was doing, and we asked
them and said, ``Would you get back to us?'' Four months later,
we just get our answers now.
Would anybody say that a 4-month response from the Fed is a
timely and responsive and responsible response from the Fed?
Does anybody say that is timely, responsive, and responsible?
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Garrett, what exactly were the questions?
Were they detailed, technical, hard questions--
Mr. Garrett. Well, we got the answers back.
Mr. Johnson. --or were they straightforward questions? We
don't know those details.
Mr. Garrett. Then, I guess the American public doesn't know
the answers either. And that goes to the overarching question
of--to my first question, if we can't have certainty in the
marketplace, then the market is continually going to be looking
on a daily basis to what the Fed is doing.
All the underlying legislation is trying to do, is to
provide certainty in the marketplace. We are not telling the
Fed what to do. We are just saying, ``Please, please let us
know what you are doing and give it to us in a timely manner.''
One way to do that is to help us out with an economic
analysis. Now, this wasn't my idea. We crafted our language
from President Clinton's and President Obama's Executive
Orders.
Apparently, those two gentlemen thought it was prudent that
the American public have, from their Federal agencies, an
economic cost-benefit analysis before agencies take actions to
see whether the cost of something is greater than the benefit.
So does anybody disagree with President Clinton and
President Obama when they signed Executive Orders saying that
there should be cost-benefit analysis for the agencies that
they did? I guess there is always one.
Mr. Johnson. Can you take the Executive Order cost-benefit
formulation to the courts in the same way that you could take
your legislative cost-benefit analysis to the courts, Mr.
Garrett?
Mr. Garrett. Actually, we can, because the courts have been
able to do that, and the district court was quite able to do
that.
As a matter of fact, the district court overturned a
decision of the SEC, saying that the SEC did not follow the
proper cost-benefit procedure.
Mr. Johnson. In that case, I think President Obama and
President Clinton got it wrong along the terms that you
specified. I don't think the court should have that ability to
trip you up on these technical details.
Mr. Garrett. It is interesting that, once again, I have to
be here and to be a defender of President Clinton and a
defender of President Obama.
But if that is my role, then I am willing to do it in this
one regard, because I think the American public does have a
right to have a balance done on the benefits of the cost and
the analysis.
Let's get to the issue of transparency in only 36 seconds.
Dr. Calabria, in your testimony, you write that the
independence of the Fed has been greatly eroded by the
revolving door between the Federal Reserve and economic
policymakers in the Executive Branch.
All of our discussion so far has been about how much overt
influence that we are going to have, as Members of Congress?
Could you talk about how much overt influence the Executive
Branch has?
Mr. Calabria. Let's start for--either--so look at the
current Board. Three out of five members of the current Board
worked at the Clinton White House, not the Clinton
Administration, the Clinton White House. So if you want an
apolitical Fed, this is not it.
As I suggest in my testimony--and I think this is applied
across any Administration--no one should be eligible to be a
Fed Board Member for at least 4 years after they have left an
Executive Branch appointment. There is really just too much of
a revolving door between Wall Street, Treasury, and the Fed.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
I see my time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Foster, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
Dr. Taylor, 3\1/2\ years ago you were a coauthor of an open
letter to Chairman Bernanke, basically criticizing his decision
to do the large-scale assert purchases and predicting, among
other things, currency debasement and inflation.
We have been hearing that consistently over the last 3\1/2\
years from Members across the aisle--my colleagues across the
aisle.
And I was wondering if each of you could, in one or two
sentences, explain why those predictions have been so wrong for
so long. And try to limit it to two sentences so we can--
Mr. Taylor. My criticism of the quantitative easing and
related activities had two risks.
One, it was a downside risk, the uncertainty that it
caused, the fact it could--unwinding would be uncertain, which
was a negative, and the other is the other side, that it could
be inflationary.
What I think we have seen is the first risk. The economy
has not performed very well. It has been disappointing by every
measure until very recently, and that is not good.
Mr. Foster. That is not--
Mr. Taylor. That is the reason why the inflation rate has
been so tame. It is a very weak economy.
But we still--just to finish the answer, we still risk
inflation if the Fed is unable to unwind. Lots of people out
there are saying they are behind the curve already. It is still
a risk.
And I say that letter, which I signed onto, raised a lot of
issues about the dangers of these kinds of policies, and I
think, to some--to a great deal, that those dangers have been
realized.
Mr. Foster. But not inflation, you would agree.
Mr. Taylor. Well, look. You have an unusual policy which
creates many kinds of risks. Probably the greatest concern is
the slow economy and the fact that unemployment took so long to
get down.
That is, to me, a tragedy. We not only had a deep
recession, we have had an abysmally slow recovery. I don't
think that is a good reflection on that policy.
Mr. Foster. It is a question of what the alternatives are.
If you believe that doing something that would increase the
output cap would actually have made the economy healthier, then
that is a discussion that probably is also worth having.
Next, Dr. Calabria?
Mr. Calabria. First of all, I would say I am not only
concerned about certainly headline inflation, I am concerned
about asset prices. It is very unusual to have a financial
crisis without some sort of run-up in asset prices.
We could have had--you and I would have had the same
conversation 10 years ago, and we would missed the financial
crisis, we would have missed the housing bubble. So, quite
frankly, I do think we need to be worried about asset prices.
I also think we need to be worried about the Fed paying
interest on reserves for years has been contractionary. Why are
we paying banks to have trillions of dollars sitting on the
sidelines doing nothing?
So I do think that sometimes the conversations sound like
the Fed is either purely expansionary or purely contractionary.
I think the Fed is a bit schizophrenic right now, quite
frankly.
I think they are doing things that are contractionary. I
think they are doing things that are expansionary. And the net
effect has been a mixed one. So, certainly, I just don't think
they have had a consistent set of policies and certainly I am--
Mr. Foster. I am trying to count sentences here.
Mr. Calabria. Okay. Well--
Mr. Foster. No. I understand.
Mr. Calabria. As you know, the two-hand economist bit with
Truman. So that is the same here, one hand or the other.
Mr. Foster. Okay.
Ms. Peirce?
Ms. Peirce. Just with the caveat that I am not an
economist, I am concerned about the Fed's policies, buying
mortgage-backed securities, for example--they are having a big
impact on the market--and then something that Mr. Campbell
alluded to earlier, which is that watching the markets react to
whatever the Fed says is pretty disturbing. I think it would be
much better if the market were reacting to the market.
Mr. Foster. All right.
Dr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Foster, good question.
I think this quantitative easing was risky. It certainly
has not produced inflation. There were legitimate concerns
about that, but it hasn't.
It also hasn't miraculously pulled us out of this hole
created by the massive financial crisis. I think there is a
limit to the magic that central banks can work in this kind of
situation.
I do think, though, the question is a good one because,
imagine, under the proposed legislation, you are going to be
having hearings on a weekly or at least monthly basis all along
exactly these lines with teams of experts like this all
disagreeing. You all are going to be disagreeing. Some of you
are expert. Some of you are perhaps less expert.
This is not particularly going to be helpful to the Federal
Reserve trying to do its job. You should be asking questions
about who gets appointed to the Federal Reserve, what are their
qualifications.
I don't have a problem with Mr. Calabria's suggestion that
you can't put people on the Fed who have been working in the
Executive Branch. I think that would rule out McChesney,
Martin, Burns, Volcker, and Greenspan, but, of the current
Board, only Lael Brainard, I think. So those are legitimate
questions.
Mr. Foster. In my 25 seconds left, if I could just have a
quick ``yes'' or ``no?''
Do you think that the Federal Reserve should have a larger
role and a larger part of its thought process in trying to
limit asset price bubbles, in particular, real estate?
You can see other countries have done this with some
success. And do you think that should be an increased part of
their portfolio or not, which is--I know.
Mr. Taylor. I think that the first thing the Fed can do
about asset bubbles is to have a policy of interest rates, a
monetary policy that doesn't bring them on. I really mean that.
Mr. Foster. Okay.
Mr. Taylor. A lot of the actions that have been taken
recently by countries on--that have focused, say, on bubbles
and housing have been because their interest rates are low.
Take Switzerland. If they have a low interest rate, they
attack the housing market with other mechanisms. Take
Singapore. They have the zero rate because the Fed has a zero
rate. They have to take special actions to contain the bubble
in their housing and automobile markets.
So, they are kind of responding to the fact that monetary
policy is stuck and not doing its usual thing. And I think the
first thing to do is to make sure the central banks, our
central bank in particular, don't cause the bubbles and then
worry about what to do with it.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer, chairman of our Housing and Insurance Subcommittee.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing.
And I thank our panelists for being here.
I really want to talk about Section 9 of the FRAT Act,
which talks about international negotiations. One of the things
that--this committee has had a number of oversight hearings
basically on the negotiations that are going on at FSOC and
then, also, the discussions that are going on with the
Financial Stability Board.
As you know, in 2008, the G20 tasked the Financial
Stability Board to come up with reforms for the financial
system across the Board internationally. And since then, it has
been kind of interesting.
Initially, the Financial Stability Board put a number of
insurance companies and financial institutions, SIFIs, and
subsequent to that, the FSOC made AIG and then Prudential as
SIFIs.
And so the question that arises is because of the fact that
the SEC and the Fed and the Treasury are all participants in
the Financial Stability Board.
And so, if they are over there in those negotiations and
they vote then in those discussions to make these financial
institutions financially significant institutions and then they
come back, can they have a fresh--do they have a fresh start
then to determine from an FSOC standpoint whether they are
going to be determined to be SIFIs?
And my question is--Scholar Peter Wallison with AEI said
something that is inconceivable, that these designations of
these three insurers would have gotten through a Financial
Stability Board without express approval of the Fed and the
Treasury.
So is that distorting the procedure that they are over
there voting at the Financial Stability Board and then they are
coming back and saying, ``Okay. We are going to start over with
a fresh piece of paper here and make our own determination'' or
is the Financial Stability Board basically making these
decisions and are the Fed and the Treasury complicit to that?
Dr. Taylor, do you have an opinion on that?
Mr. Taylor. I don't know the specifics of your question,
but I do know quite a bit about negotiating because I was the
Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs for
4-plus years.
My sense is there is frequently negotiating within the
government and then there is negotiating between governments.
And the within government, I think as much as possible, should
take the Congress into account. It doesn't always do that.
I remember having former Chairman Barney Frank out to lunch
at the Treasury to explain various things that we were working
on at the time. I think that was essential.
And so I think, when you think about this legislation, the
word ``negotiation,'' you have to think about what that means
and, I think, try to explain it more. But I think, in the case
you are talking about, it would be one where there should be
better consultation in the first place.
But you are always going to have different opinions at
different agencies. Some may be more worried about the
economics. Some may be more worried about the security. Some
may be more worried about U.S. competition, the
competitiveness.
And they are going to figure out the best way and then
approach the other government, which also has the different
agencies. So, it is a complicated process.
I think the intent of the proposed legislation is fine. But
I think the word ``negotiation'' needs some more specificity.
Mr. Neugebauer. And I think one of the things that a lot of
people feel like and the reason to have more transparency and
disclosure here about what is going in these negotiations is
because, basically, it appears that those negotiations are
ending up setting policy in our own country, and I think that
there is a concern about that.
And so, much like if we are negotiating treaties between
other countries, basically, we are in some ways negotiating
treaties between financial institutions.
Dr. Calabria, do you want to--you seem to want to engage in
this.
Mr. Calabria. I certainly share that concern. Let me make a
broader point about much of this, and this applies to the cost-
benefit, this applies to the negotiation.
Congress can decide all this stuff if it wants. Remember,
within Dodd-Frank, we decided that bank holding companies--
there is no negotiation there. Boom. You are in. You could have
decided that. The Congress could have set up other parameters.
So any of these efforts--to me, part of the problem is that
Dodd-Frank has 400-some rulemakings. There is just so much
delegation, so much discretion in the regulatory process, that
I think some of these hard choices actually have to be made up
here rather than by the regulators. But I certainly do agree.
I worry that the FSOC, the SIFI process, that--in my
opinion, we are essentially signaling to the market that the
entities are too-big-to-fail. I worry that is committing the
Fed to assisting those entities. So I certainly think that
needs to be a more transparent process.
Mr. Neugebauer. I see my time has expired
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I agree with Dr. Calabria that Dodd-Frank
basically just transferred all this power to the Executive
Branch. It took us 2,000 pages to just say, ``Executive Branch,
don't let it happen again, and here are all the hammers to use
to make that happen. Hit whoever ought to be hit.'' But all too
often we either do nothing or we can't agree on what to do. So
we just empower the Executive Branch.
I don't always agree with the Fed. They haven't focused on
the trade deficit. Of course, virtually no one in Washington
talks about the trade deficit. And they haven't agreed with
Bernie Sanders and I that too-big-to-fail is too-big-to-exist.
But very few people in Washington agree with Bernie Sanders and
I on that point.
But the Fed has done more than any other institution to
pull us out of the Great Recession. They have not debased our
currency. It is, if anything, as shown by the inflation rate,
the Cost of Living Index, as valuable as anyone would have
predicted that it would be in 2014.
We have had a slow recovery, but we had a national
financial meltdown. And when that happens, you expect a slow
recovery, but I don't think you blame the slow recovery on Fed
policy. Their low interest rates are the only thing of any
policy that I can point to in the last several years that have
pulled us out of this recession.
And we should approach things with a degree of humility
because I don't think there is anybody in this room who can
wave around a brokerage receipt showing that they were selling
Countrywide short in early 2008.
If anybody really knew and was ready to bet the farm that
2008 would have happened, the least they could do is give me a
ride on their private jet, subject to Ethics Committee
approval.
The gentleman from New Jersey says that cost-benefit
analysis was endorsed by President Clinton and President Obama.
I do think I need to point out for the record that they
never supported a cost-benefit analysis for Fed monetary policy
decisions because everything they do is a cost-benefit
analysis.
It isn't trying to weigh debts from pollution to effects on
the economy. Everything they do is to focus on the national
economy. There are various cosponsors of the FRAT Act.
Presidents Clinton and Obama should not be listed.
Dr. Calabria, you have suggested that we not allow people
who have served in the Executive Branch within the last 5 years
to serve on the Fed.
Mr. Calabria. Four years. That's--
Mr. Sherman. Should we have the same rule for those who
have worked on Wall Street?
Mr. Calabria. In terms of people from Wall Street working
at the Fed?
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Calabria. Yes. I would be fine with a 4-year
restriction. I think that is a reasonable span.
Let me say just as an aside--
Mr. Sherman. So we would have just academics on the Fed--
Mr. Calabria. No. Because--
Mr. Sherman. --having excluded--and former Members of
Congress.
Mr. Calabria. If I could channel Section 10--
Mr. Sherman. Two of the least--
Mr. Calabria. If I can channel Section 10 of the Federal
Reserve Act for a second, it does say, ``due representation to
agriculture, commerce, and industry.''
So it actually--the Federal Reserve Act, as structured,
suggests that we should have people--not just academics, not
just bankers.
Mr. Sherman. I would point out there are two major problems
with the structure of the Fed.
First, it is undemocratic. You have governmental power in
the hands of those elected by bankers. And second, it
discriminates against the western half of the country.
Certainly, if you have the San Francisco Fed representing 3
or 4 times as many people as the New York Fed, the least you
could do is give the San Francisco Fed a permanent seat on the
Open Market Committee, but--and perhaps I could work with the
gentleman from New Jersey to correct those two problems.
Mr. Calabria?
Mr. Calabria. I suggest in my testimony that Section 10 of
the Federal Reserve Act also requires that no two Members of
the Board can be from the same Federal Reserve district.
We have repeatedly violated that. I would go as far to say
that, with the current makeup of the Board and you count the
New York, that the New York district has 6 votes on the FMO--
Mr. Sherman. And the Board that represents 3 or 4 times as
many people as any other Board has either one or zero and no
assurance of even one.
Finally, there is this idea, Dr. Johnson, that we could
write a rule and then put monetary policy on automatic pilot if
we just wrote a good rule. Is that possible?
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Missouri,
Mr. Luetkemeyer, the vice chairman of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go to the section that deals with the stress
tests of the banks, and this really concerns me. I know that
Sheila Bair wrote an op-ed back in April 2013, and the headline
was, ``Regulators Let Big Banks Look Safer Than They Are.''
And in there she makes the comment that, ``The ease with
which models can be manipulated results in wildly divergent
risk-weightings among banks with similar portfolios.
Ironically, the government permits a bank to use its own
internal models to help determine the riskiness of assets, such
as securities derivatives, which are held for trading--but not
to determine the riskiness of good old-fashioned loans. The
risk weights of loans are determined by regulation and are
generally subject to tougher capital treatment. As a result,
financial institutions with large trading books can have less
capital and still report higher capital ratios than traditional
banks whose portfolios consist primarily of loans.''
And she goes on to give an example of a big bank that has
14 percent capital, yet, if you take the risk-weighting out, it
goes down to 7 percent, and then a big regional bank that is
risk-weighted at 9 percent, and if you take the risk-weighting
out, it stays almost the same.
So we are playing on two different fields here. And I think
this part of the bill is extremely important from the
standpoint of how you begin to, I think, get some of these big
banks under control.
If you let them write their own stress test, if you let
them write their own rules for how they exist, how in the world
can we actually find a way to regulate those?
And, Dr. Calabria, I know you mention this in your
testimony. Can you--
Mr. Calabria. I want to repeat something that Professor
Johnson said, which is that the stress tests are gamed. And
maybe we will agree or disagree on this, but I think they are
always going to be gamed.
I think the Basel Capital Accords have been gamed. I think
you see these herding into low-risk assets. Let's not forget
the experts told us that Greek debt was risk-free ahead of the
crisis. I think that was obviously not the case.
I really think we should abandon the stress test, abandon
the Basel Capital Accords, and go to a flat, clear leverage
ratio. And I think that is far more simplistic and far more
transparent.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. You don't believe that the weighting
of the riskiness of the assets is something--
Mr. Calabria. There is always--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. --that should be taken into consideration
here?
Mr. Calabria. There is always going to be that issue. But I
have yet to know of a financial crisis caused by small-business
lending.
Yet, we know that small business is risky. We also know
that the Basel Capital Accords and the stress test dissuade
banks from doing small-business lending.
I think it is far more important to have a diversity of
portfolios, which, to me, the stress test and the capital
accords encourage homogeneity in a way that, to me, becomes
systemic.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Along that line, what this bill
does, though, is increase the transparency of those tests so at
least the general public--
Mr. Calabria. It is a small step in the right direction.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. That is where I was trying to go.
Yes, Dr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Unless--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You talk faster than I think. So, can you
slow down?
Mr. Johnson. Okay. I am sensitive that you have limited
time.
I and Mr. Calabria agree on the capital part, and I think
we are agreeing with you. And I think you are making a very
important point, which is we should be putting more emphasis on
leverage ratio, which is assessment of capital without these
funky risk weights and less emphasis on the risk-weighted--I am
not saying zero, but less emphasis.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Right.
Mr. Johnson. I think we completely agree on that.
I think you are also right and Sheila Bair is right to have
concerns about anything that allows the banks to use their own
models because they put all kinds of crazy stuff in that and it
is not subject to very good supervision.
On the stress test proposal in this legislation, I am
afraid I disagree with Mr. Calabria. I think it is a small step
in the wrong direction. I think you are making it easier for
the banks to game the stress test.
I agree the stress tests are not--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You don't believe the transparency helps
in this regard? That is basically what this does here.
Mr. Johnson. What you have right now, Congressman, is you
have transparency on the criteria of the stress test, how
stressed, what is going to go wrong in the stress scenario.
What the banks want to see is the details of the models the
Fed is using. Once they have those models and they run those
models in their own computers, they can game them just like
they game their own models. That is what you don't want.
We are agreeing on the capital, though, and I agree with
what you said in the beginning: Capital is the most important
thing. Capital should be front and center. And capital, without
the funky risks weights, is the way to go.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. So how would you structure that,
then?
Dr. Calabria, you just indicated you just have a--
Mr. Calabria. I was going to say we do agree that it is a
small step. The direction we might disagree on.
But again, I do think that getting more of the assumptions
out there and the parameters--and I would agree. I think
internal risk models are fine for the banks, but you can't use
them for regulatory purposes. And I think that has to be the
question here.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. This really concerns me because I think
what we are doing is we are giving the general public a level
of safety here--
Mr. Calabria. False confidence, a level of confidence that
the system is going fine, everything is good.
But when you look at what is really happening here, they
are gaming the system, and I think it is really unfortunate
because I don't think the American public has the true picture.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. With that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from California briefly for a
unanimous consent request.
Mr. Sherman. I ask unanimous consent to put in the record
Executive Order 12866 and Section 10 thereof--
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection.
Mr. Sherman. --which states that--
Chairman Hensarling. Without--
Mr. Sherman. --no judicial--
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection.
Mr. Sherman. --no judicial review is allowed--
Chairman Hensarling. The--
Mr. Sherman. --with this Executive Order.
Chairman Hensarling. For the unanimous consent decree, not
for the pontification.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Washington, Mr. Heck, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to all the witnesses for giving of your time
today.
Dr. Johnson, I note with some interest that the proposed
legislation effectively reasserts the dual mission of the Fed--
namely, bringing about price stability and optimal employment
levels. I am wondering, frankly, if that would be its practical
effect.
I am looking back over the last 4 years as an example and
have seen where, inarguably, the Fed's policies have
contributed to a decline in the unemployment rate from 9 to 6
percent, and noted with interest, as revealed I think in
Congresswoman Capito's question, application of this
legislation would have inarguably increased interest rates over
that same 4-year period of time.
What is your analysis as to what would have occurred,
unemployment-level-wise, had there been higher interest rates?
Mr. Johnson. If the Fed hadn't taken the broad set of
extraordinary measures that they embarked on in 2008, including
lowering interest rates and also buying assets in a way that
was at that point considered unconventional and affecting
different kinds of interest rates, other than the short-term
traditional policy rate, then the recession would have been
deeper and unemployment would have stayed higher for longer and
the recovery would have been slower.
I think that is, unfortunately, what would have happened
and what would happen in a future crisis if it is the case, as
I believe it is, that this legislation would effectively limit
the ability of the Fed to respond fully.
Mr. Heck. So, confirming my worst fear and suspicion that
it would have increased unemployment, notwithstanding the fact
that it reasserts that dual mission.
There are actually other bills before the Congress that
have been proposed that would have eliminated the secondary
mission of optimal employment levels, which is something like a
40-year-old law on the books passed by the then-House Banking
Committee overwhelmingly, with 3 dissenting votes in the United
States House of Representatives. It was a bipartisan bill to
set the second mission of optimal employment.
If we were to remove the optimal-employment mission from
the Fed and if they were, in fact--if it were, in fact, to
focus exclusively on price stability, what is your opinion and
analysis as to how that would play out, if they were, in
effect, not allowed to consider unemployment levels but only
price stability?
Mr. Johnson. It depends on how they would interpret that.
And there are some central banks around the world, for example,
the European Central Bank, that does focus, by law, exclusively
on price stability.
I think you would have less response in the case of these
big downturns, certainly the financial-crisis-type situations.
I don't think the Fed would embark on the same sort of
creative, unconventional policies. I don't think you would have
the same kind of interest rate cuts. And I think you would have
higher unemployment in those situations.
Mr. Heck. So last question, if I may: Various members of
this committee tend to focus on those two issues and economic
indicators: price stability; and employment levels. I like
them, too. But for the last couple of years, I have frankly
been kind of fascinated by the output gap as an indicator. In
fact, while I clearly have a problem with how it is applied in
this instance, I think the fact that the output gap is a part
of this formula is interesting.
And I am wondering, from your perspective, as somebody who
doesn't like the approach taken in this bill, is there a way--
are there policy approaches that we could take that would
utilize to a greater degree the output gap as a means of
driving policy?
And just to remind everybody, that is the difference
between actual and potential, which is essentially a no-cost
deficit to be made up in terms of the strength of the economic
output, if I can use lay terms to describe it.
Mr. Johnson. It is a good question and a completely
accurate formulation.
Look, the experts disagree a lot about this, about
precisely how big is the output gap. You have to take a view on
what has happened to labor force participation, as I am sure
you are well aware, Congressman.
And I think this is a perfect example of why you need to
delegate decision-making to the Federal Reserve. I don't think
a legislative body or a committee hearing like this produces an
operational answer that stands up over time. I think you need
to put the right people on your decision-making Board--the
FOMC, in this case.
They need to have this argument. They need to have a large
staff of experts, as Chairman Hensarling has said, who need to
be well-trained in a wide range of economic methodologies. And
they need to hammer it out. And then they need to be held
accountable, as they are in their regular hearings with you.
That is the way to get at a question like that.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
time.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here and for your
testimony.
And, first, I want to give Dr. Taylor a chance to correct
the record on the comments of the gentleman from California,
who, I believe, a few minutes ago said that Section 7 of the
bill, the cost-benefit analysis section, would require the
Federal Open Market Committee to perform cost-benefit analysis
on monetary policy.
And I would direct Dr. Taylor to page 15, line 8, which
says, ``Before issuing any regulation,''. Does that mean they
would have to consider a cost-benefit analysis on monetary
policy?
Mr. Taylor. This is pretty clearly addressed to regulatory
policy, in my view.
And, quite frankly, this discussion about cost-benefit
analysis is amazing to me. It is sort of the basic thing you
teach students about government policy. You have to pass a
cost-benefit test. And, yes, it is hard; yes, it is difficult;
but why would you just abandon it? It makes no sense to me,
really.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. And that is the way I read it, too.
But the way I read Obamacare, it was bad, too, so maybe
different people read it differently.
But I appreciate that clarification, because I think that
is really important to note. It is about the regulatory
authority, and the Federal Reserve is a giant regulator in
addition to the monetary policy that they pass. So I think that
is really important on the cost-benefit analysis.
And, in fact, the President has an Executive Order on cost-
benefit analysis that he signed; it just can't apply to
independent agencies like the Federal Reserve. Therefore, an
Act like this is very important. So I want to thank Mr.
Huizenga and the gentleman from New Jersey for their work on
it.
Second, I guess, on Section 5--and I will open this up to
the entire panel--is there anyone who believes that a quarterly
testimony of the Federal Reserve before Congress is overly
burdensome on the Federal Reserve?
So there is one--I will take that as three people do not
think it is overly burdensome and one person does.
I would just say, if we are going to have transparency in
this country, having somebody be here for a few minutes every
90 days is not too much to ask. Transparency is really
important, and I think this can really help.
I think there has been a lot of conversation already from
previous questions on Section 2 of the bill that deals with
moving to a more rule-based system.
I think I would like to ask Dr. Taylor if he remembers or
wants to talk about the day when Chairman Bernanke said we
might just stop quantitative easing and what happened to the
markets? Do you remember what happened that morning?
Mr. Taylor. Yes. It was in the Joint Economic Committee, I
believe. He said, maybe in the next few meetings there will be
a decision and that they--sometimes called a ``taper tantrum.''
And it did cause a lot of volatility, to be sure.
In fact, Quantitative Easing 3, it started when the long-
term Treasury, 10-year Treasury was 1.7, and when he stopped
talking, it was 2.7. So it is hard to see how that had a
positive effect on lower rates.
Mr. Stivers. Right.
Mr. Taylor. There are a lot of mistaken views about this.
For one, I would just say the notion that unemployment would be
higher if this legislation was passed, I believe that is
completely wrong. You wouldn't have had nearly the crisis that
you had, I believe, or the recession.
And that is what is, to me, a tragedy, that we went through
all this and it has been a slow recovery. And, there isn't any
data that say recoveries have to be slow after deep recessions.
That is not American history. We have faster recoveries after
deep recessions in this country. This is the most unusual slow
recovery from a deep recession that we have ever had in our
history that we can record.
So, those are the facts.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you.
I would like to give Dr. Calabria and Ms. Peirce a chance
to talk about Section 9, really quickly. Section 9 deals with
transparency on international negotiations.
And as international harmonization becomes a bigger issue,
don't you think the American public deserves to know the
positions that their regulators are taking on their behalf in
these international negotiations?
Either one of you?
Ms. Peirce. I certainly think that is important, given the
role that the international negotiations are playing in
determining what is happening here domestically. Obviously, you
can define negotiations so that normal conversations can happen
between regulators, but for the major issues, there should be
some input from the public here before positions are taken
abroad.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple of different things: Mr. Johnson, before I get on
to the questions that I wanted to ask, you mentioned something
that caught my attention, several questioners back, regarding
some comments that Mr. John Allison at the Cato Institute,
formerly of BB&T, had made regarding suggestions he had on
raising capital requirements to roughly 20 percent.
In my conversations with him on the same topic, he
mentioned the same thing to me. But were you aware or was it
your understanding, as it was mine in my conversations with Mr.
Allison, that was part of a larger proposal, that it would
allow an alternative system, that banks could opt out of Dodd-
Frank, opt out of the oversight that they have today, the
regulatory climate that they have, and opt into a new parallel
system, where the primary, if not the only, requirement was
this 20-percent capital requirement?
Was that your understanding, sir?
Mr. Johnson. I think I should let Mr. Calabria answer that.
I just read one article. I didn't get that impression from the
article. I would defer to Mr. Calabria.
Mr. Calabria. That is correct. It is not an add-on to the
existing system. It is a much newer, simpler, and what I
believe would be a safer system.
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes.
And I won't ask you, Mr. Johnson, if you are not that
familiar with it, what your opinion is of it, but it might be
interesting to have that conversation at some future hearing,
about whether or not the idea of a parallel system--you can
either maintain your lower capital requirements and operate
within the existing system or opt into a parallel system that
has a much more limited regulatory climate but a much larger
capital requirement. We will deal with that another time.
Dr. Taylor, over the course of the last 2 years here, I
have had a chance to talk to both Chairman Bernanke and then
subsequently his successor, Chair Yellen, regarding the
monetary tools that might be available and might not be
available to the Fed as they go forward in an era of rising-
interest-rates environments. And the conversation we have
usually focuses on the difficulties they might have in
absorbing huge balance sheet losses if they have to sell
securities.
And the answer I got in response to that inquiry from both
Chairman Bernanke and Chair Yellen was that the Fed could avoid
having to book these losses by participating in the repo
market. Subsequent to the first conversations we had in this
committee about that, the Fed actually did it, or at least
started that. Last September, they created the overnight
reverse repurchase facility.
This committee received a letter last week, on June 30th,
from Ms. Sheila Bair, the former head of the FDIC. I ask
unanimous consent to place it in the record.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Mulvaney. And she has concerns about it, a lot of
different concerns about it, not the least of which is whether
or not it would essentially force short-term investors to
reallocate their investment dollars given the presence of this
new super safe investment. Would the Fed go from essentially
being the lender of last resort to the borrower of first
resort?
The size of this market has grown very dramatically, very
quickly. And in the 2 minutes I have left, Dr. Taylor, I would
ask you if you have an opinion on whether or not the Fed should
be doing this and whether the Fed should be coming to Congress
to ask for the ability to do this?
Mr. Taylor. My view is, as long as its balance sheet is so
large that they have to do something when they want to raise
interest rates, they are perfectly capable of raising interest
on reserves for this interval, and I think that would be fine.
They are doing these other things because during the panic,
they saw that the Federal funds rate actually went below the
interest on reserves. And so, they are concerned that they need
to do both of these things, reverse repos and interest on
reserves.
But my main concern about either of these is it leads to a
situation where the balance sheet may be permanently high,
basically forever, call it ``QE Forever,'' and the interest
rate will be moved around either by reverse repo or interest on
reserves. I think that is quite problematic.
I would like to see the Fed return to a situation where the
supply and demand for reserves determines that short-term
interest rate. Then, you wouldn't have all the quantitative-
easing possibilities that you have currently. And, of course,
to move there more quickly, it would mean they may have to sell
off some of this large balance sheet. And I think if they do
that in a strategic, clear way, like the second part of
tapering has been, I think it wouldn't be a problem for the
markets.
So I have a lot of concerns with this policy, where they
are going to go, because frequently in policy, in my
experience, you start out with something temporary, like
temporary, 3 or 4 or 5 years, with this balance sheet so big,
and it becomes a permanent one. And it is a real concern to me
that the future will be ``QE Forever.''
Mr. Mulvaney. Dr. Calabria, you look like you have some
thoughts.
Mr. Calabria. I was just going to say that I very much
agree. I think the Fed is going to have to look at some ways to
get out of this, and I think they need some flexibility in
that.
And the broader point should have been they--I think they
need to remember why central banks generally stay out of the
long end of the yield curve to begin with. But you are in this
mess now.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Pittenger, for 5 minutes.
Would the gentleman yield to the Chair briefly?
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. It has come up a couple of times--I
believe one member of the panel has said it is overly
burdensome for the Fed Chair to meet with Congress on a
quarterly basis. It has been well-established in the press that
the Fed Chair meets with the Secretary of the Treasury on a
weekly basis.
Is there any member of the panel who believes it is more
burdensome to meet with Congress on a quarterly basis than with
the Executive Branch on a weekly basis? Please raise your hand.
I see one.
I yield back to the gentleman from North Carolina.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Taylor, it often seems that anytime the Congress is
contemplating an amendment to the Federal Reserve Act regarding
the Fed's monetary policy requirements, we get a knee-jerk
response that it will threaten the Fed's independence.
Do you feel that this is the case at this time?
Mr. Taylor. I think the legislation is crafted very well to
prevent that. And, indeed, the Fed chooses its own policy role,
and so it has the operational independence that it needs. I
think that you need to go beyond the independence, and that is
why I think this legislation is so valuable.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Ms. Peirce, do you believe that putting the economic
analysis requirement into the statute, like we have at the SEC
and the CFTC, can have a beneficial effect on the rulemaking
process and result in sounder regulatory outcomes?
Ms. Peirce. Absolutely. I think that the SEC has been
through its own process of first ignoring its requirement, then
being reminded that it should adhere to that, and then starting
to employ that. And I think we are gradually seeing improved
rules as a result and more deliberate rulemaking. And that is
definitely needed at the Fed.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
The SEC has rules in place to ensure its employees and
officials do not trade on information they learn on the job and
requires them to disclose their financial investments.
Do you believe that the Federal Reserve should be exempt
from these requirements, despite the fact that the Fed
employees have access to sensitive, potentially market-moving
information?
We will start with you, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, I had a chance to review the
rules, the detailed rules, and I think the Fed circulated them
more broadly, comparing the restrictions on their staff with
the restrictions on the SEC. The wording is slightly different
because they have, obviously, different jurisdictions, but it
seemed to me to be almost exactly parallel in terms of what
they can and cannot do.
And so I didn't understand that part of the legislation. I
don't understand the problem that you are trying to fix there,
because it seems like the Fed does have exactly the right kind
of rules already. But tell me what I am missing.
Mr. Pittenger. Mr. Calabria, would you like to respond to
that?
Mr. Calabria. It seems like what you are simply doing is
putting current Fed practice into statute. And that is great
that they are doing it now, but there is no guarantee they will
continue to do it. So I don't see much harm--again, maybe I
should use the phrase ``small step'' here, because, again, it
is a small step in the right direction.
Mr. Pittenger. Sure.
Dr. Taylor?
Mr. Taylor. I would agree with that.
Mr. Pittenger. Ms. Peirce, did you want to respond?
Ms. Peirce. Yes. I just wanted to note that part of the
problem is the Fed's lack of transparency. And I think this
illustrates that if they have great procedures they could tell
Congress about them and get them baked into the bill.
Mr. Johnson. They did tell you about them. I think those
details have been available for a long time. I don't understand
what is the lack of transparency around these restrictions,
these practices. I think they are available to Congress. I
think they are available to the Chair of the committee any
moment of any day that he wants to pick up the phone and call
them.
Ms. Peirce. Yes, I think the problem is that the Fed's
practice has been--and perhaps this is grounded in the fact
that it was primarily established for monetary policy--to not
be transparent. And so that is the pushback that Congress needs
to give, because the Fed can't--it is now a massive regulator,
and it can't hide behind the traditions it has built up in its
monetary policy realm.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Ms. Peirce, I would like to ask, the FRAT Act requires the
Fed to provide metrics by which to gauge the success of a
proposed rule, and requires the Fed to subsequently use those
metrics to judge whether the rule has achieved its purpose.
Do you believe that will help to ensure new rules
accomplish their intended purpose?
Ms. Peirce. I think that is a very important thing to do.
It is important for the agency to set forth the metrics by
which it will measure its own success and then a few years
later to go back. Otherwise, what it will do is, when it does
the retrospective review, it will just pick metrics that work
well for it. So it facilitates an honest review.
Mr. Pittenger. Dr. Calabria, did you want to--you seem like
you have something on your mind.
Mr. Calabria. I do think that is helpful. I would also add
that I think that applies across-the-board. So my general
suggestion would be that everything within this committee's
jurisdiction should be subject to a regular sunset so that you
are forced to reevaluate it.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Rothfus.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Taylor, markets responded forcefully to one of the
first FOMC meeting releases to be accompanied by a press
conference last summer. This panicked response occurred despite
Chairman Bernanke's characterization of his comments as not
substantially altering the FOMC's policy stance.
A recent survey of 55 economists by The Wall Street Journal
gave the Fed a grade of D-minus for its guidance.
Don't these facts show that the Fed's monetary policy
guidance function needs more work?
Mr. Taylor. I think so. I think the forward guidance as
practiced has changed quite a bit; it has been erratic.
I would go back to the point, if they had a policy rule,
like this legislation is asking, that the forward guidance
would just fall out automatically. There would not be much of a
question about it.
Mr. Rothfus. Yes.
I would like to follow up on this distinction we have been
talking a little bit about between the Fed's role in setting
monetary policy and the Fed's separate role as a financial
regulator.
Dr. Calabria, we hear many times about the importance of
the Fed's independence. Does this argument about the Fed's
independence apply to the Fed's regulatory responsibilities as
well as its monetary policy responsibilities?
Mr. Calabria. I don't think it does. And as I alluded to in
my testimony, I think the fact that the Fed does bank
regulation undermines its ability to conduct independent
monetary policy and certainly represents some conflicts of
interest.
The ``Greenspan Put,'' the ``Bernanke Put,'' and maybe
pretty soon we will call it the ``Yellen Put'' came about
because of the responsibility of the Fed feeling like they
needed to rescue financial institutions every time there was a
market hiccup. And I would certainly argue that some of the
rescues, particularly of AIG, were done partly to cover up
mistakes on the regulatory side that the New York Fed made.
So, to me, I just think there is a real tension here in
having this entity be a central bank and a financial regulator.
Mr. Rothfus. As a financial regulator, should the Federal
Reserve be any more independent of Congressional oversight than
other financial regulators, such as the OCC or the FDIC?
Mr. Calabria. No.
Mr. Rothfus. Do any of the accountability and transparency
provisions in this legislation threaten the Fed's independence
to set monetary policy?
Mr. Calabria. In my view, no.
Mr. Rothfus. Okay.
Mr. Calabria. Let me add, it is often--I think the
traditional view has felt that if we give a regulator
discretion, that entails independence. And I can certainly say,
as having been a regulator for a short amount of time, you get
all sorts of pressure, and it is much easier to be independent
if you have a set of rules to hide behind so you can sit here
and say, ``Well, we would love to do that for you, but this is
what the law actually says.''
And so, we have certainly seen this. One of the reasons
that the Volcker Rule has becomes so convoluted is because it
wasn't very clear to begin with. And so if you have a clear set
of rules in statute, it is much easier for the regulator to
defend that and stick with that than it is to compromise along
the way.
Mr. Rothfus. Ms. Peirce, does Fed independence in setting
monetary policy mean the Fed's financial regulations are above
the law?
Ms. Peirce. Absolutely not. I think it is very important
that if the Fed is going to be a regulator, and I would agree
with Dr. Calabria that it should not be, but if it is going to
be a big regulator, it needs to be subject to the same
accountability as other regulators.
Mr. Rothfus. I would like to talk a little bit about the
Fed's stress-test program, Ms. Peirce. The Fed's stress-test
program attempts to gauge how bank balance sheets hold up in
worst-case scenarios to ensure banks are prepared for periods
of extended financial stress.
But wouldn't it be appropriate to also require the Fed to
stress-test its own accommodative monetary policy?
Specifically, shouldn't the Fed be required to stress-test its
exit strategy to its quantitative easing program to estimate
the effect on the Fed's ability to fulfill its mandate, the
impact on the Fed's balance sheet, the upper ranges of interest
on excess reserves the Fed might be required to pay, and how
increases in the Federal funds rate might impact the
relationship between the government's interest payments on
Treasury obligations and the deficit?
Ms. Peirce. I am going to defer to Dr. Taylor on that since
I think he has a better sense of--
Mr. Taylor. I think that the Fed should do all of those
things.
And the evidence that they put out now that quantitative
easing worked, I think, is based on studies that just looked at
the announcement effect. They are not that great; they are
wrong, in my view. So I think, in some sense, the answer to
your question is to have these studies be done, make them
public, so we can question them and analyze them and have a
better debate about it.
I think when you say require them to do a specific kind of
study or a specific kind of analysis, I would say that should
come out of--
Mr. Rothfus. I guess that leads to my other question.
Should the Fed be subject to transparency requirements for its
own stress-test models and results?
Mr. Taylor. No, I think if this legislation is to work
well, the Fed is going to make those things clear. That will be
an example of a deviation from a policy rule, and so they are
going to have to explain why they did that. So I think it would
come out of the testimony.
I would hope that they would say, well, we are going to
deviate because of X, and they will make it clear, their
analysis. And you, being informed about it, will be able to
question that, and it will be a public debate.
So I very much feel that a lot of the things that they have
done recently have not been productive. They have gone ahead
with them, but they have been deviations from the kind of
policy for which this legislation would ask.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Barr.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very
important hearing.
And thank you to the panelists.
It has been argued that there could not have been a housing
bubble or the massive misinvestment in the housing market in
the run-up to the financial crisis had the Fed not made the
decision to expand the money supply to the extent that it did
to finance the bubble in the run-up to the crisis.
The proponents of this argument make the case that the
fundamental cause of the crisis was mistakes by the Fed--in
other words, that it would have been impossible for a
misallocation or a misinvestment of this scale to have occurred
without the monetary policies pursued by the Fed before 2008.
Do the panelists agree that the Federal Reserve had a role
to play in causing the financial crisis? And we will just go
down the row.
Mr. Taylor. Yes, I do. I think that was--I would
characterize it as they held interest rates too low for too
long in that period, and that caused excesses in the housing
market, search for yield.
I would say there are regulatory issues, as well. Rules on
safety and soundness were not adhered to enough. So it is kind
of breaking two kinds of rules that I think led to the crisis.
Mr. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Calabria. I would say, as well, that I absolutely think
that monetary policy conducted about a decade ago, if you will,
was a contributor of many. And to repeat what Dr. Taylor said,
there certainly were other regulatory failings, some of those
by the Federal Reserve, as well. For instance, to me, I think
the Basel Capital Accords were a very big contributor to the
crisis.
But again, there is not a mono-causal definition of the
crisis. To me, a dozen different explanations all had some
bearing. But I absolutely do believe monetary policy was a very
big contributor, that if we had followed something like the
Taylor Rule, the boom size of the housing market would have
been a lot smaller.
Ms. Peirce. And just coming from my perspective, I would
say that the Fed's regulatory policy did play a role. And that
is why it is so surprising that their regulatory powers were
expanded in Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Johnson. To answer your question, Congressman, monetary
policy did contribute but in a relatively small way. The
regulatory failures were much more profound. They were not just
at the Federal Reserve; they were throughout the regulatory
system. They were also on Capitol Hill.
And to the point that has been made previously, central
banks that did not have regulatory functions also struggled,
and those economies also struggled, as in Britain, as in
Europe, with similar problems.
So the regulatory failure was not because of the
regulations of the central bank. They were a much broader
misunderstanding of what the system needed.
Mr. Barr. Okay.
And I think, Dr. Calabria, you answered this question in
your initial--but the follow-up here is that to the extent
monetary policy, not the regulatory side but monetary policy,
was a contributing factor, was the Federal Reserve following a
rule-based approach in conducting monetary policy in the years
leading up to the financial crisis or following a more
unpredictable model and an ad-hoc monetary policy?
Mr. Calabria. I certainly think in the years 2003 to about
2005, 2002 to 2005, there were large deviations from what would
have been a rule, and monetary policy was certainly looser than
it would have been otherwise.
But, I do want to repeat what Professor Johnson said.
Certainly, there were regulatory failings across the system, as
well as, I spent my time up here, and I can certainly say there
were failings up here.
Mr. Barr. Professor Johnson made the argument that the
legislation before this committee is monetary policy by Spanish
Inquisition, that the legislation would produce volatility as
opposed to prevent volatility.
I would just ask what produces a greater risk of
volatility, a GAO audit of the Fed's conduct of monetary policy
that deviates from a reference rule or the opaque process that
led up to the financial crisis, which was characterized by a
monetary policy untethered to any predictable rule day-by-day,
based on the whims of the Open Market Committee?
That is a hypothetical question. Let me just take the
remaining time to ask a question to Ms. Peirce really quickly
on the regulatory policies of the Federal Reserve.
When we talk about applying cost-benefit analysis to the
Federal Reserve, does it create a problem when the cost-benefit
analysis requirements are applied to Executive Branch or
independent agencies like the SEC or the CFTC but do not apply
to another prudential regulator in the form of the Fed?
Ms. Peirce. It does create a problem. I think we saw that
with the Volcker Rule, where the Fed didn't have to do an
economic analysis and so we got the Volcker Rule without an
analysis. And I think that across-the-board, the Fed is a very
powerful regulator and needs to be contributing its analysis
also.
Mr. Barr. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Ross.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Johnson, I appreciate the passion of your opening
statement. And in your written opening, you indicate that
everyone involved in designing and implementing monetary policy
and financial regulation should ultimately be accountable, at
least indirectly, to the electorate.
My question to you, first of all, is, how do you manage
that? How do you make them even indirectly accountable to the
electorate? Because I believe we all agree that accountability
is important.
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, the system, as you know far
better than I, that has worked well for 200 years in the
American public is that you have the President nominate people,
subject to Senate confirmation, and then you have regular
oversight hearings of various kinds. And that is what we do for
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
It is not what we do for the Presidents of the Reserve
Banks. Now, that is the result of a very strange compromise
that was negotiated for the 1913 Act, and it has become, I
think, increasingly problematic.
You are making some very good points about oversight and
the need for oversight--
Mr. Ross. But there should be oversight.
Mr. Johnson. --and there is no oversight in the New York
Fed.
Mr. Ross. It is created by Congressional empowerment; it
should have Congressional oversight, period. Would you agree
with that?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, it should, but it doesn't. I am telling
you, the Reserve Banks are not subject to the same
accountability as the Board of Governors.
Mr. Ross. But all that we are--
Mr. Johnson. It is a big disconnect.
Mr. Ross. All that we are proposing here is just greater
transparency. We are not saying substantively these are the
rules--
Mr. Johnson. No, here you are not addressing the main
problem in the Federal Reserve System, which is the Reserve
Banks.
Mr. Ross. Let me ask you this, because they do have an
independent budget. They operate with what they are able to
sustain off of their investments and whatnot. But how would
requiring the Fed to publish the salaries of employees who are
paid at GS-15, which is $124,000 and higher, hinder that budget
independence? Wouldn't it just be good transparency to know
that?
Ultimately, if there is any excess in the Fed, that money
has to go back to the Treasury. So I think, again, being
accountable and making sure that we are accounting for all
those dollars so that the Treasury gets what they are entitled
to, posting something like that wouldn't be a bad thing.
Mr. Johnson. It is an interesting question. Are you going
to require this also of the Reserve Banks? Are you going to
require the salary disclosure of the executives of the New York
Fed?
Mr. Ross. What is wrong with--
Mr. Johnson. Because they are not paid on the same scale.
Mr. Ross. What is wrong with requiring--sir, I only have
5--
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, I am answering the question.
Mr. Ross. --minutes. I don't suffer blank air that well. It
makes me a little bit impatient.
All I am saying is, in this particular situation, why not
have it disclosed?
Mr. Johnson. I am asking--
Mr. Ross. And you are answering with a question.
Mr. Johnson. I am asking--
Mr. Ross. If you can't give me an answer, that is fine.
Mr. Johnson. I am asking in order to understand what you
are proposing.
Mr. Ross. Dr. Calabria, what--
Mr. Johnson. If you are going to include the Reserve
Banks--
Mr. Ross. This is my time, please, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. The time belongs to the gentleman from
Florida.
Mr. Calabria. I am going to try to answer Professor
Johnson's question, which is, in my read of the Act, where it
says, ``the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,''
so I think you should broaden that. To me, I think it is
certainly fair to have that disclosure for the Reserve Banks.
So, I am agreeing with you that they should add that, the
tweak.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Calabria. That seems a reasonable approach, to me.
Mr. Ross. Ms. Peirce, it seems that Dr. Johnson believes
that oversight, accountability, and independence are mutually
exclusive. Do you agree with that?
Ms. Peirce. No. I think that the framework is set up where
you let the folks at the Federal Reserve do their jobs but they
have to explain what they are doing to the Congress and the
public and get feedback--
Mr. Ross. And explain how they are doing and why they are
doing it.
And, Dr. Johnson, am I mischaracterizing your testimony,
that accountability and independence are mutually exclusive?
Mr. Johnson. No, that is what I said in my first paragraph.
Mr. Ross. But let me ask you this question.
Mr. Johnson. No, Congressman. You mischaracterized my
testimony completely.
Mr. Ross. Again, and let me ask you this question.
Mr. Johnson. Can I please answer the question?
Mr. Ross. If they have a policy for setting monetary policy
that includes such things as the rate of inflation, GDP, and
other factors, and that is good to have as a criteria, what is
wrong with disclosing all criteria used in developing and
implementing monetary policy?
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, what has worked with regard to
central banking for the past 100 years in this country and in
other countries is to have the government--in this case,
Congress--stipulate what the objectives are; it is up to you to
determine the objectives.
Mr. Ross. Yes, it is.
Mr. Johnson. If you don't like the--
Mr. Ross. And that is what we are trying to do. We are just
trying to make sure--
Mr. Johnson. No.
Mr. Ross. --that we know what those objectives are that
are--
Mr. Johnson. No.
Mr. Ross. --being relied upon.
Mr. Johnson. No. Sorry, Congressman, you are going way
beyond--you are going way beyond what Congress has done in the
past 100 years.
Mr. Ross. Again, I appreciate--
Mr. Johnson. That is your prerogative, of course, but this
is radical, new--
Mr. Ross. Dr. Taylor, quickly, I just have 40 seconds left.
While I understand that international coordination is
necessary--we live in a different environment than we did 5 or
10 years ago, in a global economy. But are you worried that the
Federal Reserve may be prioritizing international stability
over the domestic stability and regulation, with their
involvement with FSOC, with their involvement with the
international regulatory environment? Are we discounting our
domestic regulatory environment in lieu of trying to maintain
or at least gain some international control or influence?
Mr. Taylor. I think, to answer your question, Congressman,
that the best thing the Fed can do is have a monetary policy
that is good for the United States, and that is basically going
to help the globe.
I think, to some extent, right now, the policy it has, has
been disturbing globally. It is basically--even this so-called
``taper tantrum'' had impacts all over the world, and that
comes back and hurts the United States.
So it does make sense to think about U.S. monetary policy
as having effects abroad and worrying about those because they
feed back onto the United States. I think it is very important.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Dr. Taylor.
I see my time has expired.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being there.
As we all know, in the wake of recent financial crises, the
Federal Reserve has absolutely accumulated a vast amount of
unprecedented power to oversee our economy. Its balance sheet
alone has grown to a staggering $4.3 trillion, one-fifth of the
economy, and it has also grappled with an expanded array of
regulatory duties.
My constituents demand that the Fed account for its
handling of these important issues. That is just common sense.
After all, Fed policy affects every aspect of our Main Street
economy, from the price of daily essentials like gas, milk, and
bread, to the cost of a home and the strength of seniors'
retirement savings.
The Federal Reserve must remain an independent agency that
can withstand political threats to that independence, but this
bill does not tell the Fed when or how to do its job. It just
requires that the Fed take a transparent, measured approach to
doing so. An independent Fed shouldn't equal an opaque Fed.
These sensible reforms could bring the accountability to
the Federal Reserve that the American people demand. And I
thank the committee for taking up this legislation.
I want to focus, in my question time, on the stress-test
provision in the bill. Stress tests can be a very important way
to show that large financial institutions can, in fact,
withstand an economic downturn. This reduces the likelihood of
future bailouts because they encourage companies to follow safe
and sound business practices. They also convince our Nation's
policymakers that the proverbial sky will not fall during an
economic downturn.
However, I am also deeply concerned about the highly
secretive and unpredictable nature of the stress-testing
process. The Fed doesn't have to follow the notice-and-comment
process, too often focuses on unpredictable qualitative
factors, and doesn't provide banks with a detailed accounting
of the stress-test methodology. In practice, banks respond by
constraining their lending, which hinders the economic recovery
that my constituents desperately need. This legislation
addresses those concerns.
Some, such as our distinguished panelist, Dr. Johnson,
worry that this legislation undermines the efficacy of the
stress test. He believes it will make it easier for other
companies to tailor their balance sheets to Fed methodologies,
gaming the system.
I wonder, can the remaining panelists explain why companies
won't improperly game the system? For example, if the Fed
believes in its stress-test model and that passing banks are
safe and sound, why shouldn't there be transparency? I would
ask the other three if you have a response?
Mr. Taylor. I think the reforms improve the ability of the
stress test to work.
I do think that it needs to be supplemented with these
leverage ratios or with a combination of the risk-weighted
capital requirements. And, in fact, the more I think about
these issues that you are raising--``too-big-to-fail''
resolution, Title 2 of Dodd-Frank, Chapter 14--the more I
realize that a simpler way would be to just get these capital
requirements at a more satisfactory level.
Mr. Calabria. So let me parse out where I think I very much
agree with the questions and then maybe where I have some
concerns.
Where I very much agree is that our system is very
procyclical, in my opinion. I think we let booms get out of
control, and I think during the busts we clamp down too hard
and end up--I think our current regulatory system ends up
being, again, exacerbating the swings. That needs to be
addressed.
I don't necessarily think the biggest problem in that is
the stress tests. As I mentioned earlier, I am very skeptical
of the stress tests. I would abandon them altogether, quite
frankly. I don't think they are very informative, in my
opinion. Then again, I don't actually think they are very
stressful.
So that point is, again, I would just drop the stress tests
altogether and focus on simpler, more transparent ratios, like
a leverage ratio.
Mr. Hultgren. Ms. Peirce, a quick thought?
Ms. Peirce. You could enhance the credibility of the stress
tests by making them more open so people knew what the models
were, what the assumptions were, and then people could comment
on whether they thought those were strong enough or not. We saw
in Europe that people didn't believe the stress tests were very
credible there. And so you could have stronger ones.
But I also worry that the banks are spending so much time
worrying about what assumptions, what data the Fed is using in
its models that they are not worrying about the real business
realities that they are facing as a bank. And if we don't
believe that bankers can manage their own banks without the Fed
walking them through it, I think we are in a really bad place.
We can't rely on regulators to run our banks.
Mr. Hultgren. I just have about 30 seconds left. I wanted
to talk quickly about the cost-benefit analysis on all
regulation that I believe is necessary.
I wonder, Dr. Taylor, does the Fed's independence require
that the Fed be exempt from a review of its rules by the
courts? Does Fed independence in setting monetary policy mean
that the Fed's financial regulations are above the law?
Mr. Taylor. I think cost-benefit analysis applied to the
regulatory doesn't sacrifice the Fed's independence. Other
agencies do that. I think it makes sense.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you very much.
My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
There are no other Members in the queue. Thus, I would like
to thank each one of our witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:43 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 10, 2014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
