- OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC'S DIVISION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC'S DIVISION

OF CORPORATION FINANCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS AND

GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 24, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 113-95

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

91-159 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California, Vice     MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman    CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
Emeritus                         NYDIA M. VELAAZQUEZ, New York
PETER T. KING, New York              BRAD SHERMAN, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  RUBEEN HINOJOSA, Texas
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          AL GREEN, Texas
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
BILL POSEY, Florida                  KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
Pennsylvania                     JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DENNY HECK, Washington
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
LUKE MESSER, Indiana

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises

SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey, Chairman

ROBERT HURT, Virginia, Vice          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama              BRAD SHERMAN, California
PETER T. KING, New York              RUBEEN HINOJOSA, Texas
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  BILL FOSTER, Illinois
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
LUKE MESSER, Indiana
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 24, 2014................................................     1
Appendix:
July 24, 2014................................................    39

WITNESSES
Thursday, July 24, 2014

Higgins, Keith F., Director, Division of Corporation Finance,
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission........................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Higgins, Keith F.............................................    40

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Lynch, Hon. Stephen, and Perlmutter, Hon. Ed:
Written statement of the Council of Institutional Investors..    45
Higgins, Keith F.:
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Hurt.......................................................    51
Written response to a question posed by Representative
Stivers during the hearing.................................    52

OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC'S DIVISION

OF CORPORATION FINANCE

----------

Thursday, July 24, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets and
Government Sponsored Enterprises,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Scott Garrett
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Garrett, Hurt, Royce,
Neugebauer, Huizenga, Stivers, Fincher, Mulvaney, Hultgren,
Ross, Wagner, Messer; Maloney, Sherman, Lynch, Perlmutter,
Scott, Himes, Peters, Foster, Carney, and Kildee.
Ex officio present: Representative Hensarling.
Chairman Garrett. Good morning, and welcome. This hearing
of the Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises
Subcommittee entitled, ``Oversight of the SEC's Division of
Corporation Finance'' is hereby called to order. Welcome, Mr.
Higgins. We will begin with opening statements up here, and
then go to you for your testimony.
I yield myself 7 minutes.
Today's hearing will focus on oversight of the SEC's
Division of Corporation Finance. Corporation Finance Director
Higgins, thank you for agreeing to join us today and for all
your hard work that you are doing over at the SEC.
I want to start off today's hearing by commending Chair
White, the other SEC Commissioners, and Dr. Higgins for your
recent decision to move a potential corporate political
disclosure rulemaking, the SEC's Red Flags Agenda.
Far too often during the span of this Administration, it
appears that supposedly independent regulators use their
position to carry out heavy-handed partisan political attacks.
Whether it is the targeting of specific political groups by the
IRS, the armed raiding of Gibson Guitar by the Justice
Department, the abusing of the law by the National Mediation
Board, the bullying of fellow Commissioners by the former head
of the Nuclear Regulatory Agency, the obstructing of an
investigation of the chemical safety board, the lying about
delays by the VA Department, or the illegal implementation of
ObamaCare by Health and Human Services, and the list goes on.
The Obama Administration officials and their appointed
regulatory cheerleaders need to stop putting political politics
above the rule of law. It is not appropriate to abuse
government-granted power to threaten, cajole, intimidate or
pressure any opposition into submission.
So I want to thank Chair White for not letting the SEC fall
victim to this and for standing up for the SEC's political
independence from the White House. I am pleased that the SEC is
not joining in this conga line of partisan regulatory abuses
and is not turning the disclosure process into a political
pinata. After all, the SEC is a disclosure-based agency, and
ensuring the appropriate disclosures of material information to
investors is at the heart of what the SEC does. And the staff
of the Division of Corporation Finance is at the forefront of
this important work.
I also want to thank Chair White and Director Higgins and
the staff of Corporation Finance for their ongoing work to
refocus SEC's disclosure regime on its original purpose.
Specifically, I commend them on attempting to address the
problems of disclosure overload and for looking at ways to
streamline and modernize the integrated SEC disclosure
regulatory regime.
If the disclosure process is to be useful to investors, the
information required to be contained in the disclosures must be
material to the investors and formatted in a way that can be
easily utilized by the reader. Over time, more and more
requirements have been added to disclosures, rendering them
almost useless to the average retail investor.
So we must prioritize reforming this regime to ensure the
investors have the appropriate information to make informed
investment decisions. By getting what I would say back to the
basics of disclosure, I believe we will unlock additional
investment capital in our public markets.
Another area where I would like to commend Chair White and
Director Higgins again is your recent work on proxy advisors.
The guidance the Commission put out several weeks ago is a very
good first step in addressing the growing and outside influence
being wielded by the proxy advisory industry.
So by clarifying that investment advisors are not required
to vote every share of stock they hold for their clients and
not every recommendation of the proxy advisers must be
followed, the SEC reduced the importance of the proxy advisors
and the proxy process.
While these steps taken are very positive, there is still
more that should be done. Similar to the worries regarding the
extraneous corporate disclosure requirements, there is also a
concern about the irrelevant and unnecessary shareholder proxy
proposals being brought by activist corporate gadflies.
In a recent speech, Commissioner Dan Gallagher stated,
``Taking money out of the pocket of someone investing for
retirement or for their child's education and using it instead
to subsidize activist agendas is simply inexcusable. It is
incumbent upon the Commission to create a regulatory
environment that promotes shareholder value over special
interest agendas.''
I could not agree more with Commissioner Gallagher.
The SEC must take action to limit the abuses being
committed by superfluous activist proposals that run counter to
and promoting actual shareholder value for the actual investor,
the average investor. Specifically, the SEC should amend a
number of the rules of government which investors can afford,
offer, what shareholder proposals including four things:
increasing the current percentage ownership threshold;
lengthening the holding requirement time; providing more
specifics around what constitutes ordinary business operations
and significant policy issues; and strengthening the
resubmission thresholds.
Like the disclosure process, we must also refocus the
shareholder proposal so that proposals to address and promote
shareholder value receive the attention and consideration they
are due. I have highlighted a number of initiatives of the
Commission with which I am pleased. Let me turn to several with
which I have a number of concerns.
The first is the implementation of the JOBS Act. It is
unfortunate indeed that the SEC still does not embrace its
mission to promote capital formation with as much zeal and
enthusiasm as it does with the Dodd-Frank Act. Our markets and
economy are worse for it. This committee recently passed
legislation that I sponsored entitled, ``The Private Placement
Improvement Act.''
The purpose of this legislation is to ensure that issuers
and investors in certain private offerings under Regulation D
(Reg D) do not face overly complex and burdensome regulatory
obstacles. So last year, the SEC adopted a rule lifting a ban
on general solicitation and advertising private offering under
Rule 506 of Reg D as mandated by Title II of the JOBS Act.
Unfortunately, the SEC did not stop there. Instead of
simply removing the ban as intended and opening up this market
to new potential investors, the SEC decided, for some reason,
to issue a separate rule proposal, not called for at all by
Congress. That proposal would impose a number of new burdensome
regulatory requirements on issuers seeking to use Rule 506. As
one commenter put it, the JOBS Act on its base is not
authorizing the Commission to attach new and additional
conditions to the use of the exemption. It is not for the
Commission to rely on its general rulemaking authorities
bringing Congress and the President back in line by adding
conditions that it believes may enhance investor protection.
However, that is exactly what the Commission did in that
case. I believe that many of the additional requirements of the
SEC's Reg D proposal will, if ultimately adopted, make Rule 506
a less attractive avenue for small business capital formation.
This then is clearly at odds with the goals, let alone the text
of the JOBS Act.
And finally, I would like to raise the ongoing view by the
SEC of the accredited investor definition, and let me be clear
on this point. At a time when small businesses continue to
struggle to raise capital, and investors are having difficulty
earning a return on their investment, the SEC should not harm
small business job creators or the investing public by reducing
the amount of participants in this field eligible for private
placement.
I know there is a long-held understanding that not all
investments are appropriate for all investors, I find it
difficult to believe that the SEC will know where to draw the
line better than each individual investor. If the SEC decides
to act on this, I do encourage it to err more on the side of
allowing for investor choice and additional investment options
rather than telling more investors whether they can and they
can't invest their own money.
With that, I want to thank you again, Mr. Higgins and I now
recognize Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Chairman Garrett.
And I want to thank Mr. Keith Higgins, who is the Director
of the Securities Exchange Commission's Division of Corporation
Finance for testifying before our subcommittee today.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has a good and
necessary mission and that mission is to protect the investors,
to maintain fair and orderly and efficient markets, and to
facilitate capital formation, and any reorganization of the SEC
should be made in mind to increase its effectiveness in
achieving its mission and in streamlining the corporation with
other permanent Federal agencies.
In support of the Commission's mission to protect
investors, maintain fair and orderly and efficient markets, and
facilitate capital formation, the Division of Corporation
Finance seeks to ensure that investors are provided with
material information in order to make informed investment
decisions, both when a company initially offers their
securities to the public and on an ongoing basis as it
continues to give information to the marketplace. The Division
also provides interpretive assistance to companies with respect
to the SEC rules and forms and makes recommendations to the
Commission regarding new rules and revisions to existing rules.
I am interested in finding out what changes have been made
since the implementation of Dodd-Frank, whose fourth
anniversary we celebrate today. And if the SEC is able to
conduct any additional reforms in order to improve the
Commission's effectiveness, well, I would certainly welcome
such reforms.
Furthermore, I anticipate the opportunity to discuss
rulemaking and implementation emanating from Dodd-Frank as well
as to jumpstart our business startups or the JOBS Act. We need
to make sure that in this legislation and subsequent
rulemaking, we still allow the Securities and Exchange
Commission to evolve with market changes, and that we are not
preventing the Securities and Exchange Commission from
conducting its intended purpose.
Also, I am very much interested in working and getting an
update on how the SEC is progressing with the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (CFTC) and their joint rulemaking for cross-
border harmonization and derivatives and swaps dealing. As you
know, this comes under Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act. It is
imperative that the Securities and Exchange Commission get
together and do this joint rulemaking.
The delay causes confusion in our international markets and
failure to come up with harmonization for our cross border, and
dealing with our swaps activity puts our business community
working on international stage at a very serious competitive
disadvantage and could very well allow for a possible
reimportation of risk.
May I conclude, Mr. Chairman with this--the key to this
cross border is to make sure that the top eight foreign
jurisdictions who engage in swaps activity have equal robust
regimes to ours, and in order for us to facilitate that, it is
you and the CFTC that will determine that to report back to
Congress within 30 days if one of these jurisdictions does not
meet our robust regimes.
So there is a lot to do there. I would be very interested
to know how quickly the CFTC and the SEC will come together in
harmony on rulemaking for cross-border swaps and derivatives
activities.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance my time.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. And the gentleman yields back.
The vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Hurt, is now
recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's subcommittee
hearing to conduct oversight over the SEC's Division of
Corporation Finance.
The Division has a number of consequential initiatives on
its agenda including the review of our corporate disclosure
system and finalizing key pieces of the JOBS Act, and I am
looking forward to hearing your testimony today.
I am encouraged by Chair White's comments on the need for
the Commission to conduct a review of its corporate disclosure
system. She and other Commissioners noted disclosure overload
is having negative impacts on investors, public companies, and
the SEC itself. Fostering capital formation in our capital
markets requires consistently reliable information on public
companies. However, too much information for the sake of
information can create inefficiencies and confusion.
Streamlining our disclosure regime to better reflect the
SEC's mission of protecting the investors, maintaining fair,
orderly, and efficient markets, and facilitating capital
formation will lead to benefits for both business and
investors. I also want to emphasize that it is imperative that
the SEC not lose sight of its third important and sometimes
neglected mission, again, facilitating capital formation.
Congress has provided the SEC with broad discretion to
amend securities laws and regulations without sacrificing key
investor protections. However, the JOBS Act, and the numerous
bipartisan bills that have passed out of this committee
highlight the fact that the SEC needs to do more to promote
capital formation through common-sense updates to its
regulations.
One such bill that Representative Sewell and I have
introduced passed this committee with strong bipartisan support
to provide relief to small issuers from the disproportionate
cause of XBRL compliance. The SEC should recommit itself to
promoting capital formation that will spur growth and
opportunity, beginning with a full implementation of the JOBS
Act as well as other recommendations from the SEC's forum on
small business capital formation.
I would like to thank Mr. Higgins for appearing before our
subcommittee today. I look forward to your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance my time.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman, and the gentleman
yields back.
The gentleman from California is recognized for 4 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Four minutes, thank you.
There are a number of issues I would like to discuss. One
of those is the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
lease accounting project that I realize comes not directly
under your purview but you are, to some extent, responsible for
the need for total disclosure--for a full disclosure, and
leases are being properly disclosed now. Since it is not broke,
the folks in Norwalk, Connecticut, feel they need to fix it.
The effect will be to add $2 trillion to the balance--to the
liabilities of the balance sheet of American business because
many tens of thousands, I would say many hundreds of thousands
will be in violation of their loan covenants and perhaps cut
our GDP by about half a point.
Others on this committee have heard me talk about this, and
I hope that you would realize as your chairman has stated here
that while you can say you designated--you have delegated
everything to the Financial Accounting Standards Board, that
this is an SEC responsibility.
Second, you are about 2 years behind on issuing regulations
under the Franken-Sherman amendment to deal with credit rating
agencies. They gave AAA to Alt-A, and the economy tanked. All
of the same pressures are there now. That is to say, the issuer
of the bond selects the credit rating agency.
If I had been able to select the people who graded my tests
in college and been able to pay them an average of $1 million
per test they graded, I would have done better in college.
Day trading and now minute trading, second trading,
millisecond trading, is an issue that comes up. It makes people
think that they can't invest in a fair market if they don't
have a computer that is specially wired to the market to beat
somebody else's computer, let alone any human making the
decision. It used to be that if there was a tiny spread,
sometimes that went to the buyer, and sometimes that went to
the seller. Now, all of it is scooped up by those engaged in
this computerized trading.
And it is also very hard to see what benefit it has
provided by having some of our smartest young people sit at
home all day, avoid shaving, and spend the whole day buying and
selling stocks and being out of the market at the end of the
day. I think there is a role for people to make money in our
capitalist system but it usually should be tied to something
socially productive.
And finally, Mr. Higgins, I hope you will discuss either in
your opening statement or in questions the fact that the
British and others have transactions taxes. How can we
establish a per transactions tax that is low enough, that it
doesn't push business offshore--I think London is doing pretty
well--and it would have the effect of raising some revenue
because I am sure you are here to tell us that the SEC doesn't
have sufficient revenue to do its job such as writing the
regulations under the Franken-Sherman amendment that you are 2
years late on. just in case I didn't mention that.
And it would also have the effect of discouraging
meaningless trades where people are in and out of a stock in a
minute or a second. So I hope you will address those issues in
your opening statement.
I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Royce is recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First, let me welcome Mr. Higgins, and say thank you. To
date, your office has been very professional and forthright in
their interactions with me and with my staff.
And I would also praise the Commission because over the
last 5 years, it has been very active in the pursuit of insider
trading. I think you have charged now over 570 defendants in
civil insider trading cases for that period of time. It is easy
for our constituents to understand insider trading when it
involves a group of friends sharing information maybe over the
golf course or through an email exchange between them. It
becomes a little murkier for investors, and I assume for the
SEC, when the exchange of information is shrouded in contracts
and it doesn't look like something that you have seen before.
I am very interested in the Commission's process for
looking at novel and creative deals to ensure that they are
robustly reviewed to ensure strong investor protection and
market transparency in places where people would try to use
insider trading as part of a scheme, and I look forward to your
answers to some questions on these issues this morning.
And again, I thank the chairman for holding this hearing,
and I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back? Okay.
The gentlelady from New York is now recognized for 3
minutes, or as much time as she is going to consume.
Mrs. Maloney. First of all, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this important hearing, and I welcome Mr. Higgins.
There has been a great deal of discussion lately on
maintaining confidence in our markets, and I have always said
markets run more on confidence than on capital, and it is
important that we maintain it. But one of the most important
and most underappreciated sources of confidence is the accuracy
and transparency of the financial statements that public
companies are required to file, and this is where the SEC's
Division of Corporation Finance plays such an important role.
As an investor, if you are going to commit your capital to
a company, you need to know at a minimum how much money the
company already has, how much it is expected to make every
quarter, what its normal day-to-day operating costs are, and
how much it already owes to other creditors. This is the
information that public companies are required to disclose
every quarter in their financial statements.
If an investor cannot have a basic level of confidence in
these financial statements, that the numbers are accurate and
any major caveats are disclosed, then the investor won't commit
his capital to this company, period. The fact that investors
around the world are so willing to invest in our companies and
our markets is a testimony to the professionalism and
dedication of the SEC staff who review those financial
statements, and it is difficult work, sometimes tedious, often
frustrating, and always complex.
The confidence that investors place in these financial
statements has been hard won over several decades, but it is
truly the grease that keeps the wheels of commerce spinning.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, and
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlelady also yields back.
At this point, we return to our panel, our witness, for his
opening statement. Mr. Higgins, you are recognized for 5
minutes. Obviously, your written statement will be made a part
of the record, and, as with every witness, we remind you to
pull the microphone as close as you can, if that is not
inconvenient to you. And again, we welcome you here and you are
recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. Higgins?

STATEMENT OF KEITH F. HIGGINS, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF
CORPORATION FINANCE, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Chairman Garrett, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Keith
Higgins, and I am the Director of the Division of Corporation
Finance at the Securities and Exchange Commission.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on behalf of
the Commission about the Division's activities and
responsibilities. As has been said already, the mission of the
Commission is to protect investors, maintain fair, orderly, and
efficient markets, and facilitate capital formation. The
Division promotes this mission by overseeing the agency's
review of company disclosures to the investing public, seeking
to ensure that investors have access to materially complete and
accurate information upon which to make voting and investment
decisions.
The Division generally carries out its mission by
selectively reviewing company filings by providing
interpretative guidance about the securities laws and by making
rulemaking recommendations to the Commission in the areas of
company disclosure and securities offerings.
Through our filing review program, the Division reviews the
disclosures and financial statements of reporting companies to
monitor and enhance compliance with our disclosure and
accounting requirements. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
requires the Commission to review companies' disclosures at
least once every 3 years, and more frequently where
circumstances warrant.
In addition to these mandated reviews, the Division
selectively reviews registration statements and other filings
relating to public offerings, business combination
transactions, and proxy solicitations. During fiscal 2013, the
Division reviewed the filings of more than 4,500 reporting
companies, and I expect our reporting company review of
statistics will be similar for fiscal 2014.
The Division also provides guidance to market participants
and the public through, among other things, no-action and staff
interpretative letters and staff and accounting legal and
accounting bulletins. Most recently, as the chairman mentioned,
the Division, together with the Commission's Division of
Investment Management, issued a staff legal bulletin on proxy
advisory firms that provided guidance on the availability of
exemptions under our Federal proxy rules upon which these firms
typically rely.
It also provided guidance to the investment advisors about
their responsibilities in voting client proxies and in
retaining and overseeing proxy advisory firms. As to our
rulemaking effort, the Division has been focused on
implementing the mandatory rulemaking provisions of the Dodd-
Frank and JOBS Acts. Under Dodd-Frank, the Division has been
involved in numerous completed rulemakings including say-on-pay
and say-on-frequency votes for executive compensation,
disclosures about representations and warranties and asset
level review of asset-backed securities offerings, compensation
committee listing standards and disclosure, disqualification of
bad actors under Rule 506, specialized disclosures relating to
mine safety and conflict minerals, as well as removing a
person's primary residence from the network calculation in the
accredited investor definition.
The Division is currently developing recommendations for
final rules on the following: disclosure of asset level data
and offering of asset-backed securities; risk retention for
securitizers of asset-backed securities; and CEO pay ratio. We
are also working to implement the remaining Dodd-Frank
executive compensation rules and payments by resource
extraction issuers as well as working on the mandated review of
the accredited investor definition.
The Division has also been leading a number of the
rulemakings under the JOBS Act. As the chairman mentioned, last
year we adopted final rules on general solicitation in the Rule
506 offerings, and at the same time issued a rule proposal to
amend Regulation D to enhance the Commission's ability to
assess the development of the private offering market.
In October of 2013, the Commission published a proposal to
implement the crowdfunding rules under the JOBS Act. And in
December of 2013, the Commission proposed rules to enable
companies to offer up to $50 million in any 12-month period
under a new and expanded Regulation A.
The Division is preparing recommendations for final rules
on the Regulation D, crowdfunding, and Regulation A proposals,
and we are also working on proposals to implement the Title V
and VI changes to the 12(g) standards under the Exchange Act.
Finally, the Division, as the chairman has mentioned, is
leading the Commission staff's effort to comprehensively review
our disclosure system to review the rules, specify what
companies must disclose in their filings and to make
recommendations on how to update them to facilitate timely,
material, and more effective disclosure. Initially, the
Division is focusing its efforts on the business and financial
disclosures that are included in periodic and current reports.
After which, we will focus on the governance and compensation
information provided in proxy statements.
The staff is seeking input from a broad range of companies,
investors, and other market participants on how to modernize
and update the disclosure so we can make it both more
meaningful for investors and less burdensome for companies.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify today. I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Director Higgins can be found on
page 40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. Thank you, again, for your testimony.
At this point, I recognize myself for 5 minutes, and I just
have a few matters to go over.
You went through a whole series of things as far as what
has been done and the listing of things that are on the plate
still, I guess. One that I touched upon in my opening statement
was with regard to proxy advisor firms. And as you indicated,
you recently issued guidance, and as I said in my opening
statements that they seem to address the concerns raised by me
and also raised by investors and businesses also at the past
SEC roundtables and also at the hearings that we held here in
this committee last year.
From a reading of it, the guidance appears to require the
advisory firms to disclose, for one thing, conflict of
interest. Also, it requires them to put a system in place to
address those conflicts of interest and also to try to ensure
accuracy that correlates advice to the goals of the client fund
and clarifies when institutional investors must vote shares and
how they must engage in advisory firms. I think I touched upon
that in my opening statement as well.
So all those things are important steps, I think, forward
in creating oversight over these firms and ensuring a fair, and
what we call an even-handed shareholding voting process. But
there are a couple of points just to dig in to a little bit.
How is the SEC going to--not that they have done this--oversee
the implementation of all these with regard to the advisory
firms?
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Chairman, we keep our eye on--we monitor
the market, the guidance is out--
Chairman Garrett. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. The proxy season really is typically the first
4 months of the year so we are sort of in a lull in the proxy
season, but we would expect to watch to see what happens. We
get feedback from market participants as to how it is working,
but we don't yet have a work plan on how we are going to test
how well the guidance did. We expect--because market
participants haven't been bashful in letting us know where the
problems are, so we are hoping that we continue to get feedback
from all sides of the question.
Chairman Garrett. Okay. So just to go down on one point, as
far as the complex, there is not going to be a reporting
requirement on the conflict for each particular one that they
identify then, for example?
Mr. Higgins. What the guidance said is that the proxy
advisory firm has the obligation, if there is a significant
relationship that has to be addressed--
Chairman Garrett. Right.
Mr. Higgins. --the guidance said that the proxy advisory
firm must provide that to the client on or about the time that
it delivers the report, and we are confident that the proxy
advisory firms can implement that.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
Mr. Higgins. There is no one-size-fits-all.
Chairman Garrett. Right. Okay. So we are in a lull because
it just passes now, so when we get through the next period, the
next season of proxy advisors, will you be reporting back to
us? Will you be issuing a report? How do we know as far as the
success or not in this area?
Mr. Higgins. Right. We don't have any current plans to
issue a report, but it is something we will give some thought
to. As far as how you measure success, it will be hard. There
will be some things that won't be particularly transparent to
us. You mentioned the guidance provides some guidance on how
clients can agree with their investment advisors when and how
to vote shares.
Those are the agreements that we might not be privy to; if
they are registered investment advisors, our Office of
Compliance Inspections and Examinations could take a look at
that and add that to the list of things that they look out for
when they come in to do their exams.
Chairman Garrett. All right. Let me--my time is going by.
Moving on to shareholder proposals and what have you, do
you agree with me that the SEC should amend a number of the
rules that govern which investors can offer what and what
shareholder proposals--I won't go down it--but just in general
in that area?
Mr. Higgins. There has certainly been a lot of angst on the
shareholder proposal process. The one thing about it is that
nobody is completely happy with the process.
Chairman Garrett. Right.
Mr. Higgins. We understand that. I think that we have a
shareholder--yes, rulemaking position in on resubmission
thresholds, Commissioner Gallagher has given speeches on--
Chairman Garrett. Yes, I have heard that.
Mr. Higgins. --thresholds. All of those are issues on which
there is widespread debate. I don't think the staff has a view
on what should be done. I think the only observation I would
make is that any proposal will need to try to find a consensus.
Chairman Garrett. So let me just--my time is almost out
here. Will you commit to proactively monitor the proxy voting
process to ensure that it is not abused? Because there are
allegations, I am sure you know, from the stakeholders that
certain activist shareholders are trying to do things through
these methods that they maybe cannot accomplish in another
means. So will it be your goal to try to proactively monitor
what they are doing? The proxy voting process to ensure that it
is not abused by just this small class of what we call activist
shareholders and special interest groups who are looking to
advance their own particular goals that may not be to the
detriment overall of the other investors and other
shareholders?
Mr. Higgins. This is on the 14A shareholder proposal
process. We devote a substantial amount of staff resources
every year during the 3 months of the proxy season on reviewing
shareholder proposals on calling balls and strikes, if you
will, on what proposals can be included and excluded.
Chairman Garrett. Okay.
Mr. Higgins. So we are actively involved in watching that.
Chairman Garrett. All right. I appreciate it.
The gentlelady from New York is now recognized for--
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins, earlier this year the New York State Common
Retirement Fund, which is overseen by our State Comptroller Tom
Dinapoli, tried to get a shareholder vote at the annual meeting
of two large financial institutions on a resolution concerning
the disclosure of incentive-based compensation for employees
who take high risks for these institutions. Unfortunately, both
of the financial institutions decided to exclude the
comptroller's resolution from their proxy materials and the
staff in the Division of Corporation Finance sided with these
institutions in this dispute saying that the financial
institutions could exclude the resolution because it dealt with
so-called ``ordinary business operations.''
This seems to be contrary to the SEC's previous statement
that incentive-based compensation for bank employees who take
material risks is in fact a significant policy issue and does
not merely concern so-called ``ordinary business operations.''
Because the staff's decision appeared to be based on a simple
misreading of the resolution, the comptroller tried to appeal
the decision to the full Commission, but the staff refused to
even present the appeal to the Commissioners. And this was very
troubling to me. I know that throughout the hearings on Dodd-
Frank, the incentives were talked about, that the incentives
were there to increase risk as opposed to sound financial
practices.
This was troubling to me. Can you please explain to me how
this happened?
Mr. Higgins. Right. Well, the proposal of which you speak,
the reason that the staff concluded that it could be excluded
was that the proposal was drafted to focus on employees who
could expose the institution to material risk, that was the
first cut that needed to be made. The second was then to look
at any incentive compensation those persons might be paid. The
significant policy issue, and these are technical issues that
maybe only a lawyer can love, had to do with incentive
compensation paid to individuals who expose the institution to
material risk. The proposal as drafted talked about employees
who could expose the institution to risk whether or not they
receive any incentive compensation. On that basis, and again a
very technical area, the staff did not believe the proposal met
the significant policy issue standard, and as a result agreed
with the company that it could be excluded.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Will you commit to working with the New
York State Common Retirement Fund next year ahead of time so
that we can prevent this situation from happening again?
Mr. Higgins. The one thing about the shareholder proposal
process is that we stand in the middle. We provide informal
advice to people who ask us about what we believe can be
excluded and what can be included. We try to be scrupulously
fair and stand in the middle and not appear to aid either side.
I believe it would be problematic for us to either get together
with companies or with proponents in advance because it would
seem as if we would have already decided the issue before it is
presented. We have to let each side advocate for their
respective positions.
Mrs. Maloney. Yes, but giving them the guidelines of how
their proposal could be--
Mr. Higgins. We hope our letter was clear on how they might
revise it.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
I am a big advocate of your XBRL system which companies
file their financial statements in the standardized structure
data format, and I believe it is the way of the future, and I
must say that many of the companies that I am privileged to
represent are really thrilled that they can have a standard
format and get the materials done each month and get the
information back. And I think that you should be moving toward
a structured computer-readable financial statements.
Where does this stand right now? My time is almost up. Are
you doing an RFP? Are you developing this in-house? What data
elements are you capturing in the XBRL system? And basically,
what they are trying to--what they are required by law to
report to you, you are putting in a standardized form so it is
easier for companies and easier for you to understand and for
the public to understand?
Mr. Higgins. Correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Where does it stand right now?
Mr. Higgins. That is what is required right now, the
financial statements are required to be in XBRL. There is a
separate schedule that needs to be filed in XBRL that has the
financial statements and the financial statement footnotes
tagged so that there is--
Mrs. Maloney. Is it computerized and available now to
companies and is it available online to members of the public--
Mr. Higgins. It is.
Mrs. Maloney. --who want to study it?
Mr. Higgins. The XBRL data is available to anybody who
wants to go online. Companies have to file it and all companies
have--
Mrs. Maloney. Did you develop it in-house?
Mr. Higgins. It was before my time. It was several years
ago. XBRL is a relatively well-known computer technology that--
Mrs. Maloney. But the standardized form, from what I am
being told by some companies, seems to be new. They feel that
this cuts their paperwork and makes it easier for them to file,
the changes that you have made. Anyway, thank you.
Chairman Garrett. That was an improvement. Great. Thank
you. The gentlelady yields back.
The vice chairman of the subcommittee is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, Mr. Higgins, thank you for appearing before our
committee and for your testimony.
As we discussed prior to your testimony, I represent
Virginia's Fifth District. It is a rural district. We have the
University of Virginia, which I know you are familiar with, in
our district.
Access to capital is an extremely important subject for me
as a Representative of a district where in some places we have
unemployment as high as nearly 10%. Job creation is the order
of the day. That seems to me to be the most important thing
facing my constituents, and capital formation, obviously, is an
important part of that.
Because of the University of Virginia, we have emerging
growth companies that are coming out of the research that takes
place there at the University of Virginia. And I am glad that
Mrs. Maloney mentioned XBRL, because that is something--
constituents that I have talked to who have had to deal with
that system find it less than satisfactory and have real
concerns about the cost and ultimately whether or not it
benefits the investor in any way, shape or form.
So from the people that I talked to and from my
constituents, we believe that it is not ready for primetime,
although hoping that at some point that it will be useful to
investors but at this point that it is not and so we have
introduced--so Representative Sewell and I have introduced
legislation that would exempt emerging growth companies from
those requirements, certainly until that time that it is a more
useful program.
But with that said, I know that the JOBS Act required the
SEC to study the Reg S-K. You all came back with a report and
it sounds like Chair White has asked for follow-up. I think
there was probable--there were some who were disappointed that
there was not more meat in the original report. It was
presented, it was based on that.
My question in terms of the disclosure issue and XBRL was
very much a part of that regime--I guess my question is as you
all go forward, looking at corporate disclosure, what are your
goals and what are the timelines? This is very important
because I think there is a lot of concern about the pace at
which these JOBS Act proposals have been implemented. What is
the goal in your mind of this corporate disclosure project and
when can we see some results?
Mr. Higgins. It is hard to predict when we will see
results. What the Division is doing right now is, as the Chair
asked, preparing recommendations. We would expect that those
recommendations would likely take the form of some sort of a
release that could be exposed to the public because although
within the Division we know disclosure pretty well, we need to
hear from companies, investors, market participants as to what
it is they want, what it is that is burdensome, what it is that
could be added to. There is a whole host of things on which we
need public input.
So we are moving on that. The next step would be to get--
Mr. Hurt. How would you articulate the goals of--what were
the goals? And again, if you could--
Mr. Higgins. Our goal--
Mr. Hurt. Go ahead.
Mr. Higgins. --always is to provide investors with material
information with which they can make voting and investment
decisions, and to make it as less burdensome on companies as
possible to provide that information. We know there are
examples of information that is now required, the historical
stock price chart. People don't go to the 10-K to get a
company's stock price, they go on Yahoo Finance or Google or
something.
So these are things that could be cut out. There will be
small steps. There may be bigger steps that can be taken.
But our goal is effective disclosure. The phrase
``disclosure overload,'' to the extent that there is more
disclosure than investors need, we don't think that is right.
In the process, we may find out that investors are looking for
more and we have already heard from some investors that they
think disclosure can be enhanced on issues like short-term
borrowings. So our goal is to find the balance.
Mr. Hurt. And I would ask you to also consider that
obviously these disclosure requirements, in addition to--in
many instances not providing useful information, efficient
information to investors, they cost companies a lot of money
for an emerging growth company. Those dollars could be put into
research and development as opposed to something that is
useless to investors and it is not helping them at all. So I
would ask you to, obviously, consider that as part of your
goal.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Perlmutter? Welcome to the committee.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
Chairman Garrett. Good morning.
Mr. Perlmutter. I would like to first, if I could, ask
unanimous consent to make a letter to you and to Congresswoman
Maloney dated July 23rd from the Council of Institutional
Investors a part of the record.
Chairman Garrett. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Perlmutter. And then I would like to yield the balance
of my time to Mr. Scott.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Scott is recognized.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask you--I have a couple of points I want to ask
you. But first, now under Section 953(b), corporate governance,
the SEC is to come back with the rulemaking regarding
compensation for top executive pay. And you have an October
deadline of coming up with that rule, how are you progressing
with that?
Mr. Higgins. Well, the 953--
Mr. Scott. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. The CEO pay ratio?
Mr. Scott. Yes, 953(b), the Wall Street Reform Act requires
the SEC to issue a regulation mandating that companies disclose
a ratio pay between the CEO and their median employees and we
trying to get at this--the whole issue now is fairness and
equality in pay.
Mr. Higgins. The Commission issued a rule proposal last
September on which we have received over 128,000 comment
letters, 950 of which are unique. It is on the regulatory
rulemaking agenda of the Commission for this fiscal year which,
as you know, has an October deadline.
Mr. Scott. Right.
Mr. Higgins. But that was set back at the time, it is--what
the Commission thought it could get accomplished in that
timeframe. There is no strict deadline on that but it is the
goal that the Chair has indicated. She would like to get a
final rule done on that this year and we are working to develop
recommendations for the Commission to make that happen.
Mr. Scott. Yes. But do you feel right now you will be able
to meet that deadline or will it be an extension? I know there
has been some discussion.
Mr. Higgins. Right. We are working hard on a recommendation
for the Commission which they could act upon during the course
of this year, but I can't promise that the Commission--I can't
speak for the Commission. They set their agenda. I can't speak
for what their deadline will be on acting on that proposal.
Mr. Scott. Have you gotten tangible research as to how wide
this gap is? Do you feel that this disparity is a crucial
factor in the governance or corporate governance in your role?
I guess what I am asking is does the SEC feel the sense of this
wide gap within what top CEOs are making?
And I don't, at all, deny people for making money. They
should, certainly. But there is an issue is is this grasp for
this money way at the top of the corporate structure
detrimental to this disappearing of the middleclass.
Mr. Higgins. I am not sure that the Commission has a view
on that. I think what the Commission has a view on is that
Congress enacted 953(b), directed the Commission to adopt
rules. We are working to get those rules done as we are with
all of the mandated rulemakings that we have been--
Mr. Scott. And so you are--what I mean is the part of the
law is there and we can expect the SEC to come forth with that
rulemaking?
Mr. Higgins. It is a mandate of Congress and we take it
seriously.
Mr. Scott. In my opening remarks, I did touch upon the
cross border.
Mr. Higgins. Right.
Mr. Scott. And I want to rectify my comments on that. My
understanding is that the--we just passed the bill which is the
SEC reauthorization that does require you and the SEC to issue
a joint rule. This is very critical as we move forward because
it involves an international situation.
Swaps and derivatives are now a growing part of the world
economy, $800 trillion of the world economy. So in that light,
could you just tell me if there have been any discussions going
forward within the SEC in reaction to House Resolution 1256
where we incorporated that requirement that you and the CFTC
come up with a harmonization for cross border and the
reauthorization?
Mr. Higgins. The cross-border swap area is not part of what
the Division of Corporation Finance does--that is trading and--
Mr. Scott. Yes, I understand that but--
Mr. Higgins. I would be happy to have someone get back--
Mr. Scott. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. --to you on that but it is not anything of
which I can speak because I simply don't know.
Mr. Scott. Okay. I would--I just want to clear that up
because I might have misspoken in thinking that you did qualify
that but that is a great concern to many of us on both the
Financial Services Committee and the Agriculture Committee, and
we haven't heard anything from the SEC--
Chairman Garrett. So can we follow that up maybe in your
next round?
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Royce is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, as it relates to insider trading as I mentioned in
my opening, take for example a company that seeks to purchase
another firm. We call the other firm the target. The company
enters into a contractual relationship with a hedge fund to
purchase the shares of the target for the benefit of the
company before the announcement of the intent to acquire the
target.
The company and the hedge fund basically call their
agreement a joint venture or they call it a partnership. Does
the existence of the contract somehow make what would otherwise
be illegal trading by the hedge fund in the target companies'
stock legal insider trading?
Mr. Higgins. Congressman, I obviously can't speak to any
particular situations, but in general, there is--and I would
also say that it is really the Division of Enforcement that
handles insider trading but I am familiar with the law in that
area. There are two rules under the Commission's jurisdiction
that address insider trading. The first, Rule 10b-5, requires--
in order for someone to be liable for insider trading under
10b-5 based on Supreme Court precedent, there must be a breach
of some duty owed by the person trading to the source of the
information.
In the instance that you cite, if one company brought
another company in and said, let's work together, I want to
take this company over, I will let you in on it, that wouldn't
be any breach of any duty.
Mr. Royce. But let me throw in one other factor for your
consideration before we get to the other caveat.
Mr. Higgins. Okay.
Mr. Royce. What if the company had taken steps towards a
hostile deal before entering into the agreement and the company
and the hedge fund's interest were not aligned under the terms
of the agreement?
Mr. Higgins. Right. Taking substantial steps, the other
insider trading rule is 14e-3--
Mr. Royce. Okay.
Mr. Higgins. --which deals with tender offers and when a
bidder has taken substantial steps to commence a tender offer,
anyone who gets material nonpublic information from that bidder
who trades on it is liable for insider trading irrespective of
any breach of a duty. So that is how 10b-5 and 14e-3 work
differently.
I am not sure I completely understood the--where the one
person might be working counter to the purposes to--
Mr. Royce. Why they wouldn't be aligned? In my view, they
wouldn't be aligned because one party can walk away from the
transaction at any time. The other party, the hedge fund,
clearly is now tied in to the agreement, is benefiting from the
rise in the stock price as a result of the rumor being driven
of the hostile takeover, right? So these interests are not, in
fact, aligned. And I am also confused as to how this is any
different than a couple of buddies out on a golf course--
something we have seen a lot, and something that you have seen
a lot--exchanging information are not sellers of the target
shares subject to the same imbalance of information as
investors in the stock that is victim to a traditional insider
trading scheme? I would assume the fraud is the same regardless
of the structure, and does this somehow labeling this buying
scheme a joint bid insulate it from insider trading charges?
That is my concern.
Mr. Higgins. And that is a question that I don't think that
either the Commission or the courts has answered on whether two
parties getting together counts on co-bidders and--
Mr. Royce. And I would also like to know what the SEC's
process is for examining a novel or a creative deal structure
and what are the SEC's options to investigate conduct related
to these types of transactions?
Mr. Higgins. If a filing comes in to the Division, it would
come in, typically, to us either through a proxy solicitation
or a tender offer or a merger, we have criteria that we use to
screen. If it meets the criteria and we look at it and
typically hostile deals tend to meet our criteria for
screening. We would look at it. We would provide comments. We
would review it against the applicable disclosure requirements
as well as the anti-fraud provisions of our laws, make comments
to the participants and work through those, the goal always
being that investors get clear, accurate material information.
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Scott is recognized for his second 5--
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time. Do you
want my time?
Chairman Garrett. No, actually it is--
Mr. Himes. Okay.
Chairman Garrett. We are just going down the row. You have
not had your time, I don't believe or--
Mr. Himes. Do you want my time?
Mr. Chairman, I yield my time to Mr. Peters.
Chairman Garrett. Okay. So, here we go. Mr. Himes is
recognized, and yields his time to Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters, you are recognized.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Himes, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for that. I appreciate it.
Hi, Director Higgins. It is great to have you here. I would
like to briefly discuss some legislation that I introduced last
year and ask you a couple of questions following that, that
would amend financial disclosures of publicly traded companies.
As you know, publicly traded companies must disclose certain
information in registration statements, prospectuses, and other
periodic mandatory filings including a general description of
the company's business, a description of the company's
principal products and services, and a description of the
company's subsidiaries.
Companies must also disclose the total number of employees
that they have and anticipated changes in the number of
employees working in various corporate departments. While
corporations must disclose their total number of employees,
they do not need to disclose where they are based. Elimination
of 700 jobs in the United States, for example, and the creation
of 1,000 jobs abroad, in China perhaps, would register only as
a net gain of 300 jobs.
I believe responsible investors have a right to know how
publicly traded corporations are spending their money and
whether they are hiring and investing in the United States or
sending earnings overseas, where companies are hiring or laying
off employees could be determinative, and it could be material
information, certainly, for potential investors.
My bill, the Outsourcing Accountability Act, will simply
add location of employees to the annual SEC disclosure
requirements. These reports would need to disclose the total
number of employees in the United States broken out by State as
well as the total number of employees abroad, broken out by
country. The SEC would be given the authority to issue
regulations to implement this measure. And finally, the bill
would harmonize with the JOBS Act by exempting companies for
the first 5 years after their IPO to avoid increasing
compliance burdens on newly public employees.
So, Mr. Higgins, although I have introduced this
legislation to require this disclosure, do you believe that the
SEC currently has the authority to implement those proposals
through rulemaking and without congressional action?
Mr. Higgins. Does the Commission have a--I believe the
Commission would have authority to implement--to adopt a rule
such as that even absent a congressional mandate.
Mr. Peters. Okay. Good.
Do you believe that the disclosing of the physical location
of employees would impose less of a burden on companies than
disclosing the median of the annual total compensation of all
employees of the company and the ratio of that median to the
annual total compensation of the CEO, which was a rule proposed
by the Commission just last year as you know?
Mr. Higgins. I don't really have any sense of--we don't
have information on what it might cost to do it. Just off the
top of my head, it seems less burdensome, but without actually
getting information from participants, from the companies that
actually have to prepare this information, it would be hard for
me to speculate.
Mr. Peters. Obviously, the calculations involved in the
rule that you did last year are fairly involved, and it would
certainly be reasonable to think that a company--it would be
very easy for them to know where they send their paychecks
every month. That is information that is probably just a push
of a button away.
Mr. Higgins. Right.
Mr. Peters. Is that an accurate statement, sir?
Mr. Higgins. It seems--that seems right to me. Yes.
Mr. Peters. Right.
And given the changes are straightforward and certainly not
particularly complex, I think given the fact that the company
certainly should know where they send their paychecks every
month or however often they pay, do you believe the SEC has the
capacity to implement this proposal without difficulty?
Mr. Higgins. If Congress passes a law, and the President
signs it mandating that the Commission adopt rules, the
Commission will proceed to do that. What we would do in that
and as we do with any rulemaking is that we would have our
economists looking at the cost and benefits of such a rule. We
put it out for a notice-and-comment rulemaking so that we could
get public input from companies, from investors, and from other
market participants as to their views on the rule, and we would
take that all together in fashioning final rules.
But I don't see any structural or other impediments to
adopting a rule such as that just as long as we have enough
time and ability to attend to it and we have a pretty full
rulemaking calendar.
Mr. Peters. Right. I realize that. Thank you, Director
Higgins. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. The gentlemen yields back. Mrs. Wagner is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank Mr. Higgins for being here also.
In your testimony, sir, you indicated that you all are
seeking input from a broad range of companies, investors, and
other market participants. What does the Division plan to do to
address the 43 remaining recommendations of the SEC's forum on
small business capital formation?
Mr. Higgins. We do every year have a government business
forum on small business capital formation. We get input from
the participants so they put together recommendations. We, as
you know, received 43 recommendations this year.
It was interesting to us that none of them had a high
priority attached to them. All were either medium or low
priority. Obviously, the ones that were medium were the ones we
should be looking at first.
Of the top 10, I think about 8 or 9 of them dealt
principally with the existing rulemaking proposals that the
Commission has already--mostly either a crowdfunding or Reg A
plus and so with those, we are taking those into account as we
work through to get a final rule proposal on those rules.
Mrs. Wagner. In the past, Congress has had, I think, very
little insight into the SEC's process. And here, I am talking
really about the process for evaluating the small business
forums, recommendations. Do you, in fact, have a process and
would you be willing to work with the committee to make your
process a little more open or transparent?
Mr. Higgins. We do have a process. We work with the forum
and we get their recommendations. We put a report together on
what the recommendations are and to the extent that we have the
opportunity to talk to the Commission to see if they want us to
pursue those, we would--something that we would--
Mrs. Wagner. As I have said, we would love to be brought
into the process more. I think it is a little more transparent
and I am wondering if you are willing to allow us to do that.
It might help in prioritizing some of the legislation and
policy we put forward.
Mr. Higgins. We are happy to work with the committee on any
matter.
Mrs. Wagner. Great.
Mr. Higgins, angel investors such as St. Louis Archangels
in my district are creating jobs across the Nation with your
investment in startups. What is the Division doing to make sure
that any rules under consideration do not hurt angel groups or
harm the prospects for high potential startups across America?
Mr. Higgins. We don't single out angel groups as a favored
group, but we look at how our rules or our proposals affect all
groups. And angels in particular, what we have attempted to do
is, we realized that after the general solicitation rules came
out, there were questions that came up about how that affected
angel investing, and what we have attempted to do is, we put
out staff guidance on issues that we think can be helpful--
Mrs. Wagner. And have you received feedback on your report
or your guidance that has--
Mr. Higgins. We have. And I think it has been favorable. I
spoke last fall at an angel convention here in Washington, D.C.
I spoke to the group about the things that we were doing, and I
think we got very positive feedback and--
Mrs. Wagner. So, again, regarding the JOBS Act, an
unfortunate oversight left savings and loans out of these
provisions. To fix these, I introduced the Holding Company
Registration Threshold Equalization Act of 2013, along with
Representatives Womack, Himes, and Delaney. It passed the House
by an overwhelming majority of 417-4. Mr. Higgins, what is the
SEC doing to fix this issue?
Mr. Higgins. We are currently working on the 12(g) Title V,
Title VI rulemakings right now and that is an issue that is
among the issues that--
Mrs. Wagner. Any timeframe, sir?
Mr. Higgins. We are hoping to have a proposal out this year
but--
Mrs. Wagner. Okay. Great. Thank you.
Question, since 2008, the small business capital formation
forum has recommended that the SEC change its rules to permit
forward incorporation by reference in registration statements
on Form S-1 by all companies. The forum said that the current
rules are an impediment to capital formation and add little or
nothing to the availability or quality of subsequent public
information. We have had witnesses come before the committee
who have crossed the ideological spectrum who have said the
same thing and that change is long overdue.
What is the Division doing to remove this unnecessary
impediment that adds little or nothing to investor protection?
Mr. Higgins. Right. We don't have any current rulemaking
project on that right now. If we were to look at the question,
I think what we would want to look at is forward incorporation
has historically been available for companies that have had a
market following for some period of time.
And so, we would want our economists to take a look at how
information gets disseminated by companies that don't have as
big a market following as some others. But it is an issue that
we do understand.
Mrs. Wagner. And take very seriously. I have introduced the
Small Business Freedom to Grow Act which includes this
recommendation and it passed our committee by a large
bipartisan vote, so I am hoping it will be coming to your
attention very soon.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence, and I yield
back.
Chairman Garrett. I thank the gentlelady.
And now, the Chair recognizes Mr. Foster for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
I would like to ask a few questions about the conflict
mineral disclosure rules. Although Section 1502 requires
mandating disclosures by publicly traded companies of the
origins of listed conflict minerals, because of complex
products and complex supply chains, many private companies that
supply components to these publicly held companies are also
effectively covered under the rule.
In fact, there is a private company in my district that has
been grappling with the cost associated with conducting due
diligence as required by this rule, and in correspondence with
my office, they noted that they had been soliciting mineral
information from their suppliers, both in the United States and
the United Kingdom, but they have received very low response
rates, and this has led them to expend many hours of employee
time and many resources trying to follow up with the suppliers.
So I have several questions related to this. First, in
light of the D.C. Circuit striking down a portion of the rules
requiring issuers to describe certain products as having been,
``not found to be conflict-free,'' is there a clear definition
of what would satisfy the due diligence requirements on the
Form SD? Should they simply rely on their suppliers and their
responses as truthful?
Is there a de minimis level of component value at which
they can say, okay, we will just take your response to that
phase value and not have to delve further in?
Mr. Higgins. The rule does not have a de minimis--
Mr. Foster. Okay. So that--all the way down--
Mr. Higgins. --aspect to--
Mr. Foster. And so, microscopic components in the sub-
assembly have to be documented as being conflict mineral free?
Mr. Higgins. That is correct. It is the obligation of the
public company to conduct due diligence under an
internationally recognized due diligence framework to try to
assess where that mineral came from.
Mr. Foster. Do you think that might be a useful addition to
this?
Mr. Higgins. I am not sure. What would--
Mr. Foster. Just say that any component that costs less
than one penny or is less than a tenth of a percent of the
total value of what it is that you are supplying to a publicly
held company, I--
Mr. Higgins. Congressman, I wasn't at the Commission when
the conflict mineral rule was being developed and adopted but I
do know that there was a lot of comment back and forth on the
de minimis--on whether there should be a de minimis exception
and the Commission concluded at that time that there would not
be consistent and that was consistent with what they believed,
I think, congressional intent to be on that. So, whether that
is an issue that should be revisited, I don't really have a
view.
Mr. Foster. Okay. Yes. And so, that is it.
And the other thing is at what point do you just take your
supplier's word for it? You could easily imagine that you got
in a situation where you go down your suppliers list until you
find the first one willing to lie and then that is it. What are
the requirements, for example, for a privately held corporation
to look behind the scenes on each one of their suppliers?
Mr. Higgins. Right.
Mr. Foster. I am calling for some clarity as to what is the
definition of due diligence. At least, the companies in my
district that have contacted us on this don't feel that they
know what the real definition is.
Mr. Higgins. Right. Well, the rule is new. Obviously, this
was the first year that it was mandated, and as with any new
rulemaking, perhaps we will get feedback from suppliers like
the other one in your district as well as other companies that
will inform our taking a look at whether something can be done
to provide better guidance.
Mr. Foster. And what are the SEC's plans for enforcement
against companies whose reports are deemed to be incomplete on
this?
Mr. Higgins. As with any new rulemaking, what we typically
do is we will look at the forms, the reports that have been
filed to determine whether there is any general problem,
whether companies are generally not getting the rule correct,
and if that is the case, we typically would issue guidance of
general applicability. As to the review of individual filings
if in the course of a company's Sarbanes-Oxley 3-year review,
if the staff were to determine that the company had a
materially incomplete filing, it would likely issue a comment.
Mr. Foster. Right. So you would only be acting against the
publicly held company and not their private subcontractor?
Mr. Higgins. Correct. That is the only company which is
subject to the rule.
Mr. Foster. Okay. I am in my last 15 seconds.
Just a quick question that you may have to follow up with
me on is this issue of the calculating of the ratio of CEO pay
to median income, a lot of the complexity is just--if
calculating the exact median salary is in principle a pretty
complicated and computer-intensive job, you need a list of all
salaries which may or may not be a big issue, but if there was
a--if you could get back with some other simplification, for
example, that you have an answer which was accurate enough to
10 per cent in the median, if that would be a significant
simplification, I would be very interested and maybe the
Congress would take action there.
Mr. Higgins. We could get back to you on that.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you.
Mr. Huizenga is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that
and I actually want to continue to explore a little bit what my
colleague from Illinois was talking about because I, too, am
running into manufacturers that are very much struggling with
what to do and how to handle the conflict minerals part of the
requirements in Dodd-Frank. And I actually would love to work
with Mr. Foster and others if we can find some legislative
resolution to this because, as I think he had mentioned, the
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals ruling certainly adds a fog to
this whole issue.
And I am curious, in your opinion, do companies need to
comply with the conflict minerals rule in light of that ruling?
Mr. Higgins. We think they do. A portion of the rule was
struck down but a substantial portion of the rule was upheld
and the Commission's process in adopting the rule was upheld.
And so, the Commission made the determination that the rule
which Congress had mandated that we adopt was upheld and we
needed to go forward with implementing.
Mr. Huizenga. I, like you, wasn't here when they wrote
Dodd-Frank. I am just dealing with the echo effects of it and
this is a rather large echo effect that I think is obviously
well-intentioned. Nobody wants to see atrocities anywhere and
this was specifically geared towards the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC).
Will you all review the guidance and clarify it for these
companies?
Mr. Higgins. If there is a way that we can clarify what the
private suppliers' due diligence obligations are, we would be
happy to take a look at that. This is the first time that I
have personally heard of the issue. Again, it is the first year
of implementation and we will be happy to--
Mr. Huizenga. And I am concerned, I guess philosophically.
We are on a little bit of a slippery slope here as well using
securities laws to battle societal ills here. Even Chair White
had a couple of ``series of questions'' whether, ``using the
securities loss and the SEC's powers of mandatory disclosure''
to accomplish what many deemed laudable goals such as improving
mine safety in those kinds of things and the human rights
atrocities that are there.
Is it the proper role of the SEC to go in and try to
correct these things or is that--philosophically, what do you
think the role is?
Mr. Higgins. My philosophical answer is it sort of goes
back to my junior high civics class and that is when Congress
passes a law, and the President signs it into law and directs
an agency to adopt the rules, that agency should adopt the
rule.
Mr. Huizenga. I got it. Okay. So you are executing your job
as instructed. I understand that. I guess it is up to us and I
am--in fact, I have mentioned this to the chairman as well, I
think it would behoove us on this committee and I am happy to
be Vice Chair of the Monetary Policy and Trade Subcommittee to
go see it for ourselves.
We have had some hearings here with folks from the Congo
with mixed reports, at best, as to the effectiveness of this
and as to whether we are actually maybe even causing more harm
to the localized economy, and I am not talking about the
warlords and others who may be controlling the area. I am
talking about the real people who are dependent upon those jobs
and on the mining that is there.
I have not quite a minute left, and I know another one of
my colleagues is talking a little bit about the pay ratio and I
think that was--the quote was getting at the fairness issue. Do
you believe that anywhere in this 953(b)--does it fit within
the SEC's three-part mission of protecting investors,
maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and
facilitating capital information? Is that the job of the SEC?
Mr. Higgins. That is the mission of the SEC, as many people
have said here today. I guess I would turn again to 953(b) as
Congress directed the Commission to implement--
Mr. Huizenga. I know you were directed to do that but the
question is, does publishing pay ratios where there is no
guidance as to whether it is part-time, foreign, or contracted
out to get the bathrooms clean really going to maintain fair,
orderly, and efficient markets? Facilitate capital formation?
Protect investors? I am lost as to how that actually happens?
Mr. Higgins. I think my personal view on it, I am sorry to
say, is irrelevant; the mission of the Commission is to follow
the law.
Mr. Huizenga. I get it. And you are doing that well, and we
could keep talking until the chairman notices that I am over my
time. But I am rather enjoying this.
I guess I would express to my colleagues that we have a
role here, and the SEC has a role here, and I am not sure that
the SEC is executing that.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the additional
time.
Chairman Garrett. It was such a very important discussion
that was going on by the gentleman, and I believe both sides
were being receptive to it, so I wanted to give you the
latitude there to go on. So, thank you.
And with those extra seconds in mind, the gentleman from
California is recognized. We will be looking for equally
insightful comments to--
Mr. Sherman. One insight is that the job of the SEC is to
carry out the statutory mandates that we pass in Congress that
we impose on the SEC. It is not just their job to protect
investors. We have assigned them through statute an effort to
try to diminish the harm done by conflict minerals, for
example, or to try to illuminate for this country the growing
gap between CEOs and medium pay.
If tomorrow we passed a statute that because we conclude
there is a surplus of green paint in this country, everything
at the SEC has to be painted with green paint, then that also
becomes part of their mission. Let's hope we don't have such an
enormous surplus.
Speaking of the pay disclosures, when are you going to get
the job done?
Mr. Higgins. Right. We have active rulemaking projects on
all of them. With CEO pay ratio, we have a proposal out. The
other ones, we are working on--
Mr. Sherman. When are you going to get it done?
Mr. Higgins. Unfortunately, I don't control the agenda. The
Commission has a lot--
Mr. Sherman. What is your best estimate as to when it will
be done?
Mr. Higgins. I just don't really have an estimate. We would
like to get it done--I would like to get this done--
Mr. Sherman. You are--
Mr. Higgins. It is a mandate that we need to get done.
Mr. Sherman. Will it be done a year from now?
Mr. Higgins. I can't predict--
Mr. Sherman. Will it be done 2 years from now?
Mr. Higgins. I just can't predict.
Mr. Sherman. Ten years from now?
Mr. Higgins. I won't be in the job then, but I don't--
Mr. Sherman. But sitting where you are now is the best
person to predict whether it will be done 10 years from now.
Will it be done 10 years from now?
Mr. Higgins. Yes. I am confident of that.
Mr. Sherman. Nine?
Let's see. I have--well, let's focus on the accounting
issue. Has your Division or the SEC in general looked at the
economic harm and unfairness of the lease accounting proposal
pending at the Financial Accounting Standards Board?
Mr. Higgins. Dealing with the FASB is the role of the
Commission's Chief Accountant--
Mr. Sherman. Right.
Mr. Higgins. And the Chief Accountant doesn't report to me
but I would be happy to have the Chief Accountant get back to
you on what they have done on the lease accounting standards.
Mr. Sherman. Do you have a Chief Accountant?
Mr. Higgins. He has announced that he is leaving, but we
still have a Chief Accountant.
Mr. Sherman. I know. I called over there and he wouldn't
talk to me, and the reason was that he was packing his bags. So
your optimism that the Chief Accountant will get back to me on
that--
Mr. Higgins. I am sure that someone could get back to you.
Mr. Sherman. They did. They didn't say anything, but they
did call back. The box was checked.
Okay. What happens under the conflict mineral rules if a
non-public company simply lies when it is a supplier to a
public company? Are they subject to any criminal penalties or
anything else?
Mr. Higgins. Criminal penalties? I don't know the answer to
that.
Mr. Sherman. Is there any--assuming you are really good at
lying, is there any reason for a supplier not to lie and just
say, no conflict minerals here?
Mr. Higgins. Well--
Mr. Sherman. If they do that, what penalties do they face--
Mr. Higgins. The public--
Mr. Sherman. --if they are non-public?
Mr. Higgins. The public company has an obligation to
conduct a reasonable due diligence and if there are no red
flags around that, I would assume the public company could--
Mr. Sherman. So you have to lie--
Mr. Higgins. --rely on that information.
Mr. Sherman. So if the supplier is able to lie with the
effectiveness sufficient to fool the duly diligent, they are
home free.
Mr. Higgins. I don't know what the consequences are of a
private supplier lying to a public company in satisfying its
diligence obligations. I can look into it, but I just don't
know the answer off the top of my head.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Finally, as to computerized trading,
they are taking money off the table. They are not performing
any service to the economy that I can ascertain. We got a flash
crash, why do--what is the benefit to our society and to our
markets to not having--to taking any one of several steps that
would minimize this computerized trading?
Mr. Higgins. I don't know whether you were here for the
hearing where Mr. Luparello, who is the head of the Trading and
Markets Division testified, and whatever answer he gave you
would be my answer because that is--it is really is in his area
and not mine. I just don't--our Division doesn't deal with high
frequency trading.
Mr. Sherman. I am looking at the SEC chart, and you are one
of like 30 boxes. So it is hard to know which one of the 30 at
the SEC's responsibility we are addressing here today, but it
is nice to know that my part of addressing it is concluded.
Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. Indeed. Mr. Mulvaney is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, and I appreciate the questions by
Mr. Foster from Illinois, and Mr. Huizenga from Michigan, for
taking that opportunity to remind us all that the SEC is in
charge of regulating conflict minerals.
As someone who is still fairly new to the committee, and
still fairly new to Congress, I hope that still strikes some
people in addition to myself, that it is just patently absurd
that the Securities and Exchange Commission is in charge of
regulating conflict minerals.
That an entity that is supposed to protect investors,
maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and facilitate
capital formation is in charge of making sure stuff doesn't
come from Congo, a country, by the way, just ironically, that
also receives taxpayer subsidies from the Export-Import Bank,
another topic that we will be taking up shortly.
And for folks who follow the markets and who rightly will
ask the next time that an investor is damaged or injured that
markets are not fair, orderly, and efficient, or the capital
formation has been somehow impaired and they ask a very
reasonable question, where was the SEC, why weren't they doing
their job?
The answer will be, well, they were doing their job, they
were making sure that we didn't have stuff coming in from
Congo. And they are doing that job because we told them that is
their job, and I hope that I am not the only person who thinks
that is just one of the craziest things I have heard since I
have been in Congress.
It is relevant to what I want to talk to about, Mr.
Higgins, because I have to take the opportunity, if I can, to
talk about the JOBS Act, to talk about especially crowdfunding.
It continues to sort of stick in my craw that we have rules on
conflict minerals. We got those in a very timely fashion but we
are now 18 months late on some of the crowdfunding rules. The
Reg A-plus rules are also late and it seems like at least for
some of us, the priorities are out of whack. Again, I am not
blaming you, but to have conflict minerals rules before we have
crowdfunding rules seems to me to be a case of misplaced
priorities.
So I am going to ask you about some of the proposed rules
because the SEC does have some proposed rules floating out
regarding crowdfunding. And I want to dig down on some of the
places where I want your opinion, sir, as to whether or not how
do you think these proposals will affect capital formation;
specifically it is the rule that if I am going to try and raise
more than $500,000 through crowdfunding, I have to get an
audit, have those audited financial statements.
I used to run a small company. Audit and financial
statements are very, very expensive. In fact, we were rarely
audited and we had reviews up on audited financial statements.
Do you think, sir, that requirement will positively or
negatively impact the ability of small businesses to access
capital through crowdfunding?
Mr. Higgins. It is a question that the Commission has asked
in the rule proposal. Congress set the $500,000 threshold for
audited financial statements but gave the Commission the
ability to change that and raise it up to a million dollars.
The Commission stopped with the $500,000 in the proposal
but asked for comment and we received comments from a variety
of people--some saying, yes, $500,000. Some people want it
lowered, other people want it raised. So these are comments
that we are considering as we prepare a final rule proposal.
Mr. Mulvaney. But I think you would agree with me that it
would make it less likely that businesses would access
crowdfunding if they have to go to the additional cost in time
of having audited financial statements.
Mr. Higgins. I don't know that, but I do know that audited
financial statements cost more than reviewed financial
statements.
Mr. Mulvaney. Got it. Also, one of the proposals is that
these businesses follow the generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP). Is there a similar impact there to the
audited financial statements requirements?
Mr. Higgins. We are getting comment on that as well. I
guess GAAP is now establishing a private company financial
statement regime which would be different than GAAP. We are
getting comment on that. I think our office Chief Accountant is
helping us think through and analyze that issue. But GAAP is
pretty well-known, I guess as opposed to what--the cash method
or income tax or something like that, although at the lower
levels, I think some of those suffice.
Mr. Mulvaney. And finally, Mr. Higgins, on the rule--the
proposed rule regarding only using a single intermediary, is
that something you all continue to look at as opposed to
allowing businesses to use multiple intermediaries?
Mr. Higgins. We are getting comments on both sides of that.
Some people are saying that a single intermediary focuses the
protection better. Others think that it might limit the ability
for companies to be able to raise money.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you. Since we mentioned GAAP, let me
change gears on you for just a second because we had Chair
White in May giving a speech explaining that she wanted to use
international financial reporting standards (IFRS) more
aggressively in the future, and I wonder if you have an
opinion, sir, as to whether or not using the IFRS in our
capital markets might create confusing situations where we sort
of have two competing systems at the same time, a double GAAP
so to speak.
Mr. Higgins. I believe the Chair's position on IFRS is that
she would like to get a sense of the path forward by the end of
this year, I think is what she has said publicly. And whether
it causes confusion currently, foreign issuers are allowed to
file under IFRS. There is no GAAP reconciliation required.
I think the Commission is committed to a high quality set
of global accounting standards. If IFRS turns out to be that, I
think that would probably be the direction to go. On the other
hand, there is a lot of debate going on and whether that is the
right direction, and I think the Commission is trying to sort
through what the path forward will be for U.S. companies.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thanks, Mr. Higgins. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. Sure.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Lynch is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Higgins, for helping the committee with this
work.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to put in the record
a statement by the Council of Institutional Investors relative
to the oversight of the SEC's Division of Corporation Finance.
Chairman Garrett. I understand that has already been
entered.
Mr. Lynch. I'm sorry?
Chairman Garrett. It has already been entered into the
record.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. But with the unanimous consent, we will
do it a second time.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Higgins, I would like to talk a bit about the well-
known seasoned issuer (WKSI) waivers. As you know, a WKSI
waiver is something that the Division of Corporation Finance
controls, the Director controls that.
And just to clarify, the WKSI label enables a well-known
seasoned investor to use automatic shelf filing rather than
going through the whole detailed filing with the SEC; automatic
shelf registration, I think is what it is called. But what is
problematic is that the SEC in Congress through regulation and
through the laws have basically prohibited, in certain
instances, companies from using that label or designation if
they have been found guilty of serious felonies or in some
cases misdemeanors.
And those measures are intended to protect the investors
and the markets from bad actors. As I said under the Federal
securities law and regulation, issuers are automatically
disqualified by Congress or the SEC from claiming WKSI status
when they or their subsidiaries among other factors convicted
of certain felonies or misdemeanors are determined to have
violated the anti-fraud provisions of the securities law.
However, in practice, the SEC frequently waives these
disqualifications allowing issuers to claim the benefit of WKSI
status. Since 2010, the Commission has granted at least 30 WKSI
waivers, and I guess not surprisingly, 29 of those waivers went
to very large financial institutions and broker-dealers.
In many cases, these issuers are receiving their second,
third, even fourth WKSI waiver in less than 4 years. As SEC
Commissioner Kara Stein notes in her recent dissent from the
SEC's waiver for the Royal Bank of Scotland, some large firms
have received more than a dozen waivers over the past several
years.
One large financial firm alone in a 10-year period received
22 different waivers from the SEC. So that is problematic. I
agree with Commissioner Stein's remarks that nearly every
factor in the Division of Corporation Finance's revised
statement on well-known seasoned issuer waivers weigh strongly,
I think especially in the case of a waiver for the Royal Bank
of Scotland.
The egregious conduct by the Royal Bank of Scotland was
part of a widespread scheme undertaken by a number of large
banks to manipulate the LIBOR rate for their own profit and the
LIBOR rate is determinant for about $350 trillion in
derivatives. It basically underpins the entire U.S. derivatives
market.
So by manipulating the LIBOR, those banks were manipulating
the entire U.S. derivatives market. And the manipulation of
LIBOR by the Royal Bank of Scotland harmed millions of
Americans, and this was at a time when our Nation was facing
its worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
We didn't get much action here in Congress over this whole
scandal. I don't know how that happened. But we had very, very
little attention on this committee with respect to the
manipulation of the LIBOR rate.
In such situations, the SEC needs to ensure that the
American people are protected from egregious conduct by
financial institutions and the SEC should be penalizing the
Royal Bank of Scotland for its conduct instead of granting them
a waiver. And I just want you to persuade me that I am wrong
here.
Mr. Higgins. The WKSI status that you refer to, when an
issuer is convicted of a crime or an anti-fraud violation, it
automatically disqualifies them from WKSI status.
The rules that the Commission adopted built in a waiver
process if for good cause shown the issuer shows good cause why
the waiver shouldn't apply. The focus of the inquiry is whether
the conduct for which the issuer has already been punished, I
mean, it is not a question that--
Mr. Lynch. How are they punished?
Mr. Higgins. I think they paid a multibillion dollar--it
was a significant--no, it was hundred--
Mr. Lynch. So we can pay out of--
Mr. Higgins. That is what the Justice Department--
Mr. Lynch. That is being paid in many cases by the
investors. So the people who perpetuated this are not getting
penalized. The investors are getting penalized with the fine
and that is it?
Mr. Higgins. The WKSI disqualification was never considered
by the Commission to be a penalty for the underlying conduct.
What it was is an automatic disqualification because it called
into question whether the issuer could produce reliable and
accurate disclosure. It might. If the issuer could show with
good cause that it didn't affect that and that conduct was
unrelated to their disclosure--
Mr. Lynch. But you have one company here 22 times. At one
point, I know you are going to say it is annecdotal, but at
some point, it becomes a pattern and practice.
Chairman Garrett. And with that--
Mr. Lynch. Thanks for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thanks.
Chairman Garrett. Mr. Stivers is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here, Mr. Higgins.
I was just looking at some speeches by some of the members
of the SEC and in October of 2013, Chair White essentially
talked about how increasing the disclosure regime can lead to
information overload.
I looked at another speech that Commissioner Gallagher gave
in July of 2013 that talked about when you require too much
disclosure, it really is becoming a regulatory creep and
doesn't provide real value to investors. And then a speech by
Commissioner Piwowar in January of 2014 where he again
expressed concerns about the continual growing disclosures and
how it leads to information overload.
And then I looked at the speech you made in February maybe,
or April that says, and I will quote a little bit of it,
``While it may be called disclosure overload or cutting the
clutter, losing the excess baggage, we can all probably agree
on the need to reduce the material disclosures.''
However, essentially you say that one person's meat is
another person's fat. I guess my first question is, you do work
for the Commissioners, right?
Mr. Higgins. I do.
Mr. Stivers. Okay. So you do share their belief that there
could be some information overload in the disclosure or not?
Mr. Higgins. I believe that there could be disclosures that
investors don't find useful and the companies find burdensome.
I also believe that it could go the other way. There could be
information that isn't there that investors would find useful
and companies may find burdensome. And the job of the
Commission is to balance that.
Mr. Stivers. Right. And so my next question is, what are
you doing about it?
Mr. Higgins. Right.
Mr. Stivers. How are you reaching out to figure out what
disclosures are overly burdensome to companies and not useful
to investors? And even to find information that would be useful
to investors that is not included in disclosures, although if
everybody is talking about disclosure overload and mission
creep, my guess is there is a lot more that you might be
requiring today that is not useful to investors as opposed to
stepping this up. But what are you doing about it? How are you
fixing that problem and seeking information?
Mr. Higgins. Right. We have reached out to a lot of--first
of all, people can send an email to
[emailprotected]
. They
can send in their recommendations, their comments, and their
thoughts about how we can get better, more effective
disclosure.
We have gone out, and we have met with interested groups of
investors and companies. I spent some time at a large mutual
fund complex speaking with portfolio managers and equity
analysts about information that they find to be useful.
And it is eye-opening, really these folks at big financial
institutions want more information. They would like to see
companies--
Mr. Stivers. And big institutions have a lot of means to
get their own information. Your job isn't to work for big
financial institutions. Your job is to protect the investors.
And so, is it your job to substitute for their own due
diligence?
Mr. Higgins. Not at all. Our job is to make sure that
investors have the accurate material information necessary to
make voting and investment decisions and that is the input we
are seeking.
Mr. Stivers. Great. Keep seeking comment and information
and then act. Because I do find the SEC seeks information a
lot, sometimes acting slowly, and I share that frustration
with--and I know you are a Commission, it is not like there is
one person directing you, I get it. There is a variety of
opinion but I just read three of the five Commissioners who
have a fairly similar position.
But keep seeking information but then at some point, please
act. I am running out of time. I do want to ask you about every
year you get recommendations on capital formation from your
small business capital formation commission. Tell me, how many
of those have you acted on?
Mr. Higgins. Right. If you are referring to the small
business--the government small business forum.
Mr. Stivers. Yes, the small business forum. So have you
acted on any of their recommendations?
Mr. Higgins. We have acted on recommendations.
Mr. Stivers. Do you have any idea how many? Do you know the
percentage?
Mr. Higgins. I don't, but I can--
Mr. Stivers. You have to get back to me on that because--
Mr. Higgins. And a lot of those recommendations became part
of the JOBS act and--
Mr. Stivers. Right. And do you know why it became part of
the JOBS act? Because the SEC didn't act on them. So, that is
my push here and I have 8 seconds left. But, you have a great
advisory council of small business people who are telling you
the things they need and the burdensome things that are
weighing on them. Please, listen to them. That is my plea to
you.
Mr. Higgins. Right. Thank you.
Mr. Stivers. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The SEC's written response to the above question can be
found on page 52 of the appendix.]
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Carney is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carney. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for having
this hearing. And thank you, Mr. Higgins, for coming in and
helping us do our important business.
Yesterday, we had a hearing before the full Financial
Services Committee with a great panel which included our former
chairman and ranking member, Barney Frank. And we had a lengthy
discussion about risk retention and mortgage lending
securitization and mortgage lending under Section 941 of Dodd-
Frank where there was a requirement at the SEC, along with the
banking regulators, with HUD and with the FHFA-prescribed rules
about risk retention, not less than 5 per cent of an economic
interest in a material portion of that credit risk for any
asset that a bank might transfer.
And, of course, you came out with a rule, the agency came
out with a proposed rule in March of 2011, and then a
reproposal in August of 2013. And the issue that former
Chairman Frank complained about was the fact that the original
statute that he described, and I have his testimony here, said
that there are three categories of mortgages: those that fell
below QM standards which were subject to certain legal
constraints; QM mortgages which were the minimum standards; and
then QRM which were the super good quality mortgages.
And that in the reproposed rule that the Commission--the
agencies I should say came out basically where QM and QRM were
essentially the same. Thereby, according to former Chairman
Frank, taking out the risk retention provision because some of
those QRM mortgages are not subject to that.
What was the thinking from the SEC's perspective of that
reproposed vis-a-vis risk retention in the mortgage lending
space?
Mr. Higgins. The reproposed rule proposed that QRM equal QM
as the preferred approach but also offered an alternative
approach which added additional features to QM in order to get
to QRM, seeking comment recognizing that it was an issue of
substantial concern.
Mr. Carney. How would you respond to former Financial
Services Committee Chairman Frank's objection that the clear
statutory intent was to have three categories, if you will: the
non-QM lower standard; the QM minimum standard; and the QRM
super quality standard? And therefore, is QRM subject to
certain exceptions under the Act or under the regulation?
Mr. Higgins. That is a view that has been expressed not
only by former Chairman Frank but by many commenters who have
written in on the joint agency rule proposals. We are working
through those comments. Joint agency rulemaking is an
interesting process.
Mr. Carney. Difficult, for sure.
Mr. Higgins. Because they are different agencies with
different missions. The Fed's mission is different than HUD's
mission, which is different than the SEC's mission, and so on.
Mr. Carney. We will see what happens from there based on
public comment.
And lastly, in my last minute-and-a-half, my friend and
colleague Mr. Fincher and I worked in the last Congress on the
IPO On-Ramp. It may be familiar but it was part of the JOBS
act. It didn't require any rulemaking I don't think, a minimum
maybe.
I wonder if you could comment on the successor or what you
have heard about some of the On-Ramp provisions. But the one I
am most interested in is the quiet period, if you will, prior
to an emerging growth company deciding whether to go public or
not.
They are able to issue reports to potential investors to
gauge interest confidentially publicly and whether or not--what
I have heard from companies is that it is very helpful because
they don't have--
Mr. Higgins. Testing the water--this is the testing the
waters provision?
Mr. Carney. Right. That is correct.
Mr. Higgins. Okay. Yes. This was an area that I practiced
in. I was in private practice for 30 years prior to coming to
the Commission.
Mr. Carney. Great. So you are the perfect person.
Mr. Higgins. So, I did lot of IPOs. Before the JOBS Act or
right after the JOBS Act came in. But testing the waters
started off, right, we understand people were a little skittish
about it. I think part of it was that investors only have so
much time and they wanted to deal with deals that were real
deals, not works in progress.
However, we have heard anecdotally that the process is
being used in a lot of deals. Initially, it was used in the
biotech industries but I think now it is across-the-board. And
we haven't seen any problems with it and to the extent it is
helpful, we think that is great.
Mr. Carney. And in my remaining 15 seconds, any other
feedback with respect to IPO On-Ramp?
Mr. Higgins. The confidential filing process has worked
very well.
Mr. Carney. Right.
Mr. Higgins. Companies like it, and it has worked well for
us--things are working well.
Mr. Carney. Great. Thanks very much. Keep up the good work.
Chairman Garrett. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Hultgren is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do want to thank
Director Higgins for being here.
First, I would like to focus on the lineup questions that
Representative Lynch brought up, and I wonder if you can help
me understand this a little bit more. Director Higgins, as you
know, in 2005 the SEC undertook securities offering reforms
which among other things created a new category of issuers
known as the well-known seasoned issuer or WKSI.
The main purpose of creating of WKSI was to enhance
flexibility in accessing capital markets. As I understand that,
there are certain instances, however, where issuers that would
otherwise be considered WKSI can become ineligible and request
that the Commission review their applications to grant a waiver
so that the entity can once again gain WKSI status. Is this
correct?
Mr. Higgins. Correct.
Mr. Hultgren. Once the request is made for a waiver, does
the Commission just rubberstamp an approval on the request and
call it a day?
Mr. Higgins. Not at all.
Mr. Hultgren. Conversely, does the Commission just
categorically deny all waiver requests?
Mr. Higgins. The Commission doesn't--typically, they come
in to the Division of Corporation Finance. We have been
delegated authority from the Commission to act on the waivers.
And they come in, we talk informally with companies.
Companies that we talk to informally that we don't believe
would qualify for a waiver because they haven't shown good
cause, they may not even come in and make a request.
Mr. Hultgren. So it sounds to me like there is a process in
place through which the Commission can consider on a case-by-
case basis whether to approve or deny a waiver request. I
wonder if you could walk through in a little more detail what
that process is once the waiver request is received by you and
your staff. What considerations do you give that request?
Mr. Higgins. What typically happens is there is a phone
call first that comes in. Our Office of Enforcement Liaison
speaks with the company about the particular facts and
circumstances. And to understand better whether it is totally
out of the question that they would get a waiver or whether
they would present a plausible case.
If they think it is worth presenting a case, the company
would submit a letter where they would focus on the factors
that we lay out in our public guidance when we will grant WKSI
waivers and they will put their case forward. At that point, we
will go back and forth on the letter with them, ask them
questions about it.
And if we are satisfied that they have made the case, we
would recommend granting a waiver. The Commission can always
decide to take the authority--to decide it on its own and a
case where they have done that, the Royal Bank of Scotland is a
good example. But we do have delegated authority, and we would
grant the waiver if we believe they met the applicable
standard.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you. So it sounds like it is a
thoughtful process and not something--to me it seems it was
being characterized to something different because I hear more
sounds like it is a process that does work.
Switching gears a little bit, the SEC has had an important
three-part core mission: to protect the investors; to maintain
fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and to facilitate capital
formation. Certainly, a key component of this mission is
ensuring that investors can access a wide variety of
transparent investment options.
I would like to talk about the SEC's definition of
accredited investor. This determines which investors, those
deemed sophisticated, have access to a wider variety of
investment options. Unfortunately, I think this definition has
not been significantly updated since it was first promulgated
back in 1982.
While this issue may be decided in Washington, it has a
very significant impact on Main Street. A newer definition of
accredited investor will not only hurt potential investors in
my district but it will also cut off small businesses in my
district for much needed potential sources of capital.
Thankfully, the SEC is reviewing the definition of
accredited investor, and I am hopeful it will take the
opportunity to expand this definition. While I am thankful that
the SEC takes its mission to protect investors very seriously,
I am also hopeful that it will recognize that today's investor
has access to a wider variety of information that was not even
available 10 years ago.
So my question, Director Higgins, is as follows: Linking
the definition of accredited investor purely to income network
is an antiquated and counterproductive measurement. As you may
be aware, the United Kingdom recently added two additional ways
that maybe an accredited investor, whereby a person who does
not meet the income network requirements, will take a test or
show through education or advanced degree that they would be
able to assume the risk involved in investing a non-public
securities.
I wonder, is the Division considering an educational
component as you begin to update the definition of an
accredited investor?
Mr. Higgins. We are, as part of our review of the
accredited investor definition.
Mr. Hultgren. So you are looking at that; you expect there
will be some changes there?
Mr. Higgins. It is up to the Commission to make changes,
but we are definitely looking at it and it will be part of our
discussion that will be part of our report.
Mr. Hultgren. Good. And there is an understanding or
recognition of how this does impact Main Street and our
constituents as well, and how very different access information
is now than it has ever been before?
Mr. Higgins. Again, we will get comments, I am sure, on
both sides of the issue, but we do understand the importance.
Mr. Hultgren. Again, thank you for being here. My time has
expired. I yield back.
Chairman Garrett. Thanks. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Fincher is now recognized.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you.
Chairman Garrett. The gentleman will have the last word.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
willingness of the chairman to allow me to participate in
today's hearing.
Just a couple of questions to wrap up--I am going to echo
what my good friend, Mr. Carney talked about. He and I did have
in the JOBS Act the last time, the On-Ramp Provision in that
bill. JOBS, J-O-B-S, which is what is super important in
getting the economy running again, people working, that is how
we produce revenue in this country.
And just a few minutes ago, my good friend, I am glad he
brought up Ex-Im Bank that is a key part of the process and
reforming it, making it more transparent accountable and it is
all about jobs in our districts is what is important.
But back to specific questions, former SEC Chairman
Schapiro attempted to water down the JOBS Act that was passed
in the House in 2012, and the President ultimately signed into
law. I hear many SEC staffers do not like the JOBS Act possibly
because it was not invented at the SEC.
And because Congress had to act to help small companies and
entrepreneurs access the capital markets more effectively, do
you believe that the SEC should exhibit the same zeal,
sustained effort, and enthusiasm when implementing the JOBS Act
that it has done with Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Higgins. I think that we should implement it faithfully
in accordance with our mission. Absolutely.
Mr. Fincher. Do you feel that some staffers have taken the
opinion that they really turn the cold shoulder to the JOBS
Act?
Mr. Higgins. None have expressed it to me, Congressman.
Mr. Fincher. Okay. And then lastly, what is the SEC's
capital formation agenda outside of the JOBS Act? Are there
specific rule changes the SEC is considering that would be
helpful to small companies looking to raise capital and that
would distinguish them from larger companies?
Mr. Higgins. As we are often reminded, we still have some
wood to chop on the JOBS Act front. We are focused on getting
that done. Our Office on Small Business Policy in the Division
is open for business. We answer more than a thousand requests
each year from small businesses and other market participants
who are interested in small business capital raising.
So we are available to try to provide guidance on the rules
that have already been adopted so that people can have some
certainty in how they are applied and make it easier and more
cost-effective to do. So, the Division is committed to this
small business capital formation.
Mr. Fincher. With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you again for your patience.
Chairman Garrett. It was well worth the wait. I think
everyone would agree with that. No one is commenting.
Seriously though, Mr. Higgins, we do appreciate your time
and your work at the Commission.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
And with that, there being no further business before the
subcommittee, I thank you once again, and this hearing is now
adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 24, 2014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]
