- EXAMINING COMMUNITY BANK REGULATORY BURDENS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING COMMUNITY BANK
REGULATORY BURDENS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 16, 2013

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 113-13

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

80-879 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2013

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California, Vice     MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman    CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
Emeritus                         NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
PETER T. KING, New York              MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          BRAD SHERMAN, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           AL GREEN, Texas
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
Pennsylvania                     ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                BILL FOSTER, Illinois
MICHAEL G. GRIMM, New York           DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DENNY HECK, Washington
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
TOM COTTON, Arkansas

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia, Chairman

SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin, Vice       GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York,
Chairman                             Ranking Member
SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
GARY G. MILLER, California           MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   RUBEN HINOJOSA, Texas
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            AL GREEN, Texas
BILL POSEY, Florida                  KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
Pennsylvania                     STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     DENNY HECK, Washington
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
TOM COTTON, Arkansas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 16, 2013...............................................     1
Appendix:
April 16, 2013...............................................    45

WITNESSES
Tuesday, April 16, 2013

Burgess, Kenneth L., Jr., Chairman, First Bancshares of Texas,
Inc., on behalf of the American Bankers Association (ABA)......     9
Kim, Charles G., Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer, Commerce Bancshares, Inc., on behalf of the Consumer
Bankers Association (CBA)......................................    11
Loving, William A., Jr., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Pendleton Community Bank, on behalf of the Independent
Community Bankers of America (ICBA)............................    13
Pinkett, Preston III, President and Chief Executive Officer, City
National Bank of New Jersey....................................    15

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Burgess, Kenneth L., Jr......................................    46
Kim, Charles G...............................................    65
Loving, William A., Jr.......................................    76
Pinkett, Preston III.........................................   144

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Maloney, Hon. Carolyn:
Letter to Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, FDIC
Chairman Martin Gruenberg, and Comptroller of the Currency
Thomas Curry from Representatives Capito and Maloney, dated
February 19, 2013..........................................   149
Posey, Hon. Bill:
Written responses to questions submitted to Kenneth L.
Burgess, Jr................................................   151
Written responses to questions submitted to Charles G. Kim...   153

EXAMINING COMMUNITY BANK
REGULATORY BURDENS

----------

Tuesday, April 16, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Shelley Moore
Capito [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Capito, McHenry, Pearce,
Posey, Fitzpatrick, Luetkemeyer, Duffy, Stutzman, Pittenger,
Barr, Cotton; Meeks, Maloney, Watt, McCarthy of New York,
Scott, Green, Ellison, Velazquez, Murphy, Delaney, and Heck.
Ex officio present: Representatives Hensarling and Waters.
Chairwoman Capito. The subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time. Luckily, I don't think we
are expecting votes until 1 p.m., so we will have a good
stretch of time here.
This morning's hearing is the second installment in a
series of hearings focused on regulatory relief for community
financial institutions.
Last week, we heard from a panel of credit union
representatives. Today, we will hear from community bankers.
These hearings are an opportunity for our Members to further
examine proposals for regulatory relief from community
financial institutions.
The challenges facing community banks across this Nation
are not new. Every time our Nation experiences a financial
crisis, Congress responds with new regulations, and in some
cases new agencies, rather than identifying outdated,
unnecessary, or overly burdensome regulations. While
formulating these new policies, too often the response is just
to pile new regulations on top of the old. We are now seeing
this as the Dodd-Frank Act is implemented by the Federal
regulatory agencies.
Unfortunately, the growing regulatory burden is having a
real effect on communities across the Nation. The more time and
resources community bankers devote to compliance, the less time
they have to work with their communities to drive innovation
and economic growth.
This is especially troubling given that the community banks
provide 46 percent of the industry's small denomination loans
to farms and businesses.
These types of loans are often labor-intensive, and the
strong relationships community bankers have with their clients
allows them to provide tailor-made products.
One of our witnesses today will discuss the adverse effects
the regulatory burden is having on consumers and their access
to financial products.
We must find a way for policymakers, regulators, and
financial institutions to develop better ways to track the
cumulative burden regulations place on financial institutions.
If we do not, we will continue to see further consolidation
in the industry which will have a profound effect on the world
communities, like the State I represent, West Virginia.
In many of these areas, community banks are the only banks
that serve the needs of their communities. Their local
knowledge and connection to families and businesses they
support is a critical aspect of our Nation's diverse financial
system.
One area that I will continue to focus on is the
examination process for financial institutions. Last night,
Representative Maloney and I reintroduced the Financial
Institutions Examination Fairness and Reform Act. This
bipartisan legislation has support from Members across the
geographic and political spectrum.
We need to ensure that regulators have the tools to
maintain a safe and sound financial system, but we also need to
ensure the community banks and credit unions have an impartial
avenue to appeal materials, supervisory decisions, and ensure
consistency in examinations.
Today's witnesses will provide the subcommittee with
recommendations on ways to improve the regulatory environment
for community banks.
I would like to thank you all for your willingness to share
your thoughts. I am especially pleased that my constituent,
Bill Loving, from Pendleton Community Bank is able to join us
here today.
Bill is a wonderful advocate for community banks and
understands rural communities and the banks that serve them.
I now yield to the ranking member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Meeks, 2 minutes for the purpose
of making an opening statement.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you for holding this hearing today. This is, as you
said, the second hearing we have held in the last month on
examining regulatory relief for smaller institutions, whether
they are credit unions or community banks, and I can't think of
a more worthy topic to consider in this subcommittee.
Community-based institutions play a vital role in every
district in this country and I hope that this is something that
we can agree upon on a bipartisan manner and look at reforms
that will help these small banks. I will ask about Basel III
and its potential impact on the industry.
As I mentioned in our first hearing, I worry that Basel III
is too complicated and does not offer the appropriate risk
weightings to different classes of assets. For example, it
would apply a discount to any asset that isn't sovereign debt
in the U.S. Treasuries or cash.
This means a bank that specializes in mortgages, for
example, may have to hold a lot more capital against those
mortgages to satisfy the minimum capital requirements; however,
it would make sense to me to not have capital requirements that
jeopardize the worthy economic activities spurred by lending
firms from smaller and medium-sized or regional banks,
institutions that don't engage in the exotic activities that
some of the larger institutions do.
As we learned in the FDIC's recently released community
banking study, smaller and regional institutions are the
engines of economic growth in this country because they lend to
their neighbors and their communities to keep their farms or
their small businesses going or to hire employees.
In fact, as you have indicated, the study noted that
although community banks hold only 14 percent of the banking
industry's assets, they make 46 percent of the smaller
denomination loans to farms and small businesses.
They are often the sole source of mortgage financing, and
therefore the lifeline of the housing industry in our
communities. It was not their activity that blew up the global
banking system, and I think the capital requirements we have
placed on banks should recognize that.
I want to work with all my colleagues, the Republicans and
regulators and Democrats, on that issue to make sure that we do
not stifle the economy through well-intentioned but ultimately
inappropriate rules.
Last week, I ended my opening statement at the hearing on
credit unions by including a plea for credit unions to
cooperate with community banks on regulatory reform. So what is
good for the goose is good for the gander. I hope that the
community banks represented here today will come together with
credit unions to help advance commonsense reforms for both
groups so we can make the changes necessary to decisively move
the economy in the right direction.
I thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I look forward to
hearing the testimony of the witnesses.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy for 2 minutes.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for holding this
very important hearing. As you mentioned, last week we focused
on credit union regulatory burdens. This week, we are focused
on community bank regulatory burdens.
My district is dotted with both types of lenders, and if
our community banks can't get dollars out the door then it is
not just the banks that suffer: it is the family who is trying
to buy a home; it is the entrepreneur who is trying to start or
expand their business; or it is the farmer who is trying to
purchase a new piece of equipment who suffers. It is our local
economies that these community banks serve that suffer when
they are not well-functioning.
In the past few years, we have seen banks consolidate, and
tighten credit, consumer product options have diminished, and
compliance costs have skyrocketed. While we have a strong
community bank presence in Wisconsin, I wish I could say the
sector is expanding, but unfortunately it is the opposite. The
number of community banks in Wisconsin has decreased over the
past years as the number of employees has also shrunk.
On the other hand, the banking regulators are on a hiring
frenzy. From 2010 to 2014, the CFPB has grown from zero
employees to 1,500 employees. That is more employees than the
Department of the Treasury.
The Dodd-Frank Act promulgated more than 400 new rules and
only about half of them have been finalized. The tide is still
rising and the paperwork is piling up.
Today, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how
we can stop these negative trends and alleviate these burdens.
I have strongly opposed a one-size-fits-all approach to many of
these new regulations.
There are 253 FDIC-insured banks in Wisconsin with under $1
billion of assets. These are not the guys who caused the
financial crisis, but they are being roped into the new
regulations as if they were the bad actors.
Today, I am interested in hearing more about your concerns
with Basel III, QM, and how other rules are seriously affecting
the way community banks lend and operate.
My concern is that homeowners and small businesses back
home in central, northern, and western Wisconsin are the ones
getting hurt by many of these new regulations.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Maloney for 3 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito and Ranking
Member Meeks, for calling this hearing, and I also thank all of
the panelists. We really look forward to what you have to say.
First of all, Madam Chairwoman, I would like to remember
Charlie Wilson, who passed away this past Sunday. He was a
member of this body, a member of this committee for two
Congresses, and he was himself a community banker and he
brought that understanding and passion to the committee.
He played a very forceful role particularly in financial
institutions and community banks and also housing, and I wanted
to remember him at the beginning of this hearing and the
contribution that he made to Ohio and to our country.
This hearing is the second in a two-part hearing on smaller
financial institutions, community banks, credit unions, and
regional banks and identifying ways that we can make sure that
they keep doing what they do best: providing financial services
to communities, neighborhoods, and their customers.
These community banks, in the last financial crisis--which
took $17 trillion out of our economy--were truly, I believe,
the unsung heroes and heroines: the regional banks; credit
unions; and community banks.
I speak for the community that I represent. They were the
financial institutions that kept providing the traditional loan
opportunities for small businesses, home purchases, and
refinancing. Those services were provided by the community
banks and helped us revive.
They are unique in many ways to the American financial
system and we need to make sure that their services are there,
that we understand their needs, and that the regulatory burden
is not so great that it forces them to either close their doors
or to merge.
In response to this, the Chairlady and I have written a
letter to the Federal Reserve that calls upon them to be
uniquely aware of the capital requirements that are required
under Basel III.
Basel III was written for global commerce. If community
banks are not involved in global commerce, then we should not
have those standards on them.
I ask permission to place this letter in the record. I have
met with the Federal Reserve as I am sure the Chairlady has--
Chairwoman Capito. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mrs. Maloney. --and I am getting very positive indications
back that they are going to be sensitive to the dual
responsibilities, and I have had such interest in this letter,
Madam Chairwoman, that I want to circulate another one that
other Members can sign because they keep asking me, ``Can I go
on the Capito letter you did?'' And I said, ``We have already
sent it.'' But they want to show their concern for fair
treatment to these institutions.
In response to the financial crisis that according to
Christina Romer was 3 times stronger than the Great Depression,
the community banks, along with the whole banking system, were
under tremendous pressure.
And during this time, Chairlady Capito and I authored the
Financial Institution Examination Fairness and Reform Act to
make sure that they had the strength to respond.
In examinations, they often felt like they couldn't speak
up, and this bill generated over 190 co-sponsors in the last
Congress and has been introduced yesterday by Senators Manchin
and Moran. I do hope that this is one area where we can reach
across the aisle and have strong bipartisan support.
And in closing, we have the need for both very large
institutions that are necessary to compete in the global
marketplace, but we don't need to have that standard then put
on community banks that the regulation is so overwhelmingly
burdensome. But we have to respect the role that each of these
institutions plays in our financial system.
I look forward to your testimony. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pittenger for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for holding
this important hearing and allowing me the time to make an
opening statement.
We have seen in the wake of the financial crisis the only
prescription from D.C. was to regulate away the problem.
Unfortunately, this has had a severe impact on smaller
financial institutions, especially community banks, and it has
also led it to an anemic economic growth and a persistent high
unemployment.
One of the first district events I held was to sit down
with a number of community bank presidents and listen to their
concerns regarding the amount of regulations pouring out of
Washington.
The same concerns were voiced time and again, ``We didn't
cause the crisis, and our banks didn't take bailout money, but
yet we are the ones suffering the consequences.''
All we need to look at is the consolidation of these banks
for the past several years. Even the FDIC's community banking
study found that the number of federally-insured banks
decreased from nearly 18,000 in 1984 to 7,000 in 2011. We are
witnessing the devastating loss of community banks throughout
the country.
After sitting on a community bank board for over 10 years,
I have seen firsthand how these institutions have a positive
impact in the community and the types of services they provide
to their customers.
Failure to listen to their concerns and adopt a new
regulatory approach will only lead to further consolidation of
these banks, and less options for Americans, and will impede
our Nation's economic recovery.
Today's testimony provides a great opportunity to hear from
community banks about regulatory and compliance issues, and I
look forward to hearing their concerns.
I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
The ranking member of the full Financial Services
Committee, Ms. Waters, is recognized for 2 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Madam Chairwoman, I would
like to thank you for holding this hearing. This may be one of
the most important ones that we will be involved with anytime
soon.
I want to thank the witnesses for taking time to come talk
to us today, and I would like to personally thank Mr. Pinkett
for agreeing to testify in front of the committee today.
He is the CEO of City National Bank of New Jersey and
serves on the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's
Minority Depository Institution Advisory Committee.
Thank you very much, Mr. Pinkett.
I know it is still a challenging time for community-sized
institutions such as yourselves, and it can't be easy to take
time away from your businesses, so I want to get you all back
home as soon as possible because we really need you to be out
there lending in your communities to help get this country back
on track.
That is exactly why we are here today. We want to know what
we can do to help. We understand there is quite a bit of
regulation that you are responsible for complying with in your
day-to-day operations, and that burden falls particularly hard
on smaller institutions such as yours.
There is not a one-size-fits-all solution to regulation,
and I have been encouraged by the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau's (CFPB) recognition of that fact.
I understand that Director Cordray has been aggressive in
his outreach to community banks and that the CFPB takes your
input very seriously. This was recently evident by the
community bank exceptions in the Qualified Mortgage rule. That
dialogue is leading to results, and I hope it continues.
Other regulators have taken note of the importance of
community banks to our economy as well. In December, the FDIC
released a thorough and enlightening study on community banking
that has been quite helpful to our Members, and Governor Duke
of the Federal Reserve recently highlighted how the Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Reform Act is being implemented in ways that
consider the size and the complexity of the institutions it
impacts.
Reading through your testimony, I am reminded that
appropriately regulating the larger banks is just as important
to your survival as reducing your regulatory burden.
There are a lot of advantages to being a large institution,
and I have heard many times that the small banks feel they are
held to a higher standard, that regulators pay much more
attention to their books even though community banks were not
responsible for the financial crisis.
I will continue to support the regulators in the
implementation of the Wall Street Reform Act to ensure that our
financial system is a stable one where small institutions like
yours can thrive, but regulators are only tasked with enforcing
the laws that Congress has passed.
So it is appropriate for us as lawmakers to turn our
attention to a discussion of what is and isn't working right
now and what we might do to streamline these laws so we can get
you back to your communities creating jobs.
As you know, the House has already gotten to work on that
by passing the Eliminate Privacy Notice Confusion Act. Our
Members have received letters from your trade organizations,
and over the recess, visited you in your home districts in
order to gather information on other sensible reforms we might
pursue that will help you put more of your capital to work.
My staff and I have been reviewing these requests closely,
and I look forward to a productive discussion today. This has
been an area of strong bipartisan agreement, and I want to
commend Chairwoman Capito and Ranking Member Meeks on working
together to make this hearing possible.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzpatrick for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And I want to thank the witnesses for your testimony to the
committee here today. I have been meeting on a fairly regular
basis with community bankers back in my district and I
consistently hear about examinations and regulations.
More recently, I am hearing a lot of anxiety with respect
to CFPB and also the Qualified Mortgage rule, and what I have
been telling them is that I believe that there is a broad
acknowledgement that Congress needs to do more to relieve
community financial institutions from the regulatory burdens
that they are facing, and I believe this recognition has been
borne out from hearings like this and from meetings like the
meetings that I am having and other Members of Congress across
the country are having with their community bankers in their
districts.
Community bankers are vital to the economy and I want to
thank you for what you do for our economy. I and my colleagues
on the Financial Services Committee will continue to look at
how we can help community banks, help Main Street, and I
believe that we will produce some meaningful legislation to
that effect.
I know that I am committed to that and will continue to
work with the community bankers in our districts to that end.
I thank the chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott for 2 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I believe we all agree that regulatory reform is indeed
necessary; however, as we work forward with these issues
revolving around community banking, we must be sure the
regulations meant to address too-big-to-fail do not wind up
placing a disproportionate burden on the relative little guy of
community banking.
A disproportionate burden of say compliance costs due to
simple economics of scale. We look at our industry, you have
the smaller banks, you have community banks, you have a
regional bank. What is the difference?
We have medium-sized banks. We have credit unions. We have
pawn brokers. We have loan companies. All have an impact when
we do regulations. In my State of Georgia, we have led the
Nation in bank failures. My colleague Lynn Westmoreland and I
have looked at that and so far, there is a determination that
in some cases, there has been too much regulation, and in other
cases, there has not been enough regulation.
So I assure all of you who are here to testify that this
committee, our committee, understands your concerns and I am
hopeful that as financial regulatory reform is implemented, we
can work to come to a consensus and indeed ensure that
loopholes, where they are, are closed, that transparency is
emphasized, and those institutions which contributed to the
financial crisis are indeed held accountable without harming
smaller institutions, which is the heart and soul of our
lending system.
They are the ones that make the loans to the small business
community. They are the ones that make the loans to
entrepreneurs, to farmers, and to homeowners.
And so I think it is important, in closing, that we
underscore that we must not be afraid to make what I call smart
adjustments to the regulatory responses to the financial
crisis, be it Dodd-Frank or otherwise, where such adjustment is
warranted, particularly to portions that may not work as we
intended or may have unintended negative consequences.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Barr for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito, for holding this
very important hearing to examine the regulatory burdens on
community banks.
As I have travelled around the 6th Congressional District
of Kentucky and talked with community and regional bankers,
whether in Lexington or in more rural parts of my district, I
have consistently heard the same themes: that the regulations
coming out of Washington are too burdensome, too complex, and
oftentimes, flat out counterproductive.
I am frequently told by my community bankers that they feel
like they are no longer working for their communities, but
instead that they are working for the regulators.
I regularly hear that overregulation has effectively
prohibited reputational relationship and character-based
lending which deprives reputable entrepreneurs and small
businesses of the ability to access the capital needed to
create jobs.
Why do we continue to suffer from persistent high
unemployment in this country? Why is this the most anemic
economic recovery since the Great Depression?
I submit that this is one of the reasons, and the worst
part is that while regulatory costs are most directly seen
firsthand by the community banks, the consequences ripple right
out into businesses on Main Street seeking credit to expand,
the farmers seeking agricultural loans, and families working to
purchase a home.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about
improvements that can be made to cost-benefit analysis, about
contradictory signals they receive from Washington, and about
whether the current regulatory environment is really protecting
consumers.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
And finally, Mr. Luetkemeyer for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I want to thank Chuck Kim this morning. He is a banker from
the St. Louis area with Commerce Bank. He is a nice addition to
the panel. I am sure he is going to have some great insights to
offer today with regards to our discussion.
Regulatory requirements disproportionately burden community
banks that do not have the resources necessary to comply. That
is why in the coming weeks, I will introduce legislation to
reduce some of the burdens facing community banks.
As in the 112th Congress, this legislation will seek to
give community banks the ability to attract capital, support
the needs of the customers, and contribute to the local
economies.
It is time for Washington to work with community banks
instead of against them. I now look forward to working with the
community leadership as well on initiatives to enable our
community banks to help the communities they serve.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. I thank the gentleman.
And that concludes our opening statements, so I would like
to welcome our panel of distinguished witnesses.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Our first witness is Mr. Ken L. Burgess, chairman, First
Bancshares of Texas, Inc., on behalf of the American Bankers
Association. Welcome, Mr. Burgess.
I would ask all of the witnesses to pull the microphones
close, so we are able to hear you. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH L. BURGESS, JR., CHAIRMAN, FIRST
BANCSHARES OF TEXAS, INC., ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN BANKERS
ASSOCIATION (ABA)

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito. Chairwoman
Capito, Ranking Member Meeks, my name is Ken Burgess, and I am
the chairman of FirstCapital Bank of Texas, a community bank
located in Midland, Texas.
FirstCapital was formed in 1998 and has since expanded to
$713 million in assets serving Midland as well as Amarillo and
Lubbock.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here to present the
views of the ABA. Hearings like today's are very important. It
is an opportunity to change the dialogue from just talking
about the importance of community banks to what can be done to
stop the rapid decline in the number of small banks and start
taking action to assure we have a healthy and vibrant community
banking sector.
Many actions since the financial crisis have hurt, not
helped, community banks. For example, at the same time that
banks were trying to serve their local communities, new rules
meant more compliance officers and fewer customer-facing
employees.
Just when regulators want to see banks grow, they raise
capital standards and now are proposing new Basel III standards
that will surely force banks of all sizes, but particularly
small banks, to reduce lending.
Just when the housing market most needs mortgage loans, new
rules are imposing costs so high that many community banks will
likely scale back their mortgage operations. These concerns may
even force my bank and others like it out of the mortgage
lending business altogether.
Make no mistake about it, this burden is keenly felt by all
banks. For my bank, we spend nearly $1 million on compliance
every year and we added 10 new members to our staff to meet
compliance requirements just this past year.
As a $713 million bank, we are better able to absorb the
compliance costs. For the medium-sized bank with $168 million
in assets and only 39 employees, this burden is nearly
overwhelming.
Some would say this is simply the cost of doing business,
but every dollar used for compliance costs is a dollar not used
to lend in our communities, and unfortunately the costs are
going up every year, and as they do, small banks disappear.
In fact, there are 1,500 fewer community banks from a
decade ago. Today, it is not unusual to hear bankers from
strong healthy banks say they are ready to sell because the
regulatory burden is simply too much.
It is time to make changes that have tangible results. ABA
applauds Congress on recent additions such as the ATM placard
and privacy notice bill. More can and should be done. Let me
highlight just a few.
First, the financial services examination process should be
improved. Our bank has been fortunate in that our exams have
continued to be thorough and fair. This is how it should be for
all banks; however, I have heard a much different story from
many community bankers.
We need an exam process that provides consistent, timely
exam reports as well as an appeals process free from threat of
retaliation. We thank Chairwoman Capito and Representative
Maloney for introducing H.R. 1553, which addresses the many
important concerns.
Second, Basel III should be reformed so that capital rules
enhance not inhibit the role of any bank, but particularly
community banks.
Current proposals would introduce significant volatility
into bank capital levels and force many banks to change their
core business model due to unfair risk weightings.
Third, mortgage rules should be simplified and consistent.
The new mortgage rules are creating severe legal risks. Our
bank and many others will not make loans outside the narrow
regulatory box, and many banks will likely be forced to exit
mortgage and retail lending altogether due to higher risks.
Fourth, clarify that banks are exempt from municipal
advisor registration requirements and ensure that banks can buy
and sell municipal bonds. We urge this committee to adopt a
bill similar to S. 710, the Municipal Advisors Relief Act of
2013, which was recently introduced in the Senate.
In summary, community banks face an uphill battle against
excessive regulatory burden. Congress has the power to lift
some of this burden and to turn the tide in favor of our
Nation's community banks.
In order to do this, we need to move beyond simple good
intentions and take decisive action. The ABA stands ready to
assist this subcommittee in those efforts.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burgess can be found on page
46 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our second witness is Mr. Charles G. Kim, executive vice
president and chief financial officer, Commerce Bancshares,
Inc., on behalf of the Consumer Bankers Association.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES G. KIM, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER, COMMERCE BANCSHARES, INC., ON BEHALF OF THE
CONSUMER BANKERS ASSOCIATION (CBA)

Mr. Kim. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Meeks, and members of the
subcommittee, my name is Chuck Kim, and I am executive vice
president and chief financial officer of Commerce Bancshares.
Commerce was founded in 1865 and serves customers in Missouri,
Kansas, Illinois, Oklahoma, and Colorado.
Our engaged and passionate workforce is guided by our
customer promise: we ask; listen; and solve. Commerce is also a
member of the Consumer Bankers Association, which has been the
recognized voice on retail banking in the Nation's capital for
more than 90 years.
On behalf of both Commerce and the CBA, I appreciate the
opportunity to be here today. CBA has long been a proponent of
reducing regulatory burden and is enthusiastic about working
with the subcommittee to achieve our shared goals.
First, we applaud Chairwoman Capito and others for
highlighting how the CARD Act is unfairly impacting spouses'
ability to access credit. This unintended consequence is a
great example of how regulations can impact a bank's ability to
provide financial products to consumers. We await the CFPB's
final rule to correct this.
I would also like to thank Congressman Luetkemeyer and
others for their leadership in removing the unnecessary
requirement of duplicative ATM fee disclosures and for their
efforts this Congress on privacy issues.
We have seen significant regulatory changes with the
passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, the creation of the CFPB, and
other new rules. The rules promulgated by our regulators were
needed to protect consumers and ensure a healthy baking
industry. As we adjust to this new landscape, unintended
consequences will surely arise throughout the process.
As we go forward with helping customers and small
businesses meet their financial needs, regulators should
consider not only the one-time cost and the annual cost of
compliance, but also the impact on innovation, new product
development, and the overall diversion of resources from
meeting customer needs.
Regulatory agencies should also consider how the various
regulations overlap and interact. While one regulation might
not be a problem, the issuance of numerous regulations at the
same time can be very challenging.
For example, we have seen a tremendous amount of change in
the market space. New regulations on appraisals, servicing,
loan officer compensation, and underwriting will impact the
mortgage market as banks work towards compliance while seeking
guidance on the new rules.
One area where we find ourselves seeking answers is the
Qualified Mortgage rule. As we prepare for the January 2014
compliance date, we face some difficulty waiting for guidance
from the CFPB. We need more clarity and enough time to comply.
While we continue to move forward with the implementation
of the CFPB's mortgage rules, we anticipate additional impacts
from the Qualified Residential Mortgage (QRM) rule and Basel
III, both of which also affect mortgages.
The impact of Basel III on home equity lines may also harm
small business owners who use them to start, fund, and expand
their businesses.
We are hopeful that regulators will provide the industry
with a coordinated final QM rule to provide the clarity we as
an industry constantly seek during any period of regulatory
change.
The absence of regulatory clarity is a difficult cost to
quantify and may hinder a bank's ability to fully comply by a
rule's specified effective date. Our systems are complex, they
are intertwined, and they are very costly to change.
When rules are not clear or there is uncertainty about
future rules, financial institutions will minimize risk by
delaying or eliminating new products and services.
One way this can occur is when enforcement actions are used
by regulators as a proxy for industry guidance instead of using
the formal regulatory process. Enforcement actions that are not
grounded in clear rules provide little clarity for the
industry.
Exams are the hallmark way in which consumer protection and
safety and soundness are maintained by regulators; however,
supervision can become unnecessarily burdensome if the
examination process is inefficient, if the rules are too
complex, if there are multiple regulatory agencies covering the
same examination territory, or if the process is unnecessarily
slow.
We applaud this subcommittee for its work to improve the
exam process and CBA looks forward to working with the
subcommittee in the future.
We would also suggest the subcommittee review
inefficiencies in both the ESIGN Act and the CARD Act's rate
increase review requirement to further reduce regulatory
burden.
In conclusion, we expect the regulatory environment to
remain challenging as the CFPB and the prudential regulators
issue more rules including QRM, Basel III, and others.
It is important to understand how excessive and unnecessary
regulations are costly are to consumers. The more clarity,
coordination, and cost-benefit analysis we see, the better we
can serve our communities and prevent unintended consequences.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kim can be found on page 65
of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our next witness is Mr. William A. Loving, president and
CEO of Pendleton Community Bank, on behalf of the Independent
Community Bankers of America.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM A. LOVING, JR., PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, PENDLETON COMMUNITY BANK, ON BEHALF OF THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY BANKERS OF AMERICA (ICBA)

Mr. Loving. Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Meeks, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is William A. Loving, Jr.,
and I am president and CEO of Pendleton Community Bank, a $260
million bank in Franklin, West Virginia. I am also chairman of
the Independent Community Bankers of America, and I testify
today on its behalf.
America's 7,000 community banks, including those located in
rural and small towns, are dedicated to lending in their
communities and supporting their broad-based economic recovery.
Unfortunately, in addition to the existing regulatory
burden, a glut of new rules that are not proportional to our
size, business model, or risk is stunting our potential to do
so.
Sensible, targeted, regulatory relief will allow community
banks to realize their full potential as catalysts for
entrepreneurship, job creation, and economic growth.
To that end, ICBA has developed a package of legislative
recommendations known as the Plan for Prosperity that will go a
long way in rebalancing our regulatory burden and will allow us
to invest more of our private capital and labor resources in
serving our communities.
Because my time is limited, I will focus on the mortgage
provisions of the plan. We believe that portfolio lending,
because it provides an overriding incentive for lenders to
ensure a loan's affordability and performance, should be the
principal criteria for protecting community banks from
heightened litigation risk and exemption from costly new
requirements.
Such protections and exemptions are essential to preserving
a private capital lending model. This model has worked well for
decades, experienced a low default rate, and is often the only
source of credit for many customers and communities.
In the rural areas I serve, many loans are ineligible for
sale into the secondary market because of stringent appraisal
requirements, because the house sits on an irregular or mixed-
use property, or because the borrower has a nontraditional
income.
I am happy to hold these loans in my portfolio; however,
the only way I can manage interest rate risk is to structure
the transaction as an ARM loan or a ballooned loan which is re-
priced and renewed at maturity; typically 3 to 7 years.
Because these loans cannot be securitized, they must be
funded through retail deposits which include higher cost CDs.
For this reason, the required pricing often triggers the
regulatory definition of higher-priced mortgage loans, which is
based on an unrelated secondary market index.
But this lending model is at risk. New CFPB rules would
only provide Safe Harbor litigation protections to balloon
loans made by lenders that operate predominantly in rural
counties. Applying the narrowly defined rule designation at the
county level produces arbitrary results.
Many community banks that have all the characteristics of
rule lenders will fail the test. To illustrate the problem,
attached to my written testimony is a State-by-State map of
rural county designations based upon the criteria that CFPB
will use. I urge you to look at your own State. You may be
surprised at the results.
In my State of West Virginia, arguably a rural State in its
entirety, 26 of 55 counties fail the CFPB's rule test.
Similarly, higher-priced loans, even when that pricing is
aligned with the lender's cost of funds, risks, and other
factors, are excluded from the Safe Harbor and will be subject
to an escrow requirement for taxes and insurance.
For low-volume lenders in particular, an escrow requirement
is expensive and impractical. Our recommended solution avoids
the torturous analysis required by the CFPB. It is clean,
straightforward, and easy to apply: provide QM Safe Harbor
status and an exemption from the escrow requirement for all
community bank mortgage loans held in the portfolio.
Additionally, the escrow requirement is unnecessary for
portfolio lenders like Pendleton who have every incentive to
ensure that the borrower can make tax and insurance payments.
These burdens will simply curtail prudent lending to
qualified borrowers who have no other sources of credit.
Before closing, I would like to thank Chairwoman Capito and
Congresswoman Maloney for introducing H.R. 1553 yesterday,
which will provide for needed examination reforms called for in
the plan to prosperity.
I would also like to thank this committee and the House for
quickly passing the Privacy Notice Confusion Elimination Act,
another key provision of the plan introduced by Congressman
Luetkemeyer.
Finally, we are grateful to the members of this committee
who have introduced additional provisions for the plan for
prosperity. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loving can be found on page
76 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Our final witness is Mr. Preston D. Pinkett, III, president
and chief executive officer, City National Bank of New Jersey.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF PRESTON PINKETT, III, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CITY NATIONAL BANK OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pinkett. Thank you, and good morning.
I am president of City National Bank of New Jersey. We are
a $350 million African-American-owned and operated bank
headquartered in Newark, New Jersey.
At $350 million, that makes us the 7th largest African-
American bank in the country, and so I would like to talk a
little bit about the difficulty minority banks are having as
they deal with, sort of, all of the regulation and the business
challenges we face.
We are regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency. We are also regulated by the Federal Reserve because
we have a holding company, and we are regulated by the FDIC, of
course. And I could go on.
And so, the regulations continue to pile up. As Ranking
Member Waters mentioned--thank you very much--I am on the
advisory board for the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency's Minority Depository Institutions Advisory Committee
which is focused on trying to figure out what the regulators
can do to improve access and support minority institutions.
It is an effort that is focused on trying to make a
difference in the communities where minority institutions
function, and I think there is a lot of work that is happening
and we are very pleased to be part of that.
I accepted the job focused on minority institutions because
I think it matters. I think this work is really important.
There are a small number of minority depository institutions
and an even smaller number of African-American institutions
focused in America and we need to preserve those institutions.
The largest challenge we face, I think, is that there is
regulation in FIRREA Section 308 that speaks to the need for
the regulators to preserve minority institutions, support
minority institutions.
What I hear from the regulators is that they don't have
guidance from this body on what that means. So they have no
specific authority or no specific guidance on how to make life
a little more bearable for minority institutions.
They understand the struggles we face. We are in high-risk
markets engaged in high-risk business but they don't have
levers or opportunities to, or even direction as to what it
means to preserve and protect those institutions to support
them.
I really would like to applaud the work--the intention of
this committee because I think that there is a lot to be done
and it is important of course to continue to focus on securing
the safety and soundness of the economy as well as of these
institutions.
We want to be fair. We want to be responsive to community
needs. The banks that I work with in the National Bankers
Association are all interested in the communities that they
serve and no one wants to take advantage of consumers, and I
think that is a fair assessment of all of the community banks
that I know.
It is important that this body understand that access to
financial services through low- and moderate-income communities
is essential and that it be through regulated institutions.
If we were to fail, if we were unable to serve our
customers, they would be forced to use alternative service
providers and those service providers would charge much more
and have much less compassion and understanding about how to do
business with our customers.
We understand that there is a commitment to consumers and
we share that commitment. The degree to which there can be some
flexibility in business models so as to ensure the products and
services we offer are reflective of that which the community
needs is important to us.
Let me just touch on some of the things that haven't been
mentioned. A lot of what I have prepared has already been said,
so I don't want to repeat that over again. But there are some
things with which those in our industry are struggling.
We have TARP funds and the TARP redemption process is one
in which it is unclear and for our institutions which are
minority-owned because they are 51 percent minority-owned, the
ability to raise capital is not quite as easy as it is for
larger institutions or even non-minority institutions, and so
the TARP redemption process being made clear and giving us
sufficient time to align the resources we need would be
helpful.
We have gone through the process with the Capital Purchase
Program. And next, that will be the Community Development
Capital Initiative, the CDCI funding. Those institutions have
not yet, in most instances, plan for how they will deal with
that redemption.
Tax policy: we have deferred tax excesses due to losses. To
the extent that we could work out a solution for minority
institutions so that the change of control provisions in
investments don't adversely affect them when they raise
capital, that would be helpful in sustaining the institutions
and allowing them to survive.
And on the last, I would just like to ask you to please
encourage the Community Development Financial Institutions fund
in Treasury to continue to support minority banks and minority
institutions as they reach out to the communities to do the
business of helping to turn the most needy areas of this
country around. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pinkett can be found on page
144 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
I thank all of the witnesses, and we will now begin the
question portion of the hearing. I will recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Several of you mentioned the costs of compliance but you
mentioned that there was a 2001 survey which found that nearly
half of the banks surveyed point towards compliance as the
reason for not offering a new product, no longer offering
certain accounts, or market expansion.
I am interested in the effect this is having not only on
the institution, but the consumer, and I think Mr. Kim and Mr.
Burgess, you mentioned this in your testimony. What types of
new products or new accounts are you talking about when you are
talking about that?
Mr. Kim. One thing that comes to mind are prepaid cards.
Those are popular with a lot of consumers now whether they are
gift cards or payroll cards or a general purpose reloadable
card, and there has been a lot of regulation recently around
those products that probably make the business case for them
just kind of completely go away. And so, we would--
Chairwoman Capito. For a community bank?
Mr. Kim. Right. For a community bank and maybe for anybody.
A bad regulation can hurt everybody in that case.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Mr. Kim. So, that is one area where we have seen some real
problems and that is a product we issue. For instance, there
were some regulations in a Q&A format that were put out
recently which caused us to stop selling gift cards in our
branches for a period of time until we get some clarity on the
regulation.
And so, customers are just not getting those products and
others will shy away from those kinds of products because we
have regulatory ambiguity.
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Mr. Burgess, did you have any other suggested products, or
where you are limiting your market expansion because of this?
Mr. Burgess. Madam Chairwoman, I wouldn't say that it has
limited us yet, but the two major concerns I have would be on
the mortgage side because we are a relatively large mortgage
lender for our size bank, and with some of the things that are
coming out in the QM rules and a few of the other things that
are coming out, we have a concern that the box is becoming so
small for people to fit into and the risks are becoming so high
to be outside that box from our standpoint, depending on how
all of this comes out, we will have to make a decision as to
whether we stay in the mortgage lending business.
We are not as big of a retail lender outside of the
mortgage business, but retail lending has some of the same
concerns with some of the compliance issues that are arising.
Chairwoman Capito. All right. Let's talk about Qualified
Mortgages. It came up in everybody's testimony. This is my
concern--as you mentioned the narrow box--you folks are in
business obviously for your shareholders and to do the right
thing.
What kind of consumer do you envision that once these rules
become--even if they are--let say that they lack the clarity
because they are not going to be clear. Let's face it; it is a
new world out there. And so, it is going to be more difficult.
So you are going to err on the side of caution, I would
imagine. Instead of saying, ``I will take the risk on this,''
you are going to pull back.
What kind of consumer is the one who is going to be most
hurt? I would imagine Mr. Pinkett might have a--because you
dealt with higher risk. What kind of concerns do you have about
your consumers in this new, Qualified Mortgage world?
Are you just going to write less mortgages or--
Mr. Pinkett. I'm sorry. It certainly becomes difficult to
write as many mortgages. It becomes more of a factory as
opposed to a customized consumer product. So the challenge of
all the regulations that dictate what the product should look
like is that they also dictate what the customer should look
like--
Chairwoman Capito. Right.
Mr. Pinkett. --and it leaves less flexibility. I think the
direction of ensuring that the consumer has choices and
ensuring that the consumer is well-served is important, but I
would offer that the regulators could ask us to justify how the
product works in a way that is supportive of the customer as
opposed to telling us what the product should look like.
Chairwoman Capito. Excellent suggestion.
Mr. Loving?
Mr. Loving. As indicated, the QM rule has a narrow
definition as it relates to the rule designation. That is a
problem for us simply because of the high price mortgage, but
you also will find farmers who have seasonal or nontraditional
income. They fall outside of the income requirement.
They may have high-wealth individuals who have substantial
assets that historically we have made loans based upon their
financial history, the financial net worth, but all of a sudden
their income doesn't meet the criteria and so they fall outside
the guidelines.
So unfortunately, this rule will carve out a lot of good
borrowers for mortgages.
Chairwoman Capito. Okay.
Mr. Kim, I have 10 seconds.
Mr. Kim. I think also physicians, new physicians for
instance is another area where we tend to be accommodating.
They are people who are going to make a lot of money at some
point in the future and they probably wouldn't fit a QM the way
that we would underwrite them.
Chairwoman Capito. Oh, actually I did hear that from one of
my community bankers in West Virginia who sort of specializes
in that product.
All right. Mr. Meeks for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
As legislators, one of the challenges we have is that many
definitions exist for a community bank. And in February,
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke gave a speech on the
importance of community banking to the economy.
In that speech, he noted that although community banks
provide a wide range of services for their customers, their
primary activities revolve around the traditional banking
models, specifically taking short-term deposits to fund longer-
term investments such as small business, agricultural, or
commercial real estate loans.
So my question, Mr. Burgess, is do you think it is more
appropriate to define a community bank by its activities rather
than the size of its balance sheet?
Mr. Burgess. I would say that would be true because I think
what should be done is we should look at the risks that a bank
is taking to determine how much regulation needs to be there
and not necessarily the size.
Because there can be some fairly large regional banks that
are just plain vanilla, providing plain-vanilla products and
they are not taking a lot of risks that would create a lot of
risk in the balance sheet, and I think the regulations are to
be focused on risk and not on size.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Loving, would you support reforms that are
targeted towards community banks that focus on providing
services in ``traditional'' banking?
Mr. Loving. I believe community banks are those that have
operated and operate in the traditional banking model except,
as you said it, short-term deposits and fund long-term
investments.
I think the risk model and the risk matrix that they employ
is the definition of the community bank. They lend locally.
They are relationship lenders. They know their customers. They
are operated locally, and so I would agree.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Pinkett, could you tell us, have your
interactions with regulators suggested that they are concerned
about the preservation of MDIs?
Mr. Pinkett. It has suggested that they are concerned. I
think it has also suggested that they don't know how that
concern translates to action.
Mr. Meeks. What do you think would help preserve the MDI
status? For example, CPP and raising capital?
Mr. Pinkett. I think the--in dealing with the TARP issue
and how that capital has flowed to the institutions and then
how it gets paid out is a challenge.
I think that part of the challenge is that we have to
reflect the value of the institutions today as we redeem those
shares and that is a challenge for Treasury, because in some
sense, I would say Treasury sees this as more debt than equity
in those institutions.
But I think that the ability to raise capital really is
reflective of the ability to manage getting new capital in
without changing the nature of the institution.
So focusing on the minority depository institution's
activities and the fact that it remains focused on minority
communities and remains managed by minorities and overseen by a
minority board regardless of the makeup of the shareholders, I
think would be a big step in allowing them to raise the capital
they need to be stable and secure.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Kim, to what extent if any are compliance
costs a driver for consolidation in the community banking
sector? And do you know of any banks that have merged with each
other perhaps or shut down entirely because they couldn't keep
up with the compliance costs?
Mr. Kim. We are very aware of what is going on in the
community banking market both in banks smaller than us and our
same size and truly that is a driving factor.
I heard a story--it is interesting you ask this--last week
I was sitting with a young man whose family had been in the
banking business in Kansas.
He said he made it through the Depression, made it through
the Dust Bowl, and now he has a cousin who is in his 60s and is
running a $70 million bank in Kansas and he said, ``They don't
make a whole lot of profit. What profit that they made, they
were going to have to invest in hiring compliance officers.''
And his family, after all those years of being in the
banking business--he actually said his cousin said, ``I don't
want to burden my family with continuing to run the bank.''
Mr. Meeks. Let me just also say though, when we talk about
the QM rule, I wouldn't be here if the QM rule as proposed
today was in place when my parents bought a house.
They would have never qualified for a house under the QM.
And had they not been able to buy that house, I wouldn't have
been able to go to college because it was because of that house
that they were able to finance my education.
So what we will be doing with the QM rule as it is proposed
is locking out a whole segment of Americans who want the
American dream of owning a home, who can then help their
children get the quality education that they need so that we
can all prosper in this place--so I am with you 100 percent
when--if you looked at some of these rules, there were all
unintended consequences. Some of them just don't make any sense
to me. The QM rule as proposed is one of them.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
You can see that all the news reporting about congressional
gridlock has been wrong. We all get along and a great hearing
of bipartisanship and I think it underscores the fact that this
issue we are talking about today is not an urban versus rural,
Democrat versus Republican, liberal versus conservative issue.
This is an issue that is affecting our country as a whole, and
I think it is really important that we have more light shed on
it and we get some congressional action.
I want to talk about Basel III a little bit because many of
my Wisconsin bankers, some of whom are here today, continually
bring this up to me and its impact on their ability to perform.
We all want to have strong capital requirements. We all
want to have safe and sound banks. We want to make sure we
don't have taxpayers bail out the banking industry again.
So when we look at Basel III and its proposals, why
wouldn't you all agree with it? And if you don't agree with it,
what negative impact will it have on your bank's ability to do
its important job?
Mr. Loving?
Mr. Loving. There are several provisions of Basel III that
concern community banks and concern me personally. The AOCI
provision will certainly distort capital as interest rates
move.
And also the risk weights that are assigned to mortgage
loans; if you take the Basel III provision and you take the QM
requirement that is being proposed, that is a significant
process on mortgage lending that will curtail mortgage lending
and balloon loans in particular. Just because it is a balloon
loan, by definition, it will receive a higher risk
classification although it is not a riskier asset.
Mr. Duffy. Mr. Burgess?
Mr. Burgess. I am not even sure where to start on it
because there are so many provisions in Basel III that could
have a negative impact, but just to mention a few: eliminating
trust preferred securities, which were grandfathered under the
Dodd-Frank Act. We don't have a lot of that, but we have about
$3 million of it and we have been able to use that as capital
to help our bank grow and provide more loans within our
communities and if that is taken away, we are going to have to
find a place to replace that.
The complexity of the weightings on each type of loan: in
the past, we have risk-weighted pools and so you could go into
the call report and you could figure out what the risk-weighted
assets were by looking at the call report. You have to do that
loan by loan, so there is complexity.
And on the mortgage side, as he just mentioned, as I said,
we are fairly large in the mortgage business, there are several
provisions there that in our case, our mortgage loans are
probably the safest loans that we have on our books. We have
never foreclosed on a mortgage loan in 15 years. So we are now
talking about significantly increasing the risk weightings on
probably the safest part of our portfolio.
I will stop now for others, but there are a number of other
things.
Mr. Kim. I would just say in general, as Chairwoman Capito
pointed out, the rule was written for the world's banks and it
makes sense for those systemically important institutions and
there needs to be some sort of level playing field. It wasn't
written for us.
It really does not work for us. Now, the Federal Reserve
and the way that it interprets the rules maybe will make it
easier for banks of various sizes to comply by throwing some
things out but we are not sure. There is no clarity.
We don't know where that is going, and there have been
calls from a couple of the FDIC Board Members, Tom Hoenig and
other gentlemen, suggesting that there is a much simpler way to
do this, especially for banks in our weight classes.
Mr. Pinkett. Mr. Duffy, I feel like I should stand up for
this since no one else has, but I really can't come up with a
reason why a $350 million bank would want to go through the
brain damage and difficulty of being--that this legislation was
set up for, for trillion dollar institutions. It is just not
appropriate for us.
Mr. Duffy. And I wanted to make sure everyone had a chance
to answer the question. I only have 45 seconds left. Does Basel
III have an impact on a smaller bank's ability to compete with
the larger bank? Is the cost imposed on a smaller bank greater
than--
Mr. Pinkett. Yes.
Mr. Loving. Yes. It certainly does, and when you add to it
the competitive advantage that the larger institutions have in
cost of funding, it just complicates the competitive issue.
Mr. Duffy. If you had a recommendation, would it be for an
exemption or would it be for delays? What is the recommendation
that you would give us?
Mr. Loving. Exemption.
Mr. Pinkett. Exemption.
Mr. Burgess. Exemption. I would say we need to reduce the
complexity of the rules so that it is much easier to determine
what the capital needs are. It is so hard to figure that out
right now.
Mr. Kim. Neither. And if there is an exemption, it needs to
be at the level of systemically important institutions, not
banks like us.
Mr. Duffy. I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Mrs. McCarthy for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you very much, and again,
thank you for having a second hearing on what we can do.
Mr. Kim, when you were speaking, the only thing I could
think of is one size does not fit all. Unfortunately, down here
in Congress, sometimes when the rules go by it is for
everybody, and it just doesn't work out, and most of us here
agree with that.
I wanted to ask you, the alternative products that help
move the underbanked and the unbanked into the financial system
are of great interest to me and to my constituents out on Long
Island, New York.
It is important that there are safe, regulated products
available to people that allow them to build their confidence
and trust in the banking system while providing Main Street
banking which many of us grew up with and we happen to like our
local bankers to go in.
So I guess in your testimony you were discussing
conflicting regulatory requirements that make offering short-
term, small-dollar products very difficult, as well as
inconsistency on certain regulatory requirements that make it
difficult for banks to offer products that provide consumers
access to funds to fill short-term gaps. You explained that a
little bit, but could you go into that a little bit more
detail?
Mr. Kim. Sure. There is a need for short-term liquidity
products. You can see it; little offices spring up in various
areas of town for payday loans or title lending or any of those
kinds of things. Some people do use the overdraft method to
finance their short-term cash needs, which is not a very
prudent way to do that.
And I think to the extent that we can move those loans into
the banking system and there is some sort of a Safe Harbor that
we can operate under to offer those kind of products and we
have to be able to offer them profitably.
Frequently what happens and what kind of scares many
bankers away from providing products to lower-income consumers
is there is regulatory risk and there is also a lack of a
business model and a lot of times people are willing to pay for
things that maybe we don't think they should.
How many of us have adult children who are willing to pay
$5 to get cash out of an ATM despite the fact that we say,
``Don't do that.'' They do that. They want the convenience.
That is what they want.
So I would say that if there was a Safe Harbor, a clear
definition of how those products could work, we would all be
better off if the banking system provided those as opposed to
the nonbanks.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Just a follow up, and this is
going to be general to those who want to answer it, I had read
the GAO report from 208 to 211 and we learned that many of the
small bank failures during the financial crisis were attributed
to high concentration in commercial real estate loans
associated with poor underwriting in management in the
institution itself.
I am interested in hearing how you would propose to address
these issues so that small banks may continue to lend while
maintaining the safety and soundness of the institution.
We do know that a lot of banks did fail and most of the
areas that I was looking at on the map were probably areas that
had high concentrations of large construction loans. How do we
handle that? How would you all handle that?
Mr. Burgess. I think in our particular case, we actually do
make quite a few CRE-type loans, but we manage our
concentrations and we make sure that we stay within the safe
concentration levels that we should.
And I think the regulators are doing a really good job of
looking at that now and making sure that everybody has strong
concentration policies in place to make sure that you are not
putting all of your eggs in one basket.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. So you basically agree with
those regulations, to keep that stronger so the banks don't
fail?
Mr. Burgess. I think that is one of the risk mechanisms
which need to be there. If you put all your eggs in one basket,
you are taking the risk that if things go bad in that area, it
can take the bank down.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Mr. Pinkett?
Mr. Pinkett. Yes. I am in one of those banks that was
overconcentrated in commercial real estate. That is how I got
my job. I think the solution is to have--the regulatory
solution, I mean, there is a management solution, which is
better management. The regulatory solution would be to identify
where there is poor management and actually to encourage
management changes and to look at the bank not from a
``gotcha'' point of view but from how a, ``Can I help you
survive and move forward point of view?''
That is guidance the regulators just don't have at this
moment, but we are seeing more of it, I would say at least from
my primary regulator, and having more productive conversations,
which I think will help the banks succeed.
I don't think there is anything this body or any other body
can do if management is poor and continues to make bad
decisions, but what we can do and what we ought to do for the
taxpayers is to identify poor management and do as much as we
can to move them out as quickly as possible.
Mrs. McCarthy of New York. Thank you.
Thank you for all your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry for 5 minutes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairwoman Capito.
Thank you all for testifying, and thank you for making
loans in our communities. I want to follow the chairwoman's
questions about the Qualified Mortgage, the QM rule that the
CFPB issued.
Now, let me just go across-the-board, each one of you, yes
or no, do you make mortgage loans?
Mr. Burgess?
Mr. Burgess. Yes.
Mr. Kim. Yes.
Mr. Loving. Yes.
Mr. Pinkett. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Fantastic. We have seen from the CFPB the QM
rule. I don't know if it is quite as thick as the Bible, but
let's just say it is a little long and very complex.
How many of you intend to make mortgages outside of that QM
box?
Mr. Burgess. Under no circumstances.
Mr. Kim. We are still evaluating that.
Mr. Loving. We are evaluating the implication as well of
making mortgages outside of the designation because of the risk
potential that is possible.
Mr. Pinkett. We are also, the risks, but also the need that
we see in the communities that we serve.
Mr. McHenry. So there is a give-and-take and you would like
to make mortgages outside of the QM rule and you are trying to
figure out how to do that?
Mr. Pinkett. We would like to service our customers if we
can, yes.
Mr. McHenry. And so the implication there is that the QM
does limit your ability to do so?
Mr. Pinkett. I believe it does.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Now, it is interesting because Richard
Cordray, who under some reports has a position at the CFPB, and
under other reports is unconfirmed--anyway, we will get into
that issue at some other point, I would hope.
But anyway, Mr. Cordray gave a speech at the Credit Union
National Association--I don't think any of you on the panel
were invited to that, but needless to say, I think some of you
might have seen his comments that he wanted to encourage
institutions to lend outside of the Qualified Mortgage rule.
Let me just ask again. Mr. Burgess, any interest in doing
that?
Mr. Burgess. In our mind, we make about 1,000 loans or so a
year and to have that much unmeasured risk out there that we
cannot evaluate on an ongoing basis for the life of the loan is
something that we just don't feel we can do.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So no interest.
Mr. Burgess. No.
Mr. McHenry. All right. Last week, it was reported that the
White House is ``encouraging lenders to use more subjective
judgment in determining whether to offer a loan.''
Now of course, this contradicts Dodd-Frank. It also
contradicts the rule put in place by the CFPB and what I am
hearing from the industry is that runs counter to the
encouragement of all their regulators.
I am not asking you to testify against your regulators; I
certainly want all of you to live happy and productive lives,
and that is probably not the easiest way to make that happen,
but just give me a little word about the conflicting messages
you are receiving on this matter in particular.
Mr. Kim?
Mr. Kim. There is a continual friction between safety and
soundness, the regulation and then the need to make loans in
underserved markets and in fact the QM rule probably makes it
harder to make loans in underserved markets.
And so, if we comply with QM, we will make fewer loans
there and they will rap us on the knuckles for not making the
loans.
So that is an example of where the lack of clarity or the
conflict in the regulation is a problem.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Pinkett?
Mr. Pinkett. We have not had any issues with our regulators
on this topic. In general, I think it is a matter of, we both
have the same interest, which is exactly as you phrased it,
which is, how do you service customers and how do you run a
safe and sound institution?
Those two things sometimes are in competition and the test
should not be a hard and fast rule. The test should be, are we
using good quality judgment in making a decision?
For us, it is a little different. We are not as large so we
don't--we wouldn't set it up as a line of business, non-QM
loans. What we would do is we would have to look at it on a
one-by-one basis and make intelligent decisions with the
information we have about our customers.
Mr. McHenry. So you would like to be able to make those
subjective decisions to give community lending?
Mr. Pinkett. I think it is really the only way we can do
the work that is really needed in this country. There are
enough big banks that are underwriting to scores and numbers.
The customers come to us because they say, ``We can't get
anyone to listen to our story.'' When we talk to small business
owners who say, ``I haven't been in business for 3 years and so
therefore I can't get a banker to even come visit me because I
don't have 3 years of financials,'' and they say, ``Thank God
you can, because this is the only chance I have to get the
money I need to grow my small business,'' that is what
community banks do, and we just happen to do it in a community
where there is even less opportunity for that kind of
conversation.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. First of all, I want to thank all the
panelists for their contributions today, but I particularly
want to thank Mr. Kim for raising a concern about how spouses
are treated in access to credit under the Credit Card Bill of
Rights, which I authored, and it certainly was not my intent in
any way, shape, or form to hurt women in our economy.
I do want to say that with the work of Mrs. Capito and
others, and we have met with Mr. Cordray and I believe he will
be coming out with a rule that completely addresses that so
there will be equality of treatment and equality of access.
But I wanted to thank you for your attention to that and
sensitivity to it. I appreciate it.
I would like to start by asking Kenneth Burgess and then
each one of you for a response to H.R. 1553, which was
reintroduced yesterday in both the House and the Senate.
This bill was written during the throes of the economic
crisis. We were in the process of losing $18 trillion of wealth
in our country and our phones were ringing off the hook with
community bankers under tremendous stress: enforced mergers;
being threatened with closure; and a feeling that their point
of view was not being heard.
And we wrote this to respond to this deep concern because
we knew the value that the community banks were offering in our
neighborhoods; oftentimes, the only access to credit during
this period for mortgages and small business loans.
Now, in the past 3 years, I don't believe I have gotten one
community bank complaint. During the crisis, they were calling
every day. They were frantic. They felt like the regulators
weren't listening to them, and I am wondering, have the
regulators changed their processes in any way to be more
sensitive to the community bank concerns?
Do you think this bill is still needed given the fact that
the economy has improved and apparently they have made some
different assessments of being more respectful and allowing the
Bozeman role to be heard in the agency? Do you think the bill
is needed and why, and what do you think is the most important
aspect of it to help community banks in our overall economy?
Mr. Burgess. Yes, I do. And as I mentioned in my testimony,
we have not been in a situation, we have been in a little bit
better economy where we are so we haven't seen the pendulum
swing quite so far in our area.
But that is kind of what happens when you have a crisis and
a lot of the rulings or a lot of the decisions that are made by
regulators when they come to a bank are subjective and a lot of
it comes from the perception that regulator has; if they are
looking at a lot of problem banks before they come in, they
take a little bit harder line view in making some of the
subjective decisions that they make.
So I think it helps if we have an opportunity for an
independent review of some of those decisions to make sure that
those are being applied consistently across-the-board.
And I did experience the 1980s in Texas, and so I did see
the same types of things at that time and I know how that can
happen. Fortunately, I am not having to deal with it at this
time.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Kim?
Mr. Kim. Yes, I would echo Mr. Burgess' comments that we
have had a very good relationship with our regulators. It has
really not been a problem we have experienced. That said, I
have heard a lot of my colleagues, and as you note, more so a
few years back, lamenting what has gone on with the regulators.
And even though perhaps it is not as big a problem now, the
pendulum will swing back and if there are some independent
rules and some appeals process, I am certain that the industry
will appreciate that and it will be well-founded.
Mr. Loving. Yes, I would agree and although the pendulum
has swung--things are better in West Virginia--we never went
through the crisis.
We have always been fairly stable from an economic
perspective, but I, like Mr. Kim, heard from colleagues across
the country that they were under a severe and harsh exam
environment and I think that the Act as presented will provide
for the proper method to have a separate review and process for
the banker to go through if there is an issue.
And as Mr. Kim indicated, the pendulum will swing back. We
will go through another crisis of some sort sometime in the
future, and so this plan in place will be helpful.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Pinkett?
Mr. Pinkett. I have not had a problem with regulators. We
have great relationships, I would say, with our regulators.
They listen; we talk. They talk; we listen. We communicate
well.
I don't know--it is so far back I will just say this:
historically, regulators have not been bankers and bankers have
not been regulators. The regulators don't understand the
operations of the institution and the bankers have never
thought about all of the systemic risks associated with running
an institution.
So we have to communicate better. I think that what I have
seen with my regulators is, and I was at the Federal Reserve in
New York last week, and we were talking about the fact that
they were hiring people from industry who understand how to run
a bank. So I think encouragement on how to be a better
regulator is really what is important.
I have not had an issue that I would need to take to an
ombudsman, but I think having that encouragement and having a
framework where they understand what it means to be a regulator
and what their challenge is and making sure that is clear, I
think would be very helpful. If this legislation could do that,
that would be great.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Pearce for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I thank each one of you as individuals for participating
today.
This is the same story that we hear as we go around my
district. I represent the southern district of New Mexico. Our
per capita income is about $30,000 to $35,000, in small
communities, and so your story is exactly the one that we hear.
I will kind of start where Mr. Meeks was discussing that he
went to college because his parents could get one of those
nonstandard loans that Mr. McHenry was talking about, and in
fact, that is my story, too. There were six kids and I was
signing notes at the bank at age 13 and 14 all the way through
high school; $2,000 a year we would buy a pig, show him at a
local county fair, and we funded six educations--six college
educations, and yet these stories are going to discontinue
because of the CFPB.
So when the CFPB is putting regulations in place that
should apply to the trillion dollar banks, what they are going
to do is choke off the small local banks and choke off access
to capital and for people who would never qualify for a loan at
one of the big institutions. We just wouldn't. The rates of
return are not there.
They are going to fall outside the box. I am hearing you
all say you are not going to set up products and so this
hearing is extraordinarily valuable. I look at it as the CFPB
has a de facto war on the poor because it is the poor who are
going to suffer when we don't have nonstandard mortgages.
I was pretty interested in Mr. Pinkett's discussion on--and
one of my concerns--we talk about GSE reform and privatizing
GSE's. I guarantee, as a small State with $31,000 per capita
income, I worry that the rates of return are not going to be
there because Mr. Pinkett says the mainstream investors seeking
higher rates of return would have us alter our decades-long
focus on the most needy.
And that is, I think, what is going to happen to the small
rural areas if we have the GSE's that are totally, totally free
market. We are never going to have a rate of return in Mr.
Pinkett's neighborhood or my neighborhood, and so what you will
do is you will take away those 30-year loans for that part of
the market and again starve us for capital.
But you mentioned also, Mr. Pinkett, about the unregulated
nonprofit institutions that you compete with. Could you expand
on that just a bit?
Mr. Pinkett. In addition to the large banks and credit
unions, we also have nonprofit organizations that operate in
the communities that are able to access capital from the large
institutions because it is debt capital, because they are
unregulated, because they have a business model that allows
them to repay that capital back in a much easier way than we
would ever be able to do it given the fact that in order for me
to make a payment back to a bondholder, I would have to get
approval from at least two of my three regulators.
Mr. Pearce. I appreciate that, and it is something that we
don't see much in--that is a viewpoint I think is
extraordinarily valuable for me today.
Also, I think you all have adequately stated the same
concerns our bankers are talking about in Basel III, that you
weren't involved in any of the risky processes but you are
getting nailed with the same responsibilities and your
lending--your portfolios don't look like those large
institutions, but you are still having to have the same capital
requirements, the increased risk weighting. We hear that
constantly.
I guess not many of you mentioned the appraisal situation.
That is one thing I hear a lot in New Mexico, that the
appraisals under CFPB have suddenly gotten very difficult. Is
that something you all are experiencing? Just a yes or no is
fine.
Mr. Loving. Yes, it is something we are experiencing. As a
matter of fact, we just went to an appraisal management company
to try to comply with the regulation, which added to time and
cost of the appraisal.
And we found cases where we knew the value of the property
better than the appraiser because they are out of the area, or
better yet, the appraiser cannot find the needed comps to
fulfill the requirements and as a result, the loan doesn't
qualify for the secondary market.
Mr. Pearce. I would hope to get some comments from
everyone, but I am going to squeeze one more question in, and
that is on the flood insurance.
Again, we are getting tremendous complaints on flood
insurance. The last flood we had was back there when Noah was
having his problems and we are getting stuck for what happened
in Hurricane Katrina and so 1,000-year floodplains.
Mr. Burgess, you had mentioned flood insurance in your
written statement. I don't know if you would like to expand on
that just a bit, the problems you are facing.
Mr. Burgess. I think right now we are still trying to get
our arms around the new rules, but I think one of the concerns
that we have is that the penalties for a mistake are going from
$500 to $2,000.
And I guess one of the things we would ask is that you
consider that penalty applying only to situations where there
was actually not coverage on the loan for a period of time
instead of just a technical violation.
Mr. Pearce. Yes, and again it is a real problem, not a
problem that you let a date lapse by one day and get stuck for
$1,000.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Scott for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Kim, let me direct my question to you, if I may. In
getting our hands around the definition of what is a community
bank, in your opinion, what is the asset size threshold or
limit for a community bank versus say a regional bank?
Mr. Kim. That is a good question. That is a very good
question. I would say in terms of--we have talked before about
application of capital standards and other rules that it should
be more about the business model than it is about a particular
asset size.
So if I am a $20 billion bank and these guys are $1 billion
banks, and I am doing about the same thing, then I am a
community bank. I refer to myself as a ``super community''
bank, which means I do business in several communities. I bring
community-like service and a bit broader product line than
sometimes some of my smaller colleagues might be able to offer.
So, $50 billion and under might be the sort of a super
community bank; above that they tend to get called regional,
but even above $50 million, some of those regional banks can be
engaged in pretty much the same business we are.
Mr. Scott. Right. So your bank, Commerce Bank, has an asset
size of about $22 billion, which could clearly put you into the
regional bank category, and the reason I am asking this is
because I think you are the right person to get to this whole
area of tracking compliance costs.
So you are basically a regional bank. Now, let me ask you
this. In what ways are regional banks similar or dissimilar
from community banks? And I think you are the right person to
ask this.
Mr. Kim. We have larger staffs who exist to handle
compliance problems. I have a very large compliance department.
I have lawyers. I have people who are solely dedicated to that.
In today's environment though, I am kind of like you guys
because--as CEOs, they are spending a lot of their time working
compliance instead of serving their customers.
And we are taking a lot of our folks who interface with
customers and directing them to compliance. That would be one
difference. I have sort of more staff to take this on, but
ultimately, it creates the same cost to the consumer.
Mr. Scott. And what additional burdens do regional banks
face even though they are not systemically significant in that
way?
Mr. Kim. I think I am more likely--for instance, take
stress testing. Banks above $10 billion have to, starting this
fall, undergo stress testing. Some of my colleagues at the $50
billion-plus institutions are submitting 8,000-page documents
for stress testing on an annual basis.
Right now, I am interviewing consultants who are going to
cost between $500,000 and $1 million to help me with stress
testing. I am taking my best and my brightest data analytics
people out of the business line and bringing them forward to do
stress testing, which if you looked at our record, in terms of
safety and soundness and loan losses, I am spending a ton of
money on something that is unnecessary for a bank with my
capital level and my history.
Mr. Scott. So we know the importance of regulatory relief
for the community banks. How important is regulatory relief for
regional banks?
Mr. Kim. I think it is extremely important. I think it is
important to both. I think the risk on the smaller banks is
that many of them are going to be forced to combine.
On the regional banks, it is more that we take our eye off
the ball of serving the customer, we raise the costs, and
eventually we can get squeezed out, too, and then we are left
with just the large banks.
Mr. Scott. And finally, on the tracking of compliance
costs, the FDIC did a study and interviewed a number of banks
on how they track regulatory compliance and every one of them
said that they didn't track regulatory compliance costs within
their bank's internal cost structures because it was too time-
consuming, it was too costly, it was interwoven into their
operations, and it would be too difficult to break out specific
costs.
Is that a general consensus? My point is, you have come to
a conclusion as to what your bank's annual cost to comply is.
And I was wondering, did you fall in that category? Do you have
an estimate of compliance costs? And what would it be?
Mr. Kim. It would be easier for me to do it and I don't
have it off the top of my head.
One thing I looked at last year is we have spent about
100,000 hours creating new products in our information
technology area; programmers and things working on new--15,000
of those 100,000 hours last year was devoted to compliance
matters.
It was about 10 people--and that is just in the IT
structure. Like I said, I have lawyers and compliance people
and business line people who normally are interfacing or
thinking about products and they are thinking about compliance
now, and those are the people that it is hard to judge their
time.
Although I will say I am tracking time on stress testing
because that is going to be a killer and I am going to want to
be able to tell somebody someday how much time I spent on that.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The other day I was reading The Wall Street Journal, and
there was an article by Sheila Bair, former FDIC Chairman, and
in the article she talks about the risk weight models that were
introduced as a result of Dodd-Frank, by a lot of banks, and
how the difference between the megabanks and their risk models
with regards to how they affect capital as well as the risk
models that community banks use.
And it was interesting because they were in there. She
indicates that--I will give you a for-instance here. For
instance, Morgan Stanley, in their weight risk model, the
capital asset ratio or capital or the risk-based capital ratio
was 14 percent by their particular model.
But if you take out the model and use it the way it should
be done, in the old way it was down to 7 percent; it cut their
capital in half.
The other bank they were putting in this article here was
U.S. Bancorp; they are just basically a big community bank of
$350 billion. With their particular risk weight ratio, they are
a little bit over nine, but when we went to the original risk
based ratio, they were just at nine. So suddenly, they became a
much better capitalized bank then Morgan Stanley, and I think
this is a concern that I have with regards to what is going on
with our community bank situation.
Have you seen, gentlemen who are here this morning, this
type of situation affecting your ability to do your job and the
competition with the big banks? Do you understand what I am
asking?
Mr. Burgess. I don't think at this point in time it has,
but when somebody is trying to calculate what the effect of
Basel III is on capital levels, the data to do that calculation
does not exist in a public format.
The level of detail that you have to go through to
determine what the risk weightings are to determine those
capital ratios is not available.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think there is a fairness issue here
though from the standpoint that these big guys all get to do
their own risk models, where you all basically don't have all
these other risky investments to sort of go out here and--when
you are risk weighting a real estate loan, let's be honest,
there is not a whole lot of risk there to that.
But when you are talking about derivatives and securities,
mortgage-backed securities, and all sorts of other products out
there that are risky, and they are all guessing at what this
is, it certainly puts them at a--whenever the regulators are
not trying to put all this on a level playing field, there are
a whole lot of problems here, I think.
Mr. Kim. I think what you are illustrating there is the
difference between those guys at the top with the complex
business models that hold a lot of different assets, and maybe
they are able to alter those models to make capital ratios look
better.
I am not going to pass judgment on whether they are doing
that or not, but the problem really comes when you try to take
that same level of information, that same level of modeling,
and push it down on us and it was not created for banks our
size and it is not going to work well for banks our size.
It is going to put us through a lot of work that yields
nothing because we don't have the kind of complex assets and
risky assets that some of our brethren at the trillion-dollar
level have.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think it really is sort of--it doesn't
help the big guys because there is not a level playing field of
a model there that actually compares them all. It doesn't make
any sense.
So anyway, I will move on here. I know that HMDA exams are
a pain in the neck for all banks and I see a lot of heads
shaking already and the other day one of my local bankers gave
me a quick sheet that they had done, a sort of survey of the
civil money penalties that were assessed by the FDIC, the OCC,
and the Fed with regards to exams over a 2\1/2\-year period
from 2010-2012.
And the FDIC came up with 166--and this is the State of
Missouri, now where I am from--civil money penalties that they
assessed over a 2\1/2\-year period and the Fed and the OCC had
a combined total of five.
I went to the FDIC, and I showed them this, and I said,
``As a former bank regulator, this has red flags all over this.
Can you explain this?''
And in discussions with the Chairman and Vice Chairman, in
fact they said, ``Well, we realize we have a problem. We are
going to start advising our examiners to be more forbearing on
the first set of exams to see if there is just oversight or if
they are still learning the rules and regulations. And the
second time we go in that is when we won't really be willing to
go start assessing these civil money penalties.''
Have you seen, over the last examination maybe not in the
last--in the hope--and have you been examined in the last 3 or
4 months? I guess that should be the first question.
Okay. Mr. Loving, have you seen a little bit more
forbearance with regards to their exam procedures? Because they
have promised that to me.
Mr. Loving. I can't say that I have because we just
recently became a HMDA reporter because of an office we located
in SMSA, but I will tell you the cost that we have incurred to
make sure that doesn't happen has increased significantly.
The number of days that our compliance officer looks at
mortgage compliance from the 2007-2008 era to today is
significantly more.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I know--if the chairman will bear with me
one more second here--I am out of time. In testimony in this
committee prior to this, we have already had bankers talk about
in a situation like this where when they hire one loan officer,
they also have to have one compliance officer.
Is that kind of a standard that you have seen or something
similar to that?
Mr. Loving. Recently, we went to an eight-member senior
management compliance committee in addition to our full-time
compliance officer who also came to me the other day and said,
``I believe we need to start looking at another compliance
person because the job is becoming too intense for me to do the
review that I need to--to comply to the level that you want to
comply at.''
So it is not quite one-to-one, but it is getting pretty
close.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. I thank you for your testimony.
And I thank you for your indulgence, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Capito. Thank you.
Ms. Velazquez for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Loving, community banks, as we all know, play a vital
role in the small business lending market. We have heard on
numerous occasions that regulatory burden is a driving factor
in why community banks aren't lending more to small businesses.
What role does regulation play versus other factors like
lack of demand or tight lending standards in limiting access to
credit for small businesses?
Mr. Loving. I think it is important to note that community
banks under $1 billion have actually funded to 60 percent of
the small business loans in our country. So, community bankers
are avid small business lenders.
We have faced, due to the economic environment, a challenge
in qualified borrowers. Community banks are active lenders in
the community and we want to lend in the community but we do
have challenges because of the perception from regulators, or
for guidance, or from regulation itself that prohibits us from
making a particular loan.
So I can't say it is one thing, but it is a combination of
many factors that had come into play when you hear that the
banks aren't lending, but I can tell you we are all in the
business of supplying credit to our communities and we are
certainly looking for qualified borrowers to fund.
Ms. Velazquez. However, at the height--and I would like to
hear from Mr. Kim--of the credit crunch in 2009, thousands of
valuable small businesses struggled to find credit because
banks and credit unions were either unwilling or unable to
lend. And we are not talking about unqualified borrowers.
Today, however, the situation has reversed, as lenders are
more willing to make loans while the number of borrowers in
search of credit has dried up. With demand weak, what steps
have your banks taken to attract borrowers and increase small
business lending?
Mr. Kim. Small business lending and small business people
are great customers for banks. They typically do their personal
business with you as well as their small business and maybe
even some of their employees bank with you.
So we are making great efforts to try to analyze our
customer base to see who is involved in small business,
reaching out to them, and offering them products. Maybe it is
taking credit cards or maybe it is different kinds of services
that might bring them into the bank and garner those
relationships.
It is difficult in that when you look at the
creditworthiness of people who have been through the credit
crisis, a lot of people took hits and a lot of small business
people maybe are out of a job and they are starting a small
business.
Those are tough things for banks to lend into. You need an
equity partner there, not a bank partner, when you are starting
up that kind of business, but sort of at that next level up, we
are reaching out and trying to get that business.
Ms. Velazquez. Yes, Mr. Pinkett?
Mr. Pinkett. I will just pick up on Mr. Kim's point. I
think a lot of times we talk about capital for small
businesses. We should leave open the possibility that what
small businesses need is equity capital, not debt capital.
And so, the idea that all small businesses should be able
to borrow regardless of the situation of that business is one
that we have been working to disabuse some of our customers of.
Good customers, but we explain to them that this is not a
debt need. It is an equity need because debt could put you out
of business and that is the conversation that we don't have
often with our customers in general, but we are starting to
have with our customers so they understand our commitment to
them is our commitment but it doesn't mean that the solution is
a loan.
Ms. Velazquez. But we do see that the bigger loans, those
above $250,000, are much easier if we are talking about
qualified borrowers.
Mr. Pinkett. Right.
Ms. Velazquez. Where we see a gap is between those smaller
loans, and we are talking here about debt, those loans to help
people start up their businesses for example. We didn't see or
we haven't seen business formation at the rate that we saw in
previous recessions like in the 1970s and 1980s compared to the
one that we are seeing today.
Mr. Pinkett. Yes, I would say that we are making small
business loans but small business loans are harder to make in
this economy than they have been in the past because the small
business owners are not able to generate the revenue as quickly
as they need to make that level, that debt service payment, and
so that is the challenge.
Helping them ramp up to get to a place where they are
stable enough is the challenge. It is a lot easier to make
larger loans to larger businesses because they have that
capacity.
And then the SBA's involvement in this process and their
ability to provide guarantees that we can rely on that, that we
can work with them to come up--
Ms. Velazquez. Those are the loans the community banks and
other banks are making. Those guarantees by the SBA, by the
Federal Government. And even with those that are guaranteed by
the Federal Government, and when we increase that guarantee
from 75 to 90 percent, what you saw is that the banks were
making the big loans but not the smaller loans.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Mr. Barr for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The tradition of community banking in Kentucky has always
been based on the three C's: collateral; capacity; and
character, and the last point is what I want to focus on a
little bit.
Community banking is relationship banking. It is based on
trust. Many times, community bankers go to church with their
borrowers. Their children grow up together. It is about knowing
your customers and trusting the discretion and business
judgment of the banker.
So banking can't just be a fit the boxes defined by some
government agency, otherwise why even have bankers in the first
place? My question is, do you get the sense that post-Dodd-
Frank, business judgment and discretion has been removed from
banking?
Mr. Burgess. One of the things that I probably pride myself
the most on in my banking career, my 35 years of banking, is
that as a community banker, I have been able to sit down with
each individual customer, whether a consumer, a small business,
whatever, and listen to what their problem is, listen to what
their need is, and try to custom design a product and a
solution for them.
As that box that we keep talking about gets smaller and
smaller and smaller, it is taking away our ability for the
flexibility we need to be able to do that type of thing.
That is probably the biggest concern I have because we
can't make those customized decisions as much anymore, probably
more so on the consumer side right now, but I have concerns
with some of the new data gathering on the small business that
we are going to start heading that way there as well.
Mr. Barr. And while the others answer the question, maybe
you could also amplify your answer by talking about the types
of services or products that you maybe are no longer able to
offer as a result of this removal of the banking judgment
discretion.
Mr. Loving. I will reiterate Mr. Burgess. Over my career, I
have prided myself, and the community bankers pride themselves
on knowing their customers, and it was heartwarming to hear the
stories in this room of those who are where they are today
because of the community banker.
And at the end of the day, that is what community bankers
do. We want to build better communities. We know our customers
better than anyone and to try to fit someone in a box or make
sure it fits in a box prohibits our ability to do what we do
best.
And so, I am very concerned. We have heard about
subjective, and this group uses subjective models, they use
subjective thoughts. We have always used subjective methods to
approve a loan because we know our customer. We tailor the
product. We tailor the loan.
But when you start assigning rules and numbers to certain
data, it is hard to fulfill those guidelines, and we will back
off.
And again, as I testified, the QM rule is one that--it
very, very likely could cut off and strangle mortgage lending
in community banks.
Mr. Barr. Let me ask the witnesses also about paperwork for
the consumers and whether or not your banks are able to collect
or have you collected data after Dodd-Frank implementation
about whether or not your consumers feel any safer as a result
of some of the requirements that are imposed on the consumer
and the borrower?
Mr. Loving. If I may say that community bankers have always
been known to be trustworthy souls, and I am sure many of the
community bankers here hear the same thing when we go to a
mortgage closing and there is a stack of papers an inch or two
inches high. I am not sure it makes the consumer feel any
better because they are saying, ``Well, just tell me where to
sign. Just show me where to sign,'' and because they know that
the product, the service that they are getting from their
community bank is a trustworthy product and they trust their
banker.
Mr. Barr. Final question: I hear frequently that there is a
disconnect between what the regulators say their mission is
publicly and what individual regulators do in practice.
In fact, in Kentucky, my community bankers have told me
that one of their primary concerns is that there is an
incentive for regulators to be excessive in their scrutiny
because that is the way they get promoted.
And the common frustration is that there is inconsistency
among field examiners even when they are in the same region.
Some of you have testified earlier about fear of retaliation.
Could you all comment on this observation from community
banks in Kentucky and also specifics about fears of retaliation
with examiners?
Mr. Burgess. I don't personally have a fear of retaliation
because we have had a really good relationship with the
regulators we have had, and we have not been in an economy
where we had to worry about that too much.
But, I think a lot of time the regulators have the best
interests in mind to do the job the way it ought to be done and
to be thorough and fair.
But as I said before, perceptions based on where they are
can change some of that, and I think there is a fear that above
them, whoever is evaluating them, if they miss something, they
could be in trouble for that. So I think that is where some of
the fear comes from.
Chairwoman Capito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I thank the witnesses for appearing.
I also think the ranking member for his comments earlier,
and I would like to associate myself with the comments with
reference to the community banks and the credit unions being
the small institutions that have provided a lot of
opportunities for persons in various communities.
I like to consider myself a friend of both small banks and
credit unions. I am not sure that we have a good definition for
a community bank, but my suspicion is that $10 billion is a
little bit high for a community bank.
If I am incorrect and $10 billion is about the right size
for a community bank, would someone please help me?
Mr. Kim. I might say $10 billion is a little bit low.
[laughter]
Mr. Green. $10 billion is a little low?
Mr. Kim. And I think the way you need to evaluate who, if
some bankers are going to get favorable treatment and others
are not I would suggest--and I am not going to wish unfavorable
treatment on anybody, but I think you need to examine the
business model.
You need to examine what people do and that is more
important, if banks aren't involved in derivatives trading,
they don't have complex exotic products, they aren't making
exotic loans, you know that. And you serve, and the bank is
engaged in serving their community. I don't think that because
I happen to serve customers across several communities that
makes me any less of a community bank than someone who is maybe
all within one county.
Mr. Green. All right, let's see if there is another
opinion. I seem to have hit a nerve.
Mr. Pinkett. I would weigh in. I think my assessment of the
industry is this: It is very difficult for a bank under $100
million to continue to exist profitably. It is going to be
difficult across the country.
I think you are going to see that the optimal size of a
small bank is going to be somewhere in the neighborhood of $1
billion because that is what it is going to take to have the
manpower to do all that is required to operate efficiently.
And I am not suggesting that we should do away with
regulation in order to allow smaller banks to exist. I think
regulation is important. Compliance is important. Managing in a
safe and sound way is important.
Mr. Green. May I intercede for just one second? I
appreciate where you are going, but would you do this for me?
You are using a term that I have not introduced, and that is
smaller banks. I have said community banks.
Mr. Pinkett. Right.
Mr. Green. Am I to assume that they are the same in your
mind?
Mr. Pinkett. No, I am about to tie those two together.
Mr. Green. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Pinkett. Community banks, I think, will be in the range
of $0.5 billion up to and I think your $10 billion number is
about right. I don't think you are going to find many small
banks smaller than that surviving, is the point I am making.
Mr. Green. Is it your opinion that smaller banks should
survive or should not?
Mr. Pinkett. It would be great if they could survive; I
don't see at this moment, given all that is in front of us, the
possibility.
Mr. Green. The smaller banks that I talked to do tell me
that they are, as you have indicated, overregulated, but they
don't see themselves in the same league, and maybe this is what
one of our panelists have said, as the $10 billion banks.
They really see themselves as true community banks. Now, we
can debate that as to who is a true community bank and who is
not, but they just see themselves as the real community banks:
smaller than $10 billion.
You walk in, you can meet the president, you have people
working there who pretty much know the people who come in and
out. They do live in the community--$10 billion banks,
generally speaking, don't have quite the same relationship in
their minds as banks that have $100 million, $200 million,
maybe $0.5 billion.
And we have a lot of these banks that are coming to me and
saying, ``I really need help.'' I am not demeaning any of the
banks, I am just trying to, in my mind, see if there is some
merit to what these smaller banks--maybe that is a better
term--smaller banks should receive in terms of attention.
Mr. Pinkett, would you elaborate a little?
Mr. Pinkett. That is exactly the point I was trying to
make, Mr. Green, that there is a--community bank has become a
term of art. There is a level of bank that I think is smaller
than that and really needs assistance also, a different level
of assistance and so--
Mr. Green. Okay. Let's agree that one size doesn't fit all,
that community banks, some that are larger, some that are
smaller, need some help. And I am amenable to doing what I can
to help.
In fact, I have agreed to go into my community--one aspect
of it in any event--and actually visit a community bank. They
would like to show me, let me have a first-hand view of what is
taking place.
And my final question would be this: What one thing should
I look for when I go into the bank, the smaller bank, the
community bank, to visit? What is the one thing I should look
for?
Mr. Pinkett. I think what you will see is the relationship
the customers have with the staff. They know each other. And
there is a sharing because they are a part of the community in
a different way than you can be if you are $20 billion--or I
should say $50 billion, not to offend any one size institution.
[laughter]
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, may I just, in a sense of
fairness, give Mr. Kim an opportunity to respond?
If you would, Mr. Kim.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kim. And I would agree wholeheartedly with what Mr.
Pinkett said. You go in and look and see the connection between
the people in the bank with the customers that they are dealing
with and I would suggest that we go to great lengths to have
staff in our branches who are engaged with the customers who
are interested in their communities.
They are in the Rotary Club. They are doing things to serve
their community. That is all part of our model. That is who we
are.
Mr. Green. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duffy [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Cotton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cotton. Thank you all for coming today. Thank you for
your very helpful testimony and what you do for communities all
around America.
In Arkansas, as in so many of your communities, community
banks are vital for providing credit to families and to small
businesses, to young people who are just starting out.
In Arkansas, we don't have much besides community banks and
a few regional bank presences, also very helpful for local
charities and schools, so we are very grateful for all you do.
Sometimes, I hear from some of my constituents in Arkansas
that banks aren't lending. That is something akin to saying
that McDonald's is not interested in selling hamburgers. I
think that most of you make your money by lending and to the
extent that you are not lending as much as you want is probably
the result of unwise decisions and actions on the part of
people in this town.
I would like to explore a point that Mr. Pinkett raised in
response to the gentleman from Texas. First, you talked about a
$100 million bank or less struggling to survive in this
environment. Could you elaborate a little bit on why that is
and also what the solution to that is if you are a bank with
less than $100 million of assets? Do you have the opportunity
to grow out of that trap or is there no solution to it?
Mr. Pinkett. I will answer your last question first. I
don't know the solution, which is why I am suggesting that
there is a real struggle there. This solution would require
additional capital. I think it is hard to attract capital at
that size because the business model is not robust enough to
cause investors to see where the institution will be able to
make a go of it in most instances.
Clearly, the cost of compliance is an issue, but it is not
just the cost of compliance; it is also the competition. With
the competition coming from large institutions, from small
institutions, from regional institutions, from unregulated
institutions, it is just hard to make that work.
Most institutions of that size have people doing two or
three jobs. If you have 15 or 20 employees, you have to have
people doing 2 or 3 jobs. The ability to learn that, to know
when one person retires who is doing three jobs, retires and
you try to replace that person, you can't find another person
who can do those three jobs that same way. If you fill that job
with three new jobs, you have already increased your overhead
costs.
So I think the revenue stream that can be generated off of
a $100 million book of business is probably just not
sufficient.
Mr. Cotton. Okay. In the debate about the size of the
community bank, just to give you some context, in Arkansas I
believe that there are fewer than 10 banks that would exceed $1
billion in assets.
There is one bank I have in mind that was started maybe 10
or 12 years ago. It was probably less than $100 million then.
It is now one of those few banks that are over $1 billion.
Do you think that kind of growth is possible in today's
environment? Can an underserved community create a new bank and
then have that grow to be a bank that serves an entire region
of a State like Arkansas?
Mr. Pinkett. I would say it is possible. I don't know that
we have created a model, though. And I think that is sort of
the issue that I would ask you to think about: how do we create
models and pathways for success?
One of the things that the regulators I think could do more
of is help lead the banks to success as opposed to simply
standing over them and pointing out where there is failure.
So I would say that turn in the regulator/bank relationship
would be an important one for future success of banks, which in
most instances should be considered small businesses, as well
as for the communities that they serve.
Mr. Cotton. And is that lack of a model do you think part
of the reason why there have been so few charters for new
community banks? I think maybe one in the last 2 or 3 years?
Mr. Pinkett. I have no idea about that one--
Mr. Cotton. Maybe if we could just go down the panel and
get--same two questions about whether that kind of growth is
possible in today's environment and is that part of the reason
why there are so few banks starting?
Mr. Loving. I cannot comment as to why, but I think there
has only been one de novo charter issued in the last 2 years,
and I think that is because of the stringent regulations
required to open an institution and the business model that you
have to have.
Unfortunately, many of the de novos that started, they
factored in their model, broker deposits, and other non-core
funding deposits and those today are not available. So that
would prohibit the growth that you saw back at the time that
you were talking about.
Mr. Kim. Growth is tricky. If any of us grow our bank too
fast, you need to look at us closely, because we may be doing
something we shouldn't be doing. It is hard to get a bank to $1
billion.
I think, as you see few charters out there, the business is
not as much fun as it was when I entered it some 30 years ago,
and it is not fun for these guys who have to spend, CEOs
spending time working on compliance.
And so I don't see a lot of people saying, ``Wow, that is a
great business that I want to be in.'' Everybody kind of hates
them right now. So why go out and start one of those? Plus, the
returns on the small banks side, as Mr. Pinkett explained, and
I think he is exactly on target--it is hard to attract capital
for that.
Now I think the way some banks get to the billion dollars
tends to be consolidation, and consolidation makes sense at
times and it is not necessarily bad.
Mr. Burgess. And I think when you are talking about a lot
of the small communities that you are talking about, I don't
think there are the financial resources or the strength of the
economy that would grow a bank that large.
So no, I don't think that is possible. And I actually have
a friend who has been running a bank for a number of years in a
community of about 10,000 people just down the road. And his
board has just asked him to sell the bank because they don't
feel like they can handle what is happening anymore.
Mr. Cotton. Thank you all for those answers, and thank you
for being here today.
Mr. Duffy. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Washington, Mr. Heck, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all very much for being here. Last week, we
heard from another part of the financial sector which brought
forward to us concerns about regulatory relief in the area of
remittances. I have read all of your testimony, and I see no
mention of it. Do you just not engage in this activity or is it
of such a de minimis concern you didn't care to point it out?
Mr. Loving. From our particular situation, it is not
something that is a problem for us. We don't engage in it, sir.
Mr. Heck. No one?
Mr. Pinkett. Our own participation is through banking
customers who are, and so we have some compliance issues around
it, but it is not a major issue.
Mr. Heck. All right. Then I would like to move on, if I
may. In the last several years, the largest banks have grown,
some would say dramatically, some would say astronomically in
their market share of retail lending.
Very quickly, what do you think are the major factors that
caused that to occur? Maybe start with Mr. Burgess and go down,
but be quick if you would, please.
Mr. Burgess. You are talking about the larger banks?
Mr. Heck. Yes. Their market share of retail lending has
gone through the roof.
Mr. Burgess. From our standpoint, they are set up to be
more or less an assembly-line operation. A lot of the products
on the retail side have become commodity-type products rather
than customized-type products.
And so, the banks like us are more of a customized type
shop. We don't do high volume. They do, and they can offer
lower rates, which is going to win out with the masses.
Mr. Kim. Yes, and I would agree with that, and maybe echo
that serving consumers is difficult and it is costly because
the loans are smaller and some of these large banks with the
way consumers want to interact with banks now online, much more
quickly, not so much coming into the branch, that is going to
be in favor of the largest banks.
And I also think the mortgage business has been one that
there has just been a lot of consolidation and that is why they
own so much of that market. I am not so sure that banks our
size have lost it. It has been more consolidation making it
look like they have it.
Mr. Loving. I can say that it is probably a couple of
factors. One is based upon the size and the perception of too-
big-to-fail. There is a security movement or a movement because
of security and there is also a cost beneficial to them from
the funding side.
Again, as I said earlier, whether it is 20 basis points or
80 basis points, they can certainly price a product cheaper
than we can in many cases and essentially buy the business. And
so, I think a lot of it is because of the perception of too-
big-to-fail.
Mr. Pinkett. Cost of capital, cost of processing, cost of
technology, ability to market broadly, and access to
securitizations. They just have a different business model than
we have.
Mr. Heck. Thank you. That was very insightful, and I
appreciate it.
Lastly, Mr. Green made reference to self-identifying as a
friend of both credit unions and community banks, which some in
this town would have you believe is a mutually exclusive
characteristic.
I want to make a point. If any of you, or as I strongly
suspect, all of you, have ever engaged in a private
conversation with your families or your colleagues at work in
which you expressed frustration with the inability of the
Members of the United States Congress, to sit down like adults
and solve problems because there was the red side and the blue
side and where is the best interest of America when it comes in
all of this, then I frankly would just encourage you, the next
time you are so tempted, to play back to you the other side of
that.
Here we have a circumstance that notwithstanding the fact
that you compete for market share, there is consensus up here--
there is no doubt about it in my mind--that some form of
regulatory relief is in order for both community banks and
credit unions.
Next time you are tempted to have that conversation about
Congress, remember this, if you would please: You are leaving
on the table a phenomenal amount of power and influence to do
what, for example, Labor and the Chamber has done with respect
to immigration reform, to come together and figure out where
your mutual interests are so that we can do our job to grant
you that which I think you so eloquently have made the case.
Again, thank you very much for your presence here today.
Mr. Duffy. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also want to add my thanks to the members of the panel
for your testimony, which is a great help to the committee and
to the communities that you serve as well, as well as to your
industry. I want to follow up on that issue of the need for
regulatory relief.
Mr. Pinkett, in your testimony earlier today, I found it
very insightful that you are talking about when the regulators
come to your community bank, to your institution, with the full
weight of all of their regulations and the examinations and the
sort of impact that has on your ability to operate in the real
world as a community bank trying to make loans, trying to be
responsive to the customers that you serve and that you want to
serve.
I am hearing the same thing from the community banks in
Pennsylvania in the communities which I represent. I have a
comment here from a community banker in Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, not far from where you are in New Jersey.
He says, ``We don't believe that the regulators understand
that their actions and the way they go about their business
does impact our ability and willingness to lend and conduct
commerce. They just look at their job as enforcing the
regulations and not the negative impact of their actions and
what they have in the economy. While this condition has always
existed, in the current environment, it is material.''
And Mr. Barr earlier was talking about, I think he was
discussing the issue of the lack of new charters, the
consolidation. We are losing banks. People don't want to take
the risk of creating a small community bank in this regulatory
environment that we have.
The last de novo bank in Pennsylvania, I think, was about 5
years ago. It is a small bank in my community, Monument Bank.
It started 5 years ago. They have 40 employees. More than half
of the employees are earning $50,000 or more, but what I am
hearing for the last 5 years is that nobody wants to start a
bank under the current regulatory environment.
Those banks that exist don't want to expand. Any new jobs
that are created are jobs that are designed directly to deal
with all of these massive government regulations coming out of
Washington.
If there was one thing that we could do here, on this
committee and in this Congress, to help reverse that trend to
get people to start community banks and take those risks, which
ultimately will help the community, what would that one thing
be?
Mr. Pinkett?
Mr. Pinkett. I would say, the one thing I would ask is that
you help the regulators, encourage regulators to recognize
their dual mission. They have to protect the economy and so we
need regulations. They have to keep us from making bad
decisions that would harm the institutions, shareholders, and
of course the taxpayers. So we need regulations.
But they have to do that in a way that helps us build the
banks so that we can better service the customers. We need
regulations for consumers and so that we don't offer products
that are harmful because some products are out there that are
really harmful to consumers and they need to be regulated out
because not everyone is of the same character as the folks you
selected today, and they are doing business in harmful ways.
But, we have to do that in a way that encourages the banks
to be successful, that allows them to be successful, and
encourages them to do a better job of managing the risk
associated with this business because it is a high-risk
business.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. Loving?
Mr. Loving. I would say that from a regulatory perspective,
tiered regulation or scaled regulation is imperative to our
industry. The risk model that I have and the risk model of one
of the largest megabanks is significantly different. Most
community banks across the country operate in a different risk
model, yet we have to face the same regulation that the largest
of the large face and the costs related to it. So I would say
tiered regulation or scaled regulation to the risk and size of
the institution.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Mr. Kim?
Mr. Kim. Yes, I would just say the one-size-fits-all, as
Mr. Loving said, and the more--one-size-fits-all doesn't work
and we need clarity and we need coordination to the extent
there is overlap with the regulators and we want to follow the
rules. We may not like the rules, but we will follow them
because that is what we do.
Bankers--most of us are kind of rule followers. We don't
want to get in trouble, so you have to make it clear for us,
and that will enable us to comply and then we get opportunities
like this to try to make some changes around the edges where
there needs to be change.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I mentioned in my opening statement about
the anxiety I have been hearing with respect to the QM rule. I
have this small community bank in my hometown of Levittown.
Mr. Terry Sager wrote to me about his concerns about no
longer being able to lend outside the box, and Mr. Barr was
talking about what he was referring to as character loans that
they make in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. We make them in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as well.
Those loans that I guess you are being told now you are not
really going to be able to make them. You look somebody in the
eye, you know that they are going to be able to make that
payment. You know that they have a good idea and that they are
going to be successful, but you are now being told you can't do
it.
Any anecdotal, any particular case you want to talk about,
a loan that you were able to make in the past that somebody was
able to go on and build a business and create jobs that you are
concerned under these new QM rules you are not to be able to
make?
Mr. Pinkett. Can I just say--if there is someone who can
look a person in the eye and know they are going to repay the
loan, I would like to hire that person. So some of this is
just--I think just a little too far.
I hear bankers say that also, but at the end of the day,
there has to be some analysis and assessment about the
capability of the person whether it is a consumer or business
owner and that should be fair and consistent.
And I think all we are saying is--piggybacking on what Mr.
Kim said--let's find rules that we would like to follow as
opposed to rules that we have to follow because he doesn't want
to run his bank into the ground. He doesn't want the taxpayers
picking up the tab for his work. He doesn't want to explain to
his kids how he was a lousy manager and a steward of resources
in this country any more than anyone in any of the regulatory
agencies wants him to have that conversation.
So I think we have to be careful about going too far in the
other direction also, which is to say that looking you in the
eye, I can tell you are going to pay me back. I think we need
some rules. We need some regulations, let's just make them fair
and reasonable and then we will all want to follow them.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you.
I want to thank the panel for your time and testimony
today. We appreciate you coming in. The committee is grateful.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
Without objection, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 16, 2013

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

