- THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 24, 2014

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 113-86

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
91-150 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California, Vice     MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
SPENCER BACHUS, Alabama, Chairman    CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
Emeritus                         NYDIA M. VELAAZQUEZ, New York
PETER T. KING, New York              BRAD SHERMAN, California
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  RUBEEN HINOJOSA, Texas
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              CAROLYN McCARTHY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
MICHELE BACHMANN, Minnesota          AL GREEN, Texas
KEVIN McCARTHY, California           EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
BILL POSEY, Florida                  KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
MICHAEL G. FITZPATRICK,              ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
Pennsylvania                     JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
LYNN A. WESTMORELAND, Georgia        GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         JOHN C. CARNEY, Jr., Delaware
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROBERT HURT, Virginia                DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  PATRICK MURPHY, Florida
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DENNY HECK, Washington
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania
LUKE MESSER, Indiana

Shannon McGahn, Staff Director
James H. Clinger, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 24, 2014................................................     1
Appendix:
June 24, 2014................................................    61

WITNESSES
Tuesday, June 24, 2014

Lew, Hon. Jacob J., Secretary, U.S. Department of the Treasury...     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Lew, Hon. Jacob J............................................    62

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Lew, Hon. Jacob J.:
2014 Annual Report of the Financial Stability Oversight
Council....................................................    81
Written responses to questions submitted by Chairman
Hensarling.................................................   228
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Huizenga...................................................   250
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Hurt.......................................................   253
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Luetkemeyer................................................   255
Written responses to questions submitted by Representative
Stivers....................................................   256

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

----------

Tuesday, June 24, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hensarling, Bachus, Royce,
Capito, Garrett, Neugebauer, McHenry, Bachmann, Pearce, Posey,
Westmoreland, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Hurt, Stivers,
Stutzman, Mulvaney, Hultgren, Ross, Pittenger, Wagner, Barr,
Cotton, Rothfus, Messer; Waters, Maloney, Sherman, Capuano,
Hinojosa, McCarthy of New York, Lynch, Scott, Green, Cleaver,
Moore, Perlmutter, Himes, Peters, Carney, Sewell, Foster,
Kildee, Sinema, Beatty, Heck, and Horsford.
Chairman Hensarling. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the committee at any time.
This hearing is for the purpose of receiving the annual
report of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to
be presented by the Honorable Jacob J. Lew, Secretary of the
Treasury and Chairman of the Financial Stability Oversight
Council.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Beginning this morning, we welcome back Secretary Lew to
discuss FSOC, but before we do discuss FSOC, I would be remiss
if I did not bring up the continuing scandal at the Internal
Revenue Service, an agency that is part of Treasury. Mr.
Secretary, 13 months ago you appeared before us and said, ``My
highest priority is to restore confidence in the IRS.'' I think
we know, Mr. Secretary, both of us, that has not yet occurred.
Back then President Obama said of the IRS scandal, ``The
misconduct is inexcusable, and Americans are right to be angry
about it, and I am angry about it.'' He said his Administration
would cooperate with Congress to uncover the truth. That is
what he said, but regrettably, that is not what has happened.
In just the last few days, we have learned the
Administration has known since at least February that years'
worth of IRS emails of eight IRS employees at the epicenter of
the scandal have simply vanished. How terribly convenient for
the Administration, but how inconvenient for the American
people who expect equal protection under the law.
The American people, regrettably but understandably, are
becoming increasingly cynical and fearful of their government.
There is a growing resentment of one set of rules for
Washington and another set of rules for everyone else. In other
words, no one believes that simply saying, ``Sorry, I have lost
my emails,'' is an excuse the IRS would accept from a taxpayer
being put through a torturous audit.
Mr. Secretary, I trust you agree that the American people
deserve better, and it is past time for openness and
transparency from this Administration, which you told this
committee 13 months ago was your highest priority. It is also
past time for openness and transparency at FSOC, which you
chair, Mr. Secretary. While you and other Administration
officials habitually cite the purported dangers of financial
stability posed by the shadow banking system, you ignore those
presented by the shadow regulatory system of which FSOC is
front and center.
Indeed, with the exception of agencies dealing in
classified information related to national security, FSOC may
very well be the Nation's least transparent Federal entity. The
public cannot view their proceedings because two-thirds of
those proceedings were conducted in private executive sessions.
And when the minutes are produced, on average they weigh in at
a mere 5 pages long, with half of the pages devoted to
memorializing attendees' names and resolutions considered.
Better Markets, a public interest group that consistently
advocates for more regulation of our financial sector, has
stated, ``The FSOC's proceedings make the Politburo look open
by comparison. No one in America even knows who they are. At
the few open meetings they have, they snap their fingers, and
it is over, and they are all scripted. They treat their
information as it were state secrets.''
To begin to remedy this sad situation is one of the reasons
this committee has ordered H.R. 4387, the FSOC Transparency and
Accountability Act, favorably reported to the House. The reason
transparency and accountability are so important is because
FSOC can designate practically any large financial firm in our
Nation as a systemically important financial institution, a
SIFI, and thus render effective control over it. Thus, it has
the ability to render great damage to our economy and set back
the dreams of tens of millions of our unemployed and
underemployed Americans who are counting on their capital
markets to work for them.
Recently Douglas Holtz-Eakin, the former Director of the
CBO, has estimated that designating asset managers as SIFIs
could cost investors as much as 25 percent of their return on
their investments over the long term, or approximately $108,000
per investor. In other words, as it operates in the shadows,
FSOC can take away the seed capital necessary to launch a small
business or to send a child to college. That is both unfair and
unwise.
And while FSOC seems dead set on trying to find systemic
risk where no one else seems to find it, a review of their
latest report indicates that they are willfully blind to the
largest sources of systemic risk, with hardly a mention of
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, who were at the epicenter of the
last financial crisis, and without the leadership of the
Administration to end permanent taxpayer subsidies, they are
certain to be at the center of the next financial crisis.
There has been no mention of the Federal Government itself,
which is $17 trillion in debt and growing, with more debt
incurred under this Administration than in our Nation's first
200 years. Our offices are all awash. The CBO and independent
reports say the pace of spending is unsustainable, but rather
than rein in government spending or prioritize interest
payments on the debt, the Administration regrettably turns a
blind eye and has even threatened to allow default on our
sovereign debt.
This committee has also passed H.R. 4881, to place a 1-year
moratorium on further designations of nonbank SIFIs. Again, Mr.
Secretary, I would call on FSOC to cease and desist with these
designations so Congress can have time to conduct effective
oversight and get answers to questions that both Republicans
and Democrats have raised about FSOC's decision-making process.
I now recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Today I am very pleased that you are here, Secretary Lew,
and I welcome you back. And I assure you that we are not poised
here today to talk about the IRS. That has been done in our
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee. We don't have
documents. We don't have emails. We don't have any information
relative to that issue. We gather here today to receive your
annual report of the Financial Stability Oversight Council,
FSOC, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act.
To be honest, I am surprised to see so many of my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle with us today given
that the FSOC has joined the ranks of the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, the Export-Import Bank, and the Terrorism
Risk Insurance Act in becoming the latest target in a
relentless Republican effort to tear down important engines of
job creation, economic growth, and consumer protection.
I didn't think my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
would have any interest in hearing about the Council's progress
or in your views of the financial stability of the United
States. In fact, just last week this committee approved two
measures that, under the guise of transparency, would
compromise the FSOC and erode the important role it plays.
These partisan bills were nothing more than an effort to derail
this cornerstone of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act.
Mr. Chairman, the economic collapse of 2008 resulted in the
greatest loss of wealth in a generation. Starting with the
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, our economy quickly ground to a
halt, leaving the American taxpayers to clean up the mess. All
told, the financial crisis resulted in the destruction of more
than $9 trillion in wealth and cost each American household
approximately $50,000, while unemployment exploded throughout
the country.
One problem leading up to the crisis was that no one in the
private sector or in government saw the big picture or had the
responsibility to deal with emerging threats before they caused
damage to our economy. That is why Democrats created the
Financial Stability Oversight Council, that is FSOC, to fill
that void and serve as an advance warning system to identify
and address systemic risks posed by large complex companies,
products, and activities before they threaten the economy.
In plain English, FSOC is charged with looking at every
aspect of our financial system for possible weaknesses and
risk, something that did not happen in the lead-up to the
crisis. The Council's work is critical to ensuring that our
financial regulators are working collaboratively to identify
and respond to emerging threats to financial stability.
It remains a mystery to me why Republicans are spending the
few legislative days we have left in this session pushing
partisan legislation that would hamstring the FSOC's ability to
protect homeowners, consumers, and the American economy. And it
is obvious that, like with CFPB, Ex-Im, and TRIA, the
Republicans' goal is to stop the program from its important
work even if that means ending important protections for the
American people in our economy.
Secretary Lew, I look forward to your insight on areas of
systemic risk the Council has identified, particularly related
to mortgage servicing, alternatives to reference rates like
LIBOR, and perceptions of ``too-big-to-fail.'' As we hear
additional details from you about the risks identified in this
year's report, I will be interested to hear whether Republicans
believe FSOC should take action to mitigate those risks or turn
a blind eye and invite another crisis.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I am looking forward to hearing more
from you about how we address concerns that I and other Members
of Congress have raised regarding the transparency of the FSOC
designation process. I am sympathetic to these concerns and
would like to hear what steps you have taken and your
suggestions on how to increase transparency in a way that
continues to carry out FSOC's mission. I look forward to the
Secretary's testimony and his insight on all of these issues,
as well as what the FSOC is currently doing to monitor systemic
risk and promote financial stability.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from West Virginia, Mrs. Capito, chairwoman of our
Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit Subcommittee, for 1
minute.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Lew, for being with us today.
We are going to learn more about the FSOC, which was
created by Dodd-Frank with the mission of monitoring systemic
risk. This designation can have a significant effect on the
institution by requiring increased levels of regulatory
capital. The costs associated with heightened credential
standards are quite clear; however, the processes and
methodologies for determining a nonbank firm's systemic risk
are much less clear.
In fact, in the recent designation of Prudential Insurance,
the one member of the FSOC with significant insurance industry
experience argued that there was little evidence to support the
notion that a large life insurer poses a systemic risk.
Furthermore, we know little about how an institution's
designation will affect the end users.
Another issue I would like to discuss with you, Mr.
Secretary, is, are there arbitrary thresholds in Dodd-Frank
that determine if a financial institution is systemically
significant? There has been a lot of discussion about the
different thresholds, and I would like to dig deeper on that
with you. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, ranking member of our Capital Markets Subcommittee,
for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters, and welcome, Secretary Lew. I believe I speak on behalf
of all New Yorkers when we say we are so proud of you and your
many years of public service.
This is an important hearing. The Financial Stability
Oversight Council was one of the keys of the Dodd-Frank
financial reform, and it provides a forum for all of our
financial regulators to come together to discuss the risks that
they each see in the markets they regulate, but from a broad
perspective, from a systemic perspective. It also requires them
to publish an annual report that describes in detail the
emerging threats that they see in the financial markets, and
this is tremendously important.
It depends on what report you look at: the ranking member
said $9 trillion; I have seen some reports that said that we
suffered $16-$18 trillion in loss to our economy; Christina
Romer testified before this Congress that the economic shocks
we experienced in the last recession were 3 times greater than
the Great Depression, and we managed it better.
But also, economists have testified before this panel and
other panels that it was the only financial crisis in our
history that could have been prevented by better financial
market overview and regulation. We didn't keep up with the new
products. We didn't keep up with the new trends. So FSOC was
created to help us prevent another serious, damaging, painful
economic loss that we could have prevented with better
financial management.
I look forward to reading your report. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Garrett, chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee, for 2
minutes.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today FSOC has become a sort of super-regulator whose SIFI
designation is effectively an implicit taxpayer guarantee. Over
time, I believe ``too-big-to-fail'' SIFIs will use their
capital cost advantage to drive smaller competitors out of
business. In short, FSOC now picks the winners and the losers
in our financial markets. As FSOC aggressively asserts itself
over more and more sectors of our economy, insurance companies
and asset managers most recently, they owe the American people
an explanation for what they are doing.
Despite the recently released 147-page FSOC report, the
vast majority of which is a rehash of basic economic
information available on any financial Web site, FSOC's
decision-making process remains a black box. Citizens whose
livelihoods are directly affected by FSOC have little idea why
FSOC makes the decisions it does.
As a Congressman, I can be briefed on the most sensitive
intelligence in the national security information, but I am not
allowed to even sit quietly and listen in on an FSOC meeting.
And companies that are designated by FSOC have only the vaguest
notion of what aspects of their operation led FSOC to deem them
systemically important. Without that knowledge, of course, they
could do nothing to reduce their own systemic risk.
And more importantly, when Republican Members have asked
questions of you and of FSOC in the past, the answers we
receive have always been bland and evasive talking points
designed simply to give us the impression of responsiveness
without actually ever answering any of our questions, Mr.
Secretary.
In fact, this committee asked you specifically last month
for all the documents and all the communications between you,
your Department, and the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and I
have everything that you supplied us with right here in this
box in response to your promise to supply us with all of those
documents. We got absolutely nothing from you when you promised
us that you would supply us with that information.
Mr. Secretary, this stonewalling by you and this Department
must stop. We have to get real answers from you and from
Treasury, and I hope that today, the process begins.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Perlmutter, for 1\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, it is good to see you here. I want to
thank you, and I want to thank the Administration. Since the
President took over, since Dodd-Frank was passed, the stock
market is up 10,000 points at about $1.3 billion per point. My
math takes that to $13 trillion. Home prices are up, IRAs are
up, and we put 10 million people back to work, and I just want
to thank you for that.
We had kind of an age-old debate a few weeks ago. Mr.
Scalia was here saying that Dodd-Frank and FSOC had too much
discretion. We had members of the banking community saying
there was too little discretion and too arbitrary lines of
demarcation within the bill.
I have two areas I would like you to talk about today:
first, the living will, what you are doing on the major
institutions to find out if they fall apart, how you are going
to take them apart; and second, I want you to talk a little bit
about the GSEs.
I am one of those who thinks that with proper underwriting,
the GSEs actually work very well, and the private market will
come and go as they think they can make money in mortgages. And
now, there isn't a lot that has to be done with respect to the
GSEs.
So I would like you to talk about living wills and GSEs,
and with that, I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Honorable Jacob J.
Lew, Secretary of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
Secretary Lew has testified before our committee on a number of
occasions, so I trust he needs no further introduction. Without
objection, Secretary Lew's written statement will be made a
part of the record.
Mr. Secretary, you are now recognized for your oral
presentation. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JACOB J. LEW, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Secretary Lew. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on the Financial Stability Oversight Council's 2014 annual
report.
Nearly 4 years ago, President Obama signed into law the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act,
creating the strongest safeguards for consumers and investors
since the aftermath of the Great Depression. As everyone here
recognizes, a stable, thriving financial sector is critical to
our economic growth and prosperity, and that is why these
historic safeguards were established.
Today our financial system is more resilient, confidence in
our markets is robust, and the agencies charged with protecting
consumers and investors are in a strong position to respond to
emerging threats that could hurt our economy, damage Main
Street businesses, and destroy jobs.
One of the lessons from the financial crisis was
recognizing how important it is to detect and mitigate risks to
financial stability. In the lead-up to the crisis, individual
regulators focused on individual institutions, functions or
markets. This siloed approach allowed risks to fall through the
cracks. Congress changed that by creating the Financial
Stability Oversight Council. Now regulators are obligated by
statute to collectively monitor the stability of the entire
U.S. financial system, to look over the horizon to identify
potential risks, and to respond to threats that have been
detected. In short, the Council's work to detect possible risk
is not only mandated by law; it is sound economic policy.
That is why it both defies common sense and ignores recent
history that some have suggested curtailing the Council's
ability to analyze information regarding particular financial
sectors, firms or activities. The Council cannot simply cordon
off any sector or activity that could pose a threat. That would
be a dereliction of its responsibilities and a complete
disregard for the very purpose of the Council.
Some have even gone so far as to suggest that the Council
should be prohibited from simply asking questions about certain
activities or companies that could threaten financial
stability. We have to be allowed to ask questions. As everyone
here knows, during the run-up to the financial crisis,
regulators should have asked more questions about institutions
and activities, not fewer.
To be clear, asking questions does not equal regulatory
action. Sometimes questions result in a conclusion that the
Council does not need to act; that it needs to examine the
issue further, or that it needs to gather more information. The
Council asks questions with an open mind and without a
predetermined outcome. In that vein, the Council's procedures
are transparent. It has put in place a comprehensive delivery
of approach to its evaluation of risks, and it solicits public
input and carefully considers all points of view.
In fact, the Council's annual report exemplifies the
Council's commitment to transparency and collaboration. It
reflects a collective analysis and conclusions of Council
members regarding the key risks to financial stability, and is
an important example of how the Council shares information
about its work with Congress and the public.
Each annual report also provides a road map for the
Council's agenda for the upcoming year, what areas it will
focus on, what areas will likely require additional attention,
and how the Council expects to address them.
This year's report focuses on nine areas that warrant
continued attention and possibly further action from its
members. These areas include wholesale funding markets, the
housing finance system, cybersecurity threats, risk-taking by
large financial institutions, and potential interest rate
volatility.
Before closing, let me point out that since the Council's
last annual report, we have reached a number of key milestones
in financial reform implementation. That means that homebuyers,
retirees, and investors have better safeguards and protections.
To that end, the Volcker Rule has been finalized, qualified
mortgage standards have gone into effect, tough capital
standards are now in place, over-the-counter derivatives are
now moving onto electronic trading platforms and into
centralized clearing, fines have been imposed on abusive
actions related to manipulation of LIBOR and other financial
benchmarks, and the international community is making progress
on increasing the stability of the global financial system.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the members of the Council
and all of the staff involved with the 2014 annual report for
their tireless work and commitment. As the Council fulfills its
obligations to strengthen our financial system and limit risk
to our economy, we will continue to work with the committee and
with Congress to make real progress for all Americans.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Lew can be found on
page 62 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes himself for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to start off with a matter that
I left off with during your last appearance, for which I did
not receive an answer. It is not a ``gotcha'' question, and
when I receive the answer, I will certainly be fair and give
you a brief moment to give it some context.
As you know, 11 months ago the G20's FSB, of which Treasury
is a preliminary member, designated 3 U.S. insurers as global
SIFIs. Did Treasury support these designations, yes or no?
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned the last time I
testified, the FSB operates by consensus, and the U.S.
participants in the FSB joined in the consensus at that time.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. So Treasury considered in the
designation, correct?
Secretary Lew. We joined in the consensus. There was not a
vote, but we were part of the consensus.
But I need to really make the point quite clearly that
action in the FSB and action in the FSOC are very different
matters. The FSB is not a national authority. It doesn't
designate institutions in a way that has a legal effect. And
the FSOC, when it makes its determination, does it on a
parallel path. Now, it may ask and answer questions in a
similar way, but it doesn't necessarily.
Chairman Hensarling. Let me ask this question, Mr.
Secretary: Can a financial institution pose, in your mind, a
systemic risk to the global economy without representing a
systemic risk to our domestic economy?
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, I think the question of
designation is a moment in time and based on analysis it had at
that time. In the case of a designation of a specific
institution, the process at FSOC goes through a very detailed
process.
Chairman Hensarling. I understand there may be two
different processes. What I am simply asking is in Treasury's
opinion, if one is a potential systemic threat to the global
economy, must they necessarily also present a systemic risk to
the domestic economy?
Secretary Lew. And the reason I am answering your question
the way I am is that in making a determination at the FSB
level, it is based on the information and the analysis you have
at that point. What you go through during an FSOC determination
process is a very detailed exchange of information ultimately
with a company--
Chairman Hensarling. So you are simply telling me that two
different processes may lead to two different answers?
Secretary Lew. It could.
Chairman Hensarling. So Treasury, then, you are telling me,
could support a designation of the exact same firm as
systemically risky to the global economy but not systemically
risky to the domestic economy?
Secretary Lew. The action taken in the FSB does not
designate a company in the same way that FSOC does. So the only
national authority that can designate a company for regulation
is FSOC.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. Well, Mr. Secretary, my time is
limited. Let me move on.
I think you know that Bloomberg--different subject--
reported that when the Chairman of the SEC told the FSOC that
they wanted to release the Office of Financial Research Asset
Management study, which, as you well know, has been widely
panned, Bloomberg reported that you personally called the SEC
Chair ``to express your displeasure.'' Is that story accurate?
Secretary Lew. I am not going to get into the details of
private conversations that I may have had with other members of
the FSOC, but--
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. Let me ask the question this
way: Did you favor or oppose releasing the study to the public?
Secretary Lew. My view was that the OFR study was going to
be released to the public, and the public was going to be
commenting on it. And the question of whether or not it would
be released in any kind of a formal way asking for comments by
an agency other than OFR is a different question.
Chairman Hensarling. Should the OFR--
Secretary Lew. There was never a question that the OFR
study would be published.
Chairman Hensarling. Should the OFR's work be immune from
public comment?
Secretary Lew. No. On the contrary, the OFR report was
meant to be public, and it was meant to elicit a public debate,
and that debate occurred. So I very much believe that it should
have been public, it was public, and the only question was
should it be formally put out by one or another agency for
comment in a formal way?
Chairman Hensarling. Last year you said, ``It is
unacceptable to be in a place where `too-big-to-fail' has not
been ended. If we get to the end of this year and we cannot
with an honest, straight face say that we have ended `too-big-
to-fail,' we are going to have to look at other options.''
I think you may know that a few months ago your predecessor
Secretary Geithner was asked if ``too-big-to-fail'' still
exists. His answer, ``Yes, of course it does.''
Using your words, can you tell this committee today with an
honest, straight face that we have ended ``too-big-to-fail?''
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, we have made enormous
progress. I am not sure we will know the answer to that
question until we have the next financial crisis. That is the
challenge that we all have in asking have we gone far enough.
But I will say that there is more work under way to continue to
look at the areas where we can have more protection, things
like supplemental--
Chairman Hensarling. We have heard from multiple witnesses
that the Volcker Rule will significantly reduce liquidity in
the corporate bond market. The Financial Times has reported
that the Federal Reserve is very concerned about the potential
of large-scale withdrawals from investors and managers of
corporate fund bonds. They are concerned about the illiquidity
of the corporate bond market. So it strikes me as somewhat
ironic that the Volcker Rule, which has been touted by you and
others as necessary to ensure financial stability, may now be a
part of financial instability.
This committee has requested information from Treasury and
FSOC regarding the status of our corporate bond markets. We
haven't received anything as yet. So has the FSOC conducted an
analysis of the systemic risk that can result from a lack of
liquidity in the corporate bond market?
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, we obviously are just in the
early months after the final publication of a Volcker Rule that
is final. It hasn't taken effect in the marketplace yet, so it
is premature to judge what its impact on the market is.
I think it is actually quite an accomplishment that five
independent regulators published an identical rule on the same
day providing clarity in an area that badly needed clarity so
that there would not be uncertainty in the industry. I have
actually received quite a lot of positive comment that that was
the result.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the Chair has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Some have criticized the FSOC's designation process as
being opaque. The GAO also made several recommendations to the
FSOC to improve its transparency. Would you please describe how
the FSOC has addressed these recommendations? Would you also
describe how the FSOC changed this transparency policy last
month? Is the FSOC appropriately balancing the need for
transparency against the need to protect sensitive market and
supervisory information?
This is an issue I would like to get behind us and deal
with it in ways that would allow FSOC to do its work. And so I
am hoping that you have not only given considerable thought to
this, but to help us to understand how we can better make sure
that you can carry out your mission and not have those that you
are regulating and giving oversight to believe that somehow you
are trying to do all this in secret. And I don't want to spend
all of my time on this, because I really do want to get to
nonbank market servicing. So would you please respond to the
first part of the question?
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman Waters, I think that the
values of openness and transparency are very important to all
of us. We have constructed a process in FSOC which I believe
respects and reflects those values, and it gives an enormous
opportunity for companies through the designation process to
engage with FSOC without prematurely making public things that
would not be appropriate to be a public discussion.
Much of the discussion in a designation process involves
reviewing the internal information that is the kind of
supervisory information with which regulators work. When we get
to the final stage of the designation process, there is a back-
and-forth that is quite voluminous with the company where the
company is sharing proprietary information, information that
gets to the essence of their business.
So I think what we need to balance is a process that
requires a certain amount of confidentiality with transparency.
We just recently made some changes, and it is a young
organization that is continuing to evolve where we are noticing
in advance topics to be discussed. We are putting out minutes
of meetings, notes for meetings afterwards, and we will
continue to try to perfect the process. But I don't think the
answer is to say it should all be a completely open public
discussion or the inquiry itself would be stymied.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Secretary, I would like to ask you to make
sure that the staff of FSOC gets what the staff of this
committee, and I would hope that the chairman would agree, so
that you could walk through whatever changes you have made--
Secretary Lew. I would be happy to do that.
Ms. Waters. --in order to have more transparency. We need
to understand that, because as you know, with H.R. 4387, this
bill would subject FSOC to the Sunshine Act, expand its
membership and change voting protocols for Commission and Board
members, and allow Members of Congress to attend and
participate in FSOC closed-door meetings.
Now, I think this is ridiculous, and I want to get off of
that, and so if you will help us to understand more about what
you have done, then hopefully we can engage with you about what
we think about what you have done and maybe have some
suggestions for you.
With that, do you have a moment to talk about what you have
done in taking a look at nonbank mortgage services?
Secretary Lew. The question of mortgage servicers is a very
important one. As they have moved out of banks into more
independent businesses, the challenge is how to maintain
consumer protections and oversight, and how to make sure that
very important backbone to our mortgage finance system
functions well.
I think if you look at the actions taken by the CFPB, they
have taken on the role of consumer protection oversight in a
very important way, and I think that is an area we have to
continue to look at, understand, and, if we need to take more
action, discuss what that is.
Obviously, the mortgage system requires that there are
servicers who are reliable, who are there to handle the
transactions between the borrower and the holder of the
mortgage, and it is something that we cannot have be fragile.
So it is something we are very much watching, and we think that
the actions taken by the CFPB are very positive ones, and we
will continue to review the situation.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Secretary, let me just say, one of the
things we discovered with the subprime meltdown was a lot of
the problems were with the servicers: the loss of paper; the
lack of understanding what their jobs really were; the
inability to make determinations about whether or not people
had sufficient income to meet a proposed modification; and on
and on and on. So this is a serious area that--
Secretary Lew. It is a very important area. I totally
agree.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Garrett, chairman of our Capital Markets
Subcommittee.
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Secretary, as you know, the chairman, some
other members of the panel, and I have asked for specific
documents from you, and we did so over a month ago, and you
assured us that you would provide them. You formally responded
only last Friday, and you did so with a nonresponse. The
response contained none of the requested documents.
Mr. Secretary, this committee has to subpoena those
documents. Can you promise us here today that any emails that
make up those documents or files that we have requested will
not fall victim to any mysterious or unexplained hard drive
crash? And are you doing anything now to protect those
documents that we have requested and you promised that you
would supply, but after a month you still have not done so?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, as you noted, I did respond
along with the Chairman of the SEC and the Chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board to your inquiry. In that letter, we said
our staff would work together to--
Mr. Garrett. So will you protect those documents? Because
you did not provide any of the documents that we requested.
Secretary Lew. Yes. And as the letter indicates, our staff
will work with your staff on--
Mr. Garrett. Are you protecting those documents?
Secretary Lew. We routinely protect our documents.
Mr. Garrett. We know the routine over at the IRS. Is yours
a better routine than they have?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, we have--
Mr. Garrett. Okay. That is a ``no.''
Secretary Lew. No, Congressman, that is not a ``no.''
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Chairman, I would suggest--
Secretary Lew. We protect our documents.
Mr. Garrett. I would suggest that we consider issuing
subpoenas sooner rather than later, given how fast emails are
disappearing within the Treasury Department.
I have a question for you from home. This is a little bit
off topic. But if the IRS is conducting an audit of a law-
abiding taxpayer citizen--and I have gotten this a lot over the
last several weeks--and the IRS asks for documents, and they do
not come, and they say that they don't have them anymore
because their hard drive crashed, the IRS and your response to
them would be, that is okay because that is the routine system?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, as Commissioner Koskinen
testified last week, if that happens to a taxpayer, the
practice is for the IRS to work with the taxpayer based on
documents that are available to proceed--
Mr. Garrett. So I will take that as--and so we are going to
be working with you, and that is why I suggested that we issue
subpoenas now because you have not supplied the information
that you have promised to this committee.
Mr. Chairman, I don't have any confidence in this
Administration to be able to conduct a fair, impartial, and
thorough investigation into that matter, nor to supply the
information this committee has requested repeatedly. And for
that reason, I do believe that a special prosecutor should be
appointed to find the truth as to what actually happened there,
and for us to go forward as quickly as possible with regard to
subpoenas.
Now, to return to the matter at hand on FSOC and
designations, the chairman asked you a very simple question
with regard to consensus. I think most people watching
understand what ``consensus'' means. It means that the parties
at a table consent to something. That is the root word of
consensus. So FSB in that process said there was a consensus on
the matter, and his simple question was, did you consent? And
you did not give an answer. Can you say whether, when they went
around the table figuratively, did you consent? Did you say
yes, no, or I really don't know what to answer?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I answered the question. I said
the U.S. Government representatives joined in the consensus.
Mr. Garrett. So you said yes?
Secretary Lew. I answered the question.
Mr. Garrett. No. And so when you made that determination,
the chairman also asked the question, is it possible for a
company to be globally designated but not to be designated
nationally by a SIFI? And the answer to that one is also yes?
Secretary Lew. Yes. I said that they are parallel
processes, and the FSOC, which is the national authority, would
make its own determination based on the process conducted at
FSOC.
Mr. Garrett. So a company could be globally important but
not here in the United States? How is that possible?
Secretary Lew. The process of the FSB designation is one
that is not binding on national authorities. Obviously, it is
something--
Mr. Garrett. Binding doesn't matter . It is whether or not
that company is actually systemically important on a global
basis.
Secretary Lew. That is the reason that the FSOC goes
through a very detailed analysis. There is more information--
Mr. Garrett. Oh. So does that mean that the FSB process is
not a detailed analysis?
Secretary Lew. No, I am not saying it is not a detailed
analysis, and I am not saying that the outcome would be
different. I am just saying that there is a parallel national
process that takes place and--
Mr. Garrett. In a legal matter, when a judge has made a
decision in one case, they oftentimes have to recuse themselves
when the same parties are involved in that or the same issues
come up. Lawyers have to do that all the time. Will you recuse
yourself from that deliberation process when these same
companies come up for designation on the SIFI basis even though
they are different processes?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, the responsibility that all of
us at FSOC have is to review all of the information and make a
decision based on the information presented in the FSOC
process, which is what I will do.
Mr. Garrett. So, the answer to that is ``no.''
Secretary Lew. I will do my job reviewing all the documents
and all the analysis, and we will make a decision based on
that.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Capuano, ranking member of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I am tempted to talk about the batting
averages of the Red Sox, but I think I will wait for another
day for that. That is my biggest concern right now, to be
perfectly honest with you.
I do want to talk about a couple of concerns. First of all,
I want to thank you for the job you have done. I think you have
done a great job. But like everything else, there are details
that have to be worked out, and I have a lot of constituents
who are concerned about questions that have not happened yet. I
am very happy with what FSOC has done, but I have my concerns
about some of the things they have not yet--the second shoe
hasn't dropped.
I want to talk to you for a minute about the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors, of which you are
participating, and I got a response from you to a letter we had
written. I want to read a section of that and put the letter on
record. We were talking about the capital standards that are
being developed by the IAIS and your letter stated that, ``the
capital standards being developed by insurance experts will not
have any legal effect in the United States unless they are
implemented by U.S. regulators in accordance with U.S. law,''
which, of course, is the answer that I wanted. I appreciate the
answer, but I need to push it a little further.
And I say that because I am not opposed to
internationalization. It is going to happen. I just think that
we shouldn't put the cart before the horse. We haven't cleaned
up our own house fully yet. I am not ready to pass it all over
to an international standard. I want to make sure that in the
standards correctly, though, that by doing so--I want to make
sure how I understand that in accordance with U.S. law, I want
to make sure that this is not some backdoor way to allow some
Section 4807 of some treaty with some country I have never
heard of to overtake our capital standards and insurance, and
say, we have a treaty that we signed 400 years ago, and we have
to therefore give it up. That is--I presume that you are not
looking for that back door.
Secretary Lew. No. Congressman, I think it is worth taking
a step back and talking about how important our involvement in
these international bodies is. We could do an outstanding job
in the United States putting a system in place that is safe and
sound for all of our financial institutions, and we are still
exposed to vulnerabilities if, around the world, the standard
isn't raised as well. So we simultaneously participate in
international discussions, and in a case like this, our
insurance experts are very much a part of shaping the
international debate.
Mr. Capuano. As I think you should be. I think you should
be at the table, and I do think that you should participate,
and I do think you should have a strong voice. I just don't
have faith at the moment. I may have it at some future time
that the international standards are going to be any better
than we can do for ourselves.
Secretary Lew. And while our participation in the
international process often leads to a result that reflects our
judgment of what the outcome is, we retain, as do all national
authorities, the right to make decisions.
Mr. Capuano. Fair enough.
Secretary Lew. In the case of insurance, it is the States
that have a lot of the authority.
Mr. Capuano. The other question, though, is, number one, I
want things straightforward. I believe in FSOC, I believe in
what you are doing, I do believe internationalization is
coming, but I don't want to find out the day after that, that
somehow through the back door, we gave up our entire system of
insurance regulation without knowing about it. If we do it, I
think we need to do it conscientiously. I don't want to find
out that some treaty did it, and I don't want to find out that
somehow because somebody from Lichtenstein had a better idea,
that now they run our insurance industry. And I don't expect
that is going to happen, but I need to put that on the record.
Secretary Lew. That is not the way it works.
Mr. Capuano. You also talk about transparency, that, as far
as I am concerned--let me back up 1 second. I also want to go
and find out that under Dodd-Frank, as I understand it, the Fed
and others have oversight on insurance companies that are
SIFIs, or they have savings and loans holding companies. Other
insurance companies are not subject to Federal regulation, and
I just want to make sure that there is not some back-door way
to expand jurisdiction. Though I do believe that Federal
optional charters will come someday, they are not here yet, and
I just want to make sure we are not trying to do that in a
back-door way.
Secretary Lew. It is definitely not any kind of a back door
into Federal regulation of all insurance, though there is a
debate to be had, as you note, as to what is the right balance
between State and Federal. But that has to be done directly, if
it is done.
Mr. Capuano. That is what I wanted to hear.
I also want to talk a little bit about transparency. You
also agree that transparency is important, and up until now
there has been some--there has been give and take; you get
transparent, and then you don't get transparent. And for me,
one of the things when it comes to designating SIFIs is the
SIFIs know what the measurements are, or the potential SIFIs
know what the measurements are.
My argument is, it is like a traffic cop. If a traffic cop
is sitting on a highway, the truth is most of the time I want
the blue lights to be flashing because I am not interested in
catching somebody going 3 miles an hour over the speed limit, I
am interested in keeping them at the speed limit, and the best
way to do that is let them know that there is a cop on the
highway.
And the same thing here. I am not interested in catching
someone into a SIFI if they want to avoid it and can avoid it.
And the only way that can happen is if FSOC and others tell
them, here are the measurements we are going to have. If you
choose not to participate in these measurements between now and
6 months from now, you can take action to avoid it. Why is that
not possible?
Chairman Hensarling. Brief answer, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Lew. I think that the standards that are used in
FSOC actually are understood by the industry. We put out
detailed rules early on in the process. When it gets to the
point of actually engaging with a company, there is an enormous
amount of give and take back and forth, which gives them the
ability to make judgments as to how they want to organize their
risk.
Mr. Capuano. I think we have to follow up on that at a
later time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from West Virginia,
Mrs. Capito, chairwoman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I believe that the
process for designating the financial institutions should be
based on activities of the institution as opposed to just
arbitrary cut-off points, for instance, the $50 billion level,
and then we have another level, $10 billion for the consumer
supervision.
And what we are finding, I think, is--and this sort of
pivots a little bit off of the previous questioner--if you have
these arbitrary deadlines at $50 billion, you could have a
financial institution that is maybe at $35 billion that is much
riskier than, say, one that is at $100 billion because of their
business platforms, their business--and the way they structured
their business with less and fewer risks.
So I guess what I would ask is--and Governor Tarullo talked
about this about a month ago, mentioned--just kind of threw out
$100 billion to raise it up, because folks who are falling in
those thresholds are having difficulty. How do you feel about
that, rather than have an arbitrary asset limitation, to maybe
look at what the risk profiles and base those designations on
that? I know that is a discussion.
Secretary Lew. The threshold does not lead to designation
automatically. There is only a designation if the analysis done
suggests that there is a risk that determines that it is
systemically significant. And I think that the number of
designations reflects the fact that we have seen the nonbank
utilities designated, we have seen two insurance companies
designated. It has not been a massive process.
Mrs. Capito. I think in the case of the banks, if they
reach the $50 billion threshold, it is a--
Secretary Lew. I thought you were talking about the FSOC
designation, the thresholds.
Mrs. Capito. I am talking about that in conjunction with, I
guess, the other designations of significantly systemically
important--
Secretary Lew. Yes. As far as the banks, I think after the
financial crisis the burden certainly was on us to take a
closer look at systemic risk in large institutions, and as we
go through that process, as the regulators go through their
more detailed reviews of both the financial conditions of those
banks and their systemic risks, I think it is a discussion that
we can continue to have.
But I think for the time being, we have to look back and
forward. We weren't where we needed to be in 2005, 2006, 2007,
and 2008. We need to make sure that we have visibility into any
of the institutions that could create that kind of systemic
risk. And as far as the designations at FSOC go, the same
standard, I think, applies. We are not looking to designate for
the sake of designating. We are only looking to identify where
are there areas of systemic risk that if we look back at the
next financial crisis, we would say, why didn't you catch that?
Mrs. Capito. I think that in the case of Prudential, they
would argue--this is a slightly different question--that if
they were to fail, their business model would not drag down the
entire financial system. What kind of metrics were used for
that, and how does that--yes, what kind of metrics did you all
use to make those determinations when the insurance expert on
the FSOC had a deep question about that?
Secretary Lew. There were detailed analyses done, and there
was a hearing where Prudential came and exercised its right to
ask for a hearing.
And, I think that the kinds of questions that you ask when
you are looking to make the determination like this don't have
to do with what happens if the company fails in good times; it
has to do with what happens if there is a financial crisis and
the company fails? What happens if it is a situation of great
stress in the system? And that is not necessarily what
regulators previously did, but when we saw what happened in
2007, 2008, at a time of great stress in the financial system,
things do happen that don't happen at other times, and that is
the kind of inquiry that we went through.
Mrs. Capito. Okay. I have asked you this, I think, every
time you have come before us. Mr. Meeks and I have a bill out
that would modernize and streamline the financial regulatory
framework. We are hearing consistently, particularly from our
community banks, but also others, that the piling on of the
regulatory burden is really becoming a chiller in terms of
being able to move forward with business.
And you mentioned that once every 10 years, there is an
analysis of this. I think 10 years is too long a period,
especially since we have gone into--a lot of these have gone
into effect over the last 4 years. So what efforts are you
making in that?
Secretary Lew. I have a certain amount of background in
this, because when I was OMB Director, I conducted a review of
all of the Executive Branch agencies to do a lookback, and we
asked the independent regulators to do a similar lookback. We
didn't have the authority to direct them to do that lookback.
I think that at the moment with the 10-year review coming
up, the regulators have indicated it is their intention to do
that kind of lookback. I think that is a very important thing.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Hinojosa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hinojosa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Lew, for your testimony today.
Before the financial crisis that caused the Great
Recession, the United States had many financial regulators, yet
none took a comprehensive look at the economy as a whole. We
were caught off guard because no one was tasked with looking at
the big picture. Congress created financial stability over in
FSOC as a cornerstone of the Dodd-Frank Act. It serves a
critical function to keep watch for emerging financial threats.
So, Secretary Lew, prior to that passage of Dodd-Frank,
what government agency, if any, was responsible for looking at
the systemic risk in the U.S. financial system?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think one of the things we
learned is that there was no single agency that had
responsibility for looking across the system and identifying
issues of systemic risk. One of the reasons FSOC was created
was to make sure that in the future, agencies collectively as a
body chaired by the Treasury Secretary would be charged with
that responsibility.
I think it is critically important. I don't think that it
would be responsible for us to go back to a world where you
don't have that kind of ability to look across the different
silos. And that is not to say that the regulators weren't
regulating the industries for which they had responsibility.
They weren't necessarily looking at the interconnections and
the way that the entire systemic risk profile developed.
That is exactly what FSOC does. It is why it was created.
It is why we need to be able to ask questions. And it is also
why we need to be able to ask questions when we don't know what
the answer is. It ought not to be that we have to have near
certainty that there is a problem in order to ask a question.
We have to be able to turn over a lot of stones and have the
good judgment to only designate if the analysis of the facts
warrant it.
Mr. Hinojosa. So last week the committee passed H.R. 4387,
the FSOC Transparency and Accountability Act. This bill would
subject the FSOC to the Sunshine Act, expand its membership,
and change voting protocols for Commission and Board members,
and it would allow Members of Congress to attend and
participate in FSOC closed-door meetings.
In addition, this bill, H.R. 4881, would prevent the FSOC
from any further actions related to the designation of a
nonbank SIFI, including even talking about the possibility of
the designation for 1 year. By undermining FSOC, we undermine
our ability to avoid a future crisis like we have just
experienced.
Mr. Secretary, how do you view the bills passed last week
out of this committee, and what is your primary concern?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that transparency is
important. We are trying to develop policies which make that
very clear. I also think that there needs to be a space where
financial regulators can have a conversation about confidential
information that is a protected space. And the balance is an
important one to strike.
I think the notion of complying with as much of the
Sunshine Act as possible is something that we have reflected.
Much of the Sunshine Act is reflected in the FSOC procedures.
But because of the balance, it is not 100 percent, and I think
it is the right balance for now, and we need to continue to
work to strive for striking the proper balance.
Mr. Hinojosa. I am with you.
Secretary Lew. As far as the participation of Members of
Congress, I would just point out that Executive Branch meetings
happen every day all day long, and it is not considered the
norm nor appropriate for there to be congressional
participation in Executive Branch meetings. I don't think it
would be appropriate here either.
Mr. Hinojosa. In looking at your annual report, the FSOC
delineates recommendations to improve the health of our
financial markets. Interest rates have been kept to a historic
low in order to encourage lending and spur economic growth. To
offset the effect of low interest rates, the banks and credit
unions have increased risk-seeking behavior such as extending
the duration of assets and easing lending standards.
So let me ask you this question: How much does the risk of
increased interest rate volatility concern you?
Secretary Lew. I look at all of the different moving pieces
in our financial system to keep track of them. Obviously, low
interest rates do produce a certain tendency for there to be a
kind of rush to yield. We have seen a narrowing of yield curves
that suggests that. I don't think that--if you balance the kind
of where we have come in our economic recovery and the policies
that have led there, I think that we are at a place where this
is a question that the Fed and others have to look at. But I am
not going to comment on monetary policy.
Mr. Hinojosa. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer, chairman of our Housing and Insurance Subcommittee.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In his dissent, Roy Woodall, who is the FSOC's designated
insurance expert, stated that the underlying analysis for the
Prudential designation used scenarios which were ``atypical to
the fundamental and seasoned understanding of the business of
insurance, the insurance regulatory environment, and the State
insurance company resolution and guaranteed fund systems.''
Do you agree with Mr. Woodall's statement?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, obviously the FSOC decision was
one in which I participated. I thought the designation was
appropriate, and the risk analysis warranted it.
Mr. Neugebauer. So you disagree with his statements?
Secretary Lew. I am just going to comment on what informed
my judgment in terms of the decision that we made.
Mr. Neugebauer. So just for the record, Mr. Secretary, what
is your background as far as experience in regulating insurance
companies?
Secretary Lew. I don't pretend to have been an insurance
regulator. I have worked on insurance policy as a policymaker
from time to time. But, I think that the responsibility each of
us has as FSOC members is to look at a very detailed analysis
that is prepared by all of the staffs of the FSOC. It is quite
voluminous and detailed. In the case of the Prudential
designation, I participated in the hearing, and you make your
judgment based on the record that is prepared.
Mr. Neugebauer. So when you don't have a background in that
industry yourself, I guess one of the reasons that Congress
decided to put these insurance people on the FSOC process was
obviously a lot of the regulators that--for example, the Fed
and the Treasury and others don't really have much background
or experience in regulating insurance companies, do they?
Secretary Lew. Look, Congressman--
Mr. Neugebauer. Do they have a background or experience in
doing that?
Secretary Lew. For the most part, they have backgrounds in
the field that they are in, whether it is banking or
securities.
But I think that if you look back at the financial crisis
of 2006 and 2007 and 2008, the insurance industry was very
integrated into the financial system and was very much a part
of the cause of a systemic collapse. So I think that the
questions--
Mr. Neugebauer. The insurance industry was--
Secretary Lew. Parts of it, yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. What part was that?
Secretary Lew. AIG was part of it.
Mr. Neugebauer. But that wasn't the insurance aspect of
their business, was it?
Secretary Lew. The inquiry about systemic risk is one where
you look at all of the activities of a firm, and you look at
whether or not it has transmission channels, if there is a
problem in that into other parts of the financial system.
And I thought, and I continue to believe, that the analysis
done was a very high-quality one, and it warranted the
determination. And I will just point out that there was not an
appeal of the judgment either.
Mr. Neugebauer. One of the reasons for designating
Prudential as a SIFI relates to FSOC's asset liquidation
analysis. Are you familiar--
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. --which it assumes that simultaneous runs
against its journal, and separate accounts by millions of life
insurance policyholders and a significant number of annuity and
other contract holders for products with a cash surrender
value, this assumes a scale for which there is no precedent.
In other words, was there anything in Prudential that would
indicate that they had ever experienced a catastrophic
liquidation of policies or surrender of policies?
Secretary Lew. The question is not whether something has
happened, but whether there is a systemic risk in the future.
And I think the scenarios that you look at tend to be scenarios
that have not been experienced because your goal is to avoid
having a financial crisis that you could avoid.
Mr. Neugebauer. The only problem with that, Mr. Secretary,
is trying to forecast cataclysmic events. Really I don't know
that anybody has any expertise in doing that. And by trying to
come up with these what-if--I could come up with a lot of what-
if scenarios where you wouldn't want to put your money in any
financial institution.
But the problem is, when you start going down this road,
you impact the business model and the customers who rely on a
lot of these financial products for something that you are not
sure is going to happen in the future, that has not happened in
the past.
And then when you ignore the expertise of people who have
been put on FSOC to give you some guidance in that area, I
think that is one of the reasons that you hear so many of us
question the mythology that is being used in this process.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I don't disagree that the
scenarios that you look at are not the likely scenarios, but
that is not our task. Our task is to look at, in a crisis
situation, is there a risk of financial stability being
undermined.
And we know what the recession of 2008, 2009 looked like.
We know what the Great Depression looked like. There are
scenarios that we have gone through in our history. And it is
not just pulling scenarios out of the air; the question is, in
a time of great stress, is there risk? And if there is risk, it
doesn't mean that you are changing the business model all that
dramatically. It is a question of, is there greater oversight
and greater scrutiny?
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Over here, Mr. Lew. Thank you, and welcome. I think you are
doing a fantastic job.
I want to first of all ask for a little help that you could
give for me and my constituents in Georgia. You are familiar
with the Hardest Hit Program?
Secretary Lew. Yes. I am.
Mr. Scott. And it is your program, thanks to the hard work
of this committee. And I would deeply appreciate if you could
assist us.
We have an issue in which my State was about a year late in
getting this money out to help the hardest hit. Subsequent to
that we have unleashed or unloaded a number of veterans, who--
it happens to be one of the fastest-growing groups of the
homeless, and that is because they are coming home, and their
houses are being foreclosed on and mortgages.
So within the next couple of months, in August, we are
putting a big event together down in Atlanta. In order to get
moving on this, your predecessor, Mr. Tim Geithner, and the
Assistant Treasury Secretary who started this was Mr. Tim
Massad, who did excellent work, but unfortunately both of them
have gone.
So what we need is just a nice call down to the Georgia
Department of Community Affairs, first thanking them for
moving, but reminding them that because of that 1-year delay,
we only have 2, 3 years left. By 2017, as you know, if we don't
get rid of that money, it is going. It would be a shame that we
have veterans coming home, seeking employment. This is targeted
just for them. So just a call down would be very helpful to the
Department of Community Affairs, asking if there is any
assistance that Treasury can give them, because if it weren't
for Tim Geithner and Tim Massad coming down to that event to
light a fire in Georgia, we would not be moving as we are.
I don't want a dime of that money coming back when we have
soldiers coming home who are living under viaducts because they
can't get that kind of help.
So I appreciate your doing this, and we will get the
information to your offices of whom to call.
Now I have another point. I want to get to the emerging
threats to our financial stability on the international stage.
You have just returned from an international visit and working
on--in this issue with some of our other counterparts. Also,
Treasury is the enforcement arm for the Iran sanctions. Six
months is coming up. Can you give us in a nutshell where we
stand relative to the impact of the standstill, where are we
are on those sanctions, and what are the emerging threats
internationally?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, first, on the Hardest Hit Fund,
I would welcome the information. Tim Bowler is running that
office, and I will have him follow up as appropriate.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. My staffer will get in touch.
Secretary Lew. As far as the Iran sanctions go and the
negotiations that are taking place, three points: first, the
sanctions have been extremely effective. They have had a
dramatic effect on Iran's economy. They have actually crushed
Iran's economy and brought Iran to the negotiating table.
Second, the joint plan of action was very limited relief.
It was several billion dollars of relief, not enough to reverse
the harm that the sanctions do to Iran's economy. And, in fact,
the ongoing impact of the oil restrictions in the sanctions
does more damage than the relief granted. So the impact is
building up, not reducing.
Third, we have made it clear that we are going to--we are
committed to these negotiations, but not committed to a deal
unless it is a good deal. No deal is better than a bad deal. We
hope there is a good deal.
We are in the final month. I think that it will be an
important month that determines whether or not there is
seriousness on Iran's part to set aside its nuclear weapons
program.
Mr. Scott. So we are at that final month, which is the apex
of my question. Where do we go from there? Do we go back to
square one, or will we ask for an extension?
Secretary Lew. I am not going to prejudge what the end of
the month is. There have been no discussions to date of an
extension. There is also not going to be pressure to take a bad
deal because we are hitting a deadline. I think we will have to
see where we are at the end of the month.
What we have said is that if the talks break down, if Iran
is not willing to make concessions, we will look for tougher
sanctions, and we will take no option off the table to make
sure Iran does not get nuclear weapons.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. McHenry, chairman of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee.
Mr. McHenry. Secretary Lew, thank you for reappearing.
We had a hearing about the OFR asset manager report. And
former Assistant Secretary Michael Barr testified that the OFR
``was not something I would hang my hat on.''
Would you hang your hat on the asset manager report?
Secretary Lew. I don't hang my hat on reports, Congressman.
Mr. McHenry. I guess--
Secretary Lew. The report was one step in the process. It
is not a decision by FSOC. It was something that FSOC asked for
as one of the things to consider.
We have done a lot of other work as well, an analysis
within FSOC, and we had a public session, I believe the day
before your hearing, where we had broad participation by the
industry and by experts from academia, including Michael, who
testified.
I think that one of the important things to remember is
FSOC has made no decision to designate asset managers. All FSOC
has done is ask the question. I think it is really important to
ask the question. The answer could be that there is no need to
designate. The answer could be that there is some other course
of action that is advised. And we will continue to pursue that.
Mr. McHenry. And to that end, Chair White testified just a
few weeks ago before this committee that the SEC has all the
authority necessary; no new authority would be needed for the
SEC to regulate the asset management industry.
Do you concur with that assessment?
Secretary Lew. I think it depends on what the answer is in
terms of what is the appropriate step to take. And I am not
going to prejudge the outcome of an inquiry that is not
completed.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Let me try that again. Do you believe
the SEC has the authority to regulate the asset management
industry?
Secretary Lew. I believe the SEC does have authorities to
regulate the asset management industry. Whether it is the
precise authority depends on what the mode of regulatory
response, if any, would be.
Mr. McHenry. Yes. Thank you for clarifying, and that is
helpful and very forthcoming.
And so, we have a number of other questions, obviously, but
with the FSB, a number of us have questions about the process.
And you have answered this to some degree, but we have--many of
us have complaints about how nontransparent FSOC is, but FSB is
even less so.
And so when the FSB designates G-SIFIs, and all those G-
SIFIs within that category of an investment--investment
companies are only U.S.-registered investment companies, it
becomes problematic for us to see that--to judge whether or not
the FSOC will take that same tack from the FSB.
And so to that end, in order to help us better understand
the policymaking process, would you help us with better
disclosure of what those discussions are like and what the
discussions are at the FSB just going forward? I think that
would be helpful in terms of transparency and in terms of
making sure that we are asking appropriate questions, and you
don't have to answer the same questions over and over again.
Secretary Lew. Our staff does try to keep congressional--
interested congressional parties informed. We will continue to
do that.
Mr. McHenry. Currently, I would say it is not sufficient.
And so, we try harder to do better when it comes to
transparency with FSB.
Secretary Lew. I try hard to do better at everything I do
every day.
Mr. McHenry. That is a fantastic commitment. So, no hats
and try harder.
All right. To that end, let me ask you another question, if
we can get to this. We have passed a couple of major pieces of
legislation through this committee and off of the House Floor
that are bipartisan in nature. Some help credit unions, and
others help community banks, basically lightening a bit of the
overreach that the large bipartisan vote in Congress has shown.
One is the swaps push-out bill that passed 292-122 on the House
Floor, and the end user margin bill, which passed 411-12. So,
there is a way for us to pass bipartisan legislation.
Give us your view. What is your encouragement for Congress
to undertake bipartisan regulatory changes?
Secretary Lew. Look, in principle, I endorse bipartisan
legislation as a general matter. And--
Mr. McHenry. But in a specific matter, would you help us
with this process?
Secretary Lew. On the question of Dodd-Frank amendments,
frankly, there has been an issue for the last 4 years where the
question is, do you just make technical fixes, or do you go
back and make broader changes? That is an important question.
We don't think there should be a broad review of Dodd-Frank.
There is also a question as to whether or not you give
agencies a chance to implement things before you legislate
again, putting an overlay to top of it. But I am happy to
continue the conversation with you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair wishes to announce to all Members that at
approximately 11:30, the Chair intends to call a 5-minute
recess.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. And we will also
accept your thanks for sending Mel Watt from this committee to
the Oversight Council.
Secretary Lew. We appreciate your sharing him.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Mr. Secretary, I have two questions. Do you believe that as
a result of FSOC, we do have an authority that is accountable
and responsible for monitoring the financial stability of the
U.S. economy? Do you believe that without FSOC, the dangers
would be increasingly more ominous?
Secretary Lew. Look, I believe we have a much higher level
of visibility into the financial stability risks. We have
relationships between regulators that are stronger and deeper
than they ever were before, and we have the capacity, if we
need to, for people to collaborate together in a much more
effective way.
I think all of that leaves us much stronger than before,
and to give that up would put us back where we were in 2007 and
2008, when regulators worked in their silos, and it was very
hard to break through to look at the broader financial
stability.
Mr. Cleaver. That is interesting, because I am wondering
how comfortable the members of this committee should be that
the expectations that an American financial institution is
still ``too-big-to-fail.'' These huge interconnected bank
holding companies or the nonbank financial giants--how
comfortable should we feel that the ``too-big-to-fail'' has
been either dramatically reduced or eliminated?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think we have made enormous
progress. We have much more capital in our banks. We have
resolution authorities that are now in place and are being
exercised so that institutions, if they hit a failure, have a
way to unwind without necessarily causing the kind of systemic
risks that we saw in 2007, 2008. We have living wills for the
largest institutions that have very detailed plans of what they
would do if they got into distress.
And I think if you look at the question that is often asked
about the implicit subsidy for large banks, that is a
reflection of the market's belief that there is a willingness
to step in, we are seeing that way lower, if not eliminated. It
has been reduced by academics who study it. It has been reduced
when the IMF looked at it. It has been reduced when rating
agencies look at it.
So I wish I could tell you with absolute certainty that
``too-big-to-fail'' was a thing of the past. What I can say is
we have made enormous progress. We will continue to work at the
kinds of sensible ongoing policies that will make our system
even stronger. And the test, unfortunately, only comes when you
have a financial crisis, which I hope we don't experience.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. I was going there, that we won't know for
sure as we didn't--I was on the committee when Secretary
Paulson and others came in and told us essentially that if we
didn't do something before the Asian markets opened the
following Monday, that the world could fall into a depression.
I am assuming you are saying we can have a degree of
greater comfort, but that comfort should be measured, because
we don't really know and won't know unless we hit another--
Secretary Lew. I would add, Congressman, that many of the
authorities that existed at the time have been changed in Dodd-
Frank, and we don't have the tools that Secretary Paulson had
at that time.
Mr. Cleaver. Of course, he didn't have the tools. He made
the tools up, by his own admission.
Secretary Lew. There were changes made in Dodd-Frank that
limit what both the Fed and Treasury do, so we have less
ability to step in. And it would require--Dodd-Frank, as a
matter of law, ended ``too-big-to-fail.'' So there is an
obstacle, and that would be a change in the law to step in to
exercise some of those authorities.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back the balance
of his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Lew, welcome. I have a quick question for you
with regards to mortgage-servicing assets. FSOC seems to be
intent on trying to implement new capital standards on these
folks. And I guess my first question is, where is the problem?
And what problem are we trying to solve? Where is the risk?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, could I just ask for
clarification as to which capital standards you are referring
to?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. FSOC capital rules on mortgage-servicing
assets. And what we are seeing is that the small banks, even
large banks, are selling all their mortgage-servicing assets to
nonbanks as a result of the capital rules that are being
implemented.
Secretary Lew. We are definitely seeing that there are
higher capital standards for banks, in general for banks. And
to the extent that banks choose to change their business plans
and get out of one line of business or into another, that is
obviously something that we need to keep an eye on.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I guess--let me back up here. The Basel
III rule was the one that really is impacting this. And it is--
again, it is something that is concerning me from the
standpoint that we are allowing the foreign rules and
regulations, which, to my knowledge, they don't have mortgage-
servicing asset activity in foreign countries. So we are the
only one that does this sort of activity, and yet we are
allowing the Basel III rules, which were basically foreign
rules, to impact our way of doing business here in this
country.
Where is the risk? What is the problem? And why are we
allowing the entities from other countries to regulate a
business that is basically American in nature?
Secretary Lew. The capital standards that our regulators
have put into place are actually in some ways tougher than
Basel III. So it is not that Basel III put the capital
requirements in place; our national authorities have to put our
capital requirements in place.
We have driven Basel III to a higher standard, because one
of the things we worry about is that a risk that we face is
that other countries don't have the capital requirements that
we have, and their banks are not going to be as sound as they
need to be.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. This is about mortgage-servicing assets.
The servicer of these assets, where is the risk with the
servicer, somebody who services loans?
Secretary Lew. I think the question actually is a broader
one in terms of--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. No, it is pretty specific. Where is the
problem that entities that service loans need to have more
capital? Where is the connectivity to our financial system that
causes a greater risk, but they have to have more--
Secretary Lew. Capital requirements are on all of a bank's
assets. So that, I think, is really the issue. But I am happy
to follow up with you on the specific question of mortgage
servicers.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. It is interesting, because as we go
through this process, I think with the previous question, one
of the folks, I think, was talking-- maybe Mr. McHenry--we are
talking about some of the stress tests that banks are doing,
and the big banks' modeling is allowed to be different than it
is from smaller banks. And yet when you--we allow them to
design their own modeling, you come up with a completely
different capital ratio as if you would use that same modeling
for smaller banks.
And so I think, again, you are using two sizes, two
different sets of rules with regards to big guys versus little
guys, and I have a real problem with that, and it continues to
be rampant through all of the things that the Treasury does.
There are two sets of rules.
Secretary Lew. The regulators have gone to great lengths to
try and reflect the special circumstances around small banks
and community banks. And it is not the banks that set the
standards for stress tests, it is the regulators who conduct
the stress tests.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes. But Mr. Secretary, you are allowing
the banks to also determine their own models on how they
determine their capital, and that is not right, because you
have to have the same set of standards for everybody. You can't
have two sets of standards. And it goes back to--I just have a
real problem with that particular--let me just go--I only have
about 24 seconds left.
I am just--your comment a while ago that insurance
companies were a part of the cause of the collapse of 2007,
2008, which I wrote down here, it is stunning. Absolutely
stunning. I defy you to give me an example of one insurance
company that is truly--the insurance part of their business,
was a cause of the collapse. Tell me, was it insurance policy,
insurance rate, insurance lack of claims processing? Was that a
cause of 2008, 2007?
Secretary Lew. I used AIG as the example and--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Secretary, you know as well as I do
that AIG--the financial portion of that company wasn't the
insurance position of that company, it was the financial
portion of that company that was the problem, the connectivity
of that.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Ms.
Moore, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, it is very nice to see you. Thank you
for coming to speak with us today.
I was looking through your testimony, and I couldn't agree
more that the formation of the FSOC was an important strategy
toward having all of the senior regulators and principals look
at the system across the spectrum to--because I was here,
again, when Mr. Paulson came with this four-page bill, saying,
give us $700 billion. I don't want to go through that anymore.
But my question is what--I think a good process leads to
good policy. So I guess I saw Mr. Roy Woodall, the FSOC
insurance expert, dissent from the decision to designate
Prudential, and yet they were designated as a SIFI. And then we
saw the SEC push back against FSOC on asset managers, an aspect
of money market mutual fund reforms, and, of course, the SEC is
the expert on these industries.
So I guess I would like--do you think it would be helpful
for us to have a sense of how you see the role of the primary
regulators in these discussions? Is there any deference to
them? Did they just dissent from the decision so that they
could--so that they wouldn't be on record as being against
their industry? What are we to learn from the experts of the
FSOC seemingly having less of a voice?
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman, I actually think all the
members of FSOC have a voice, they are listened to, but
ultimately not everyone will agree on every issue.
I think if you look at those issues separately, I have
spoken at some length on the review of the insurance companies
before the designations were made. I believe the record was a
robust one, and it warranted the decision. Obviously, not every
member of the Council agreed. But the decision stands, and the
company has not appealed it through the courts, as it could
have. And I actually think the process was one that reflected
rigor and analytic quality, and I am both comfortable with it
and concur with the judgment that was made.
As far as the issues you raised with regard to the SEC,
obviously FSOC spoke to the money market fund issue before I
was Chair of FSOC. It is an issue that was, again, at the heart
of the financial crisis in 2008, and there was, I think, an
urgency that was felt by FSOC to underscore that more action on
that and on other issues that relate to the area of shadow
banking was important.
The SEC has the direct regulatory authority. They are
working on a rule. I am very hopeful that they will complete a
rule this summer.
Ms. Moore. Mr. Lew, thank you so much. I don't have much
time, but I do think the SEC did push back on aspects of money
market. That ``breaking the buck'' thing was resolved.
Finally, I guess you have heard the complaint that prior to
designation, which is a big deal if you are designated as a
SIFI, this is not an opportunity at all for the designee to
present their case to the full board of principals of the FSOC,
even to directly address the final information charges that are
being presented to justify the decision. This seems to be just
a little bit contrary to what we know as due process. I just
want to know what your response to that is.
Secretary Lew. That is not correct. First, let me go back
to the money market fund issue. I just want to remind everyone
on this committee that there was a real problem in money market
funds in the financial crisis, and the challenge to solve that
crisis fell not on the SEC, but it fell to the Fed. So it was
quite appropriate for FSOC to take a view, and, frankly, it is
very appropriate for us to continue to take a view to make sure
good action is taken.
Ms. Moore. I only have a second. I do want you to answer
that other question, Mr. Lew.
Secretary Lew. Remind me of the second question.
Ms. Moore. It is the people don't get a chance to present
their case.
Secretary Lew. Oh, yes. That is not correct. There is
extensive back-and-forth between a company and the FSOC during
the stage 3 process.
Ms. Moore. Stage 3.
Secretary Lew. Yes, extensive. And there is no designation
until till the end of that. At the end of the stage 3 process,
they have a right to a hearing. And only one company has sought
it, but we had a hearing. And then, they have judicial rights
of appeal after that. So there is a robust due process.
Ms. Moore. Stage 3. Okay. Thank you so much, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The committee will now stand in recess for 5 minutes.
[recess].
Chairman Hensarling. The committee will come to order.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, the
chairman emeritus of the committee, Mr. Bachus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bachus. Thank you.
Secretary Lew, this whole the-dog-ate-my-homework defense
that the IRS and Lois Lerner is using, I don't--the American
people are not buying it. But, more importantly, I think it
calls into question the integrity of the process, and I think
it is very disturbing to all of us.
We have computer crashes in our office from time to time. I
think every Member has had them. And you immediately call in
the technology people, you make sure that the hard drive is
preserved, and you don't lose emails.
So I hope you will investigate this as Secretary of the
agency and find out what happened.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think we all know that hard
drives do crash, and that is what happened here. In 2011, when
the hard drive crashed, efforts were made to recover what could
be recovered. And subsequent to that, after it became a matter
of interest, extensive efforts were made to put back together
what could be put back together.
I believe that Commissioner Koskinen has testified to this.
A report has been sent to Congress in great detail.
Mr. Bachus. I am just saying the American people are still
waiting on a good explanation.
Let me ask you this: Orderly liquidation has always struck
me as a convoluted and kind of highly subjective process that
does little to end ``too-big-to-fail,'' and it gives an
enormous amount of discretionary power to regulators. And FSOC
makes resolution advice or gives recommendations to the FDIC.
The Judiciary Committee, with the Financial Services
Committee, is looking at possible changes, several possible
changes, in the Bankruptcy Code. We believe that a properly
constructed bankruptcy would be a better way to deal with the
resolution of failing institutions. There are established
precedents.
Do you think that it is a worthwhile process for Congress
to consider this approach?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think that orderly
liquidation authority actually is an effective implementation
of the law in Dodd-Frank. Obviously it is not the same as
bankruptcy, but it is a process that has actually become one
that the world is now looking at to see if a single point of
interest system--
Mr. Bachus. You don't think the bankruptcy process--
Secretary Lew. I would actually be interested in following
up with you on what the changes in the Bankruptcy Code would
be. What I was going to say is I don't think that all wisdom
was contained in the actions taken in the wake of the crisis.
Mr. Bachus. We would like to work as partners on this as we
go forward because I--
Secretary Lew. And I don't know that it is instead of the
orderly liquidation authority. I would not take the orderly
liquidation authority away, and I don't know what proposals
are, but I would be happy to look at them.
Mr. Bachus. And I am not sure we do yet.
Six months ago, Congress was told that there would be more
coordination and guidance on the implementation of the Volcker
Rule. Unfortunately, I have not heard of a lot of follow-
through on this pledge.
Would you review with us what is being done to provide
financial services providers with guidance they need to comply
with the many complexities of the Volcker Rule, and give us
some assurance that implementation questions that were posed to
the working group will be answered? I know 6 months later, only
6 of those 80 questions have been answered.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I think the fact that an
identical rule was issued on the same day by all the agencies
actually was an important step to giving guidance. My fear was
there would be differences that caused confusion, and I think
it is very important there is one rule. So I actually think
that is the foundation.
It hasn't actually gone into effect in terms of compliance
yet. And the regulators are working amongst themselves as they
go into the implementation stage to stay in close contact,
because there is obviously the risk that you end up with common
law in each of the agencies going in different directions. That
is not an area we have direct responsibility over at Treasury
or at FSOC, but I think it is an important question, and it is
one that I ask the regulators as well.
Mr. Bachus. Right. They still need more guidance in
complying with Volcker, and I appreciate your willingness to
give that. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Delaware, Mr.
Carney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for coming in today. Thank you
for all your good work. I have been reading through the FSOC
annual report. There is lots of good information and data in
there.
One of the things that is discussed in the annual report is
the repo market as an area of vulnerability for our financial
system. And, in fact, in a hearing back in February before this
committee, Governor Tarullo cited the repo market as the second
greatest threat to the stability of our financial system after
adequate capital requirements.
Do you share Governor Tarullo's concern? And what steps can
be taken to prevent adverse consequences in the repo market
during stress markets?
Secretary Lew. I think that the short-term funding issues
are quite significant. That is why, whether you call them
short-term funding or shadow banking, we are putting so much
attention into them.
The risk that one day you open for business, and you don't
either have the repo or the money market funding that you
expected, we saw in the financial crisis, can cause an
immediate collapse, and it is a collapse with an accelerant on
it.
I think if you look at the amount of funding that is in the
repo market and the money market funds, it is considerably down
from where it was at the time--
Mr. Carney. So, less of a risk. But what can be done to
prevent some of the adverse effects?
Secretary Lew. I think on both those issues, on triparty
repo and on money market funds, it is important that the
regulators continue to look at the issue and take action. So
the Fed has a responsibility in the area of repo, and the SEC
has a responsibility in the area of money market funds. I know
that both are working on additional steps that could be taken
to further reduce the exposure. There is an efficient market
there until there is not.
Mr. Carney. Right.
Secretary Lew. And the question isn't what happens when it
is working well; the question is what safeguards do you have
that you won't see in a moment where it collapses. That is why
I think the Fed is looking at what actions it can take and why
it is so important that the SEC finalizes the money markets
rule, because I think they are really parallel kinds of risks.
Mr. Carney. Moving on to GSE reform, there has been some
discussion about it. Unfortunately, my colleague, Mr.
Perlmutter from Colorado, is not here. He and I have kind of a
different perspective on it.
Your report identifies it as an important issue, but it
doesn't say too much about the negative consequences of not
doing reform.
I have been working with Congressman Delaney and
Congressman Himes on a piece of legislation that would provide
a government backstop with a more explicit guarantee. What is
your view on the risk of not doing reform in the short term?
Secretary Lew. Look, I believe that housing finance reform
is really the unfinished business that didn't get addressed in
the immediate wake of the financial crisis. And we have seen
only recently with the estimates of the exposure that taxpayers
ultimately have to the GSEs that, were there to be another
crisis, we still have the same system that we had before, which
wasn't very good--
Mr. Carney. With greater exposure.
Secretary Lew. Greater exposure.
So I believe that housing finance reform is very important.
I think there is a lot of progress that has been made in the
Senate working towards a bipartisan approach on this. I think
there has to be a bipartisan solution. And the key to a
solution is making sure that there is access to finance; making
sure that there is a clearly delineated responsibility that is
not a government responsibility in terms of losses,
particularly first losses; and to the extent that there is any
remaining government backstop, that it be extraordinary
circumstances and well-defined.
Mr. Carney. Right.
Secretary Lew. I think that the process in the Senate
didn't make great progress on that. It is obviously not
finished. And I would hope that a bill can get to conference so
that it is an area in which we can see bipartisan legislation.
Mr. Carney. I hope so, too.
I don't have much time left. But there has been a lot of
discussion, and actually a couple of pieces of legislation
introduced here in the House about differentiating among
financial institutions, banks, based on different criteria than
just size. In fact, Governor Tarullo mentioned a few weeks ago
that maybe the SIFI designation should be on firms that are
$100 billion or greater. What are your thoughts on that?
We have legislation here that Mr. Luetkemeyer and my
colleague Ms. Sewell have introduced that would differentiate
on qualitative measures. Do you have any views about--
Secretary Lew. I think that it is hard to have a hard view
that there is a size that makes you financially significant and
creating the risk. The question is, does a combination of your
size, your structure, your interconnection to the system, and
it is something that requires our ongoing analysis.
Mr. Carney. Thanks. Thanks very much.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Duffy.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Secretary Lew. It is nice to see you back at the
committee again.
Just a couple of questions on emails: How does the Treasury
back up their emails currently?
Secretary Lew. The main Treasury, I believe, has an auto
backup, but I would have to get back to you on the specific
details.
Mr. Duffy. So after all of the information about emails and
backups and IRS and Treasury, Housing, you have no idea how
your emails are backed up?
Secretary Lew. I will just say that the main Treasury is
much smaller than the IRS. It has a different volume. So it is
a different kind of an email system.
Mr. Duffy. How about with the White House?
Secretary Lew. It is generally my assumption that
everything is backed up.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. How about the White House? How does the
White House back up its email?
Secretary Lew. I am not an IT professional, Congressman.
Mr. Duffy. Neither am I, but I know as a former State
prosecutor how the State of Wisconsin backs up our emails. I
know how the House backs up our emails as a Congressman. You
were the Chief of Staff, and you are the--I am not an IT expert
either. But you can't tell me how they are backed up?
Secretary Lew. When I was at OMB, and when I was at the
White House, there was auto backup, but there also were
occasionally periods where machines broke. So it--
Mr. Duffy. And in regard to machines breaking, when you
were the Chief of Staff at the White House, did you have a hard
drive cash?
Secretary Lew. My personal hard drive?
Mr. Duffy. Yes.
Secretary Lew. Not that I recall.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. When you were the Chief of Staff at the
White House, did you have meetings or a meeting with any IRS
employees?
Secretary Lew. I do not remember. It was quite awhile ago,
and there has been a lot since then. I would have to go back
and check.
Mr. Duffy. So you haven't pondered that question with all
these--
Secretary Lew. I did not--I certainly--
Mr. Duffy. If I could ask the question, then you could
respond, please.
Secretary Lew. No, look, I am happy to go back. There were
meetings that involved people from different agencies. We
talked--
Mr. Duffy. So the answer is, yes, you did meet with IRS
employees?
Secretary Lew. The answer is, I don't remember, but I would
go back and check if I could.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. I am sure you can't recall.
Secretary Lew. I never had a meeting on any IRS policy
matter that I recall. The question you are asking--
Mr. Duffy. I mean political matters.
Secretary Lew. No, not on political matters either. I--
Mr. Duffy. Did you have any email correspondence with
anyone at the IRS?
Secretary Lew. Not that I recall.
Mr. Duffy. When did you first learn about Lois Lerner's
emails being lost, her hard drive crashing, those emails from
2010 and 2011 going missing? When did you learn about that
first?
Secretary Lew. I only learned about it at roughly the same
time the Congress did, when it was--
Mr. Duffy. So you learned about it in the press?
Secretary Lew. --when there--pardon?
Mr. Duffy. You learned about it in the press?
Secretary Lew. No, no. I learned about it right before the
report was made to Congress.
Mr. Duffy. So you were just given what, a day's notice? On
the 12th of June, you learned about it?
Secretary Lew. I don't remember the day, but I believe--
Mr. Duffy. A week before?
Secretary Lew. No. I believe it was more like the day
before.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. So you are the Secretary of Treasury, the
IRS is the biggest bureau in Treasury, and you only learned
about this the day before we did.
But isn't it true that Treasury was notified by the IRS
that these failures existed, and they were notified in April?
And then it was Treasury who notified the White House in April
that the Lois Lerner emails were gone. But you only learned
about this in mid-June.
Secretary Lew. The timeline, as I understand it, is that
the lawyers at IRS and Treasury discussed the matter. They were
notified about it.
Mr. Duffy. In April.
Secretary Lew. In April. And--
Mr. Duffy. And you didn't know anything about this, right?
Secretary Lew. And the guidance that was given at that
time, I think appropriately--
Mr. Duffy. You didn't know anything about this. Is that
your testimony?
Secretary Lew. The guidance that was given, as I understand
it--
Mr. Duffy. So you didn't know anything about the emails,
all the news about it. And the lawyers knew, but Mr. Lew, the
poor Secretary of the Treasury, had no clue what was going on
in the agency. Is that fair to say?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I am happy to answer your
question if you give me a moment.
Mr. Duffy. If you would answer the question, I would
appreciate it.
Secretary Lew. You ask the questions; I can answer the
questions.
Mr. Duffy. Well, you don't answer the question. That is the
problem.
Secretary Lew. The lawyers at Treasury advised the lawyers
at IRS, I believe correctly, to make sure they--
Mr. Duffy. And did not advise you?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I am happy to answer the
question if you give me--
Mr. Duffy. You are not answering the question.
I just--there is a level of frustration not just in this
committee, not just throughout Congress, but with the American
people. The arrogance that the Administration has shown, that
the IRS has shown, that Treasury has shown with regard to this
investigation is unbelievable.
And why wouldn't you be arrogant? You say, listen, we have
the Presidency, we have the DOJ, we have the FBI. Why not be
arrogant? We have the press. No one is going to report us for
this. We are not going to answer your questions, we are not
going to be forthright, we are not going to be honest, because
who is going to come after us?
I have to tell you, this is a sad disservice to the
American people the way this crisis has been handled.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now--
Secretary Lew. I would be glad to answer the question if I
would be given an opportunity.
Chairman Hensarling. I suspect there will be Members on
this side of the aisle who will be more than happy to accord
you more time, Mr. Secretary.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Alabama, Ms.
Sewell, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Mr. Secretary, I will give you more time. You
can use some of my time to answer his question, if you would
like to, but I think that it is better served that we talk
about the matter at hand, what you are here for--
Secretary Lew. I agree.
Ms. Sewell. --which is your annual report for FSOC.
I would like to return back to the SIFI designation. In
your testimony you highlight that designation is not the only
alternative to address potential risk posed by firms and their
activities.
What are some of the other policy options FSOC could look
at? And how does the FSOC weigh the pros and cons of the
different regulatory mechanisms in your toolbox?
Secretary Lew. Congresswoman, the initial inquiry is
whether or not there is systemic risk, and if you don't make
the determination of that risk being there, then one option is
to do nothing. So there is always the option not to designate.
The question then becomes, what is the risk? Where is the
risk? Is the risk in a firm? Is it in a product? Is it in a
business line? And depending on the answer to the question, it
could lead to different actions.
So I believe that there has been a kind of
oversimplification of the process, which is if you ask the
question, then the next step is designation. I actually don't
think that is the case. I think that there will be many
instances where the right answer is that there is not a risk,
or the right answer is that you don't need to designate the
firm. Regulators have sufficient authority, and there will be
some cases where it will be a product as opposed to a firm that
is the issue.
So I think we need to let the process run its course, and
that means have full analysis, full awareness of the facts, and
not be in a place where we are afraid to ask the question
because the answer might be designation. I think that we have a
responsibility, if we are going to have a system that prevents
financial crises in the future, to ask those kinds of questions
and not prejudge the answers.
Ms. Sewell. I also wanted to know if the FSOC in its
examination of an industry or individual firm indicates that a
particular activity or business practice may cause systemic
risk, are companies given an opportunity to address those
concerns?
One result of additional notification throughout the
designation process could be to encourage companies to reduce
their own risk. And so, would the FSOC consider establishing a
process by which a company would be given the opportunity to
reduce its own risk profile before designation as a SIFI?
Secretary Lew. It is not only a question of does the
company have the ability to modify in some way its business
structure before, but FSOC looks on an annual basis to see
whether or not the designation's continuing is indicated and
what the status is. So companies have the ability afterwards to
make changes.
As far as the involvement with the company goes, it begins
in the middle of the process, not at the beginning of the
process, I think for good reasons. We have a lot of information
that is available within both the public record and that
regulators have, and that you don't need to create a situation
where by asking a question you trigger a public debate at the
first instance of asking the question.
If it is serious, there is a huge amount of back-and-forth
between the company and the FSOC staff.
Ms. Sewell. I would like to--my last question is really
about cybersecurity. I sit on the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence. I think cybersecurity is one of the
biggest threats to disruption of the financial industry, along
with the operational risks that it poses.
I want to know what the FSOC thinks about cybersecurity and
what its recommendations have been to its firms.
Secretary Lew. Cybersecurity is something that I must say
I, as Treasury Secretary, as Chair of FSOC, think about
constantly. It is one of the kind of new frontiers of risk
exposure. I believe that we have in the financial services
sector made more progress than some of the other sectors of our
economy, but there is still a lot of work to do.
Ms. Sewell. Would you be open to information-sharing and
reducing the liability so that companies can share?
Secretary Lew. I think information-sharing is very
important. There is a big difference between what we see and
what companies see. The information needs to flow in both
directions.
I also think there is a big difference between what large
companies have the capacity to do and what smaller businesses
have the capacity to do. And where they are working together
either directly or through an intermediary, whether it is a
utility or a contractor, makes a great deal of sense.
We have sought legislation on cybersecurity. The President
has issued an Executive Order that goes as far as he can with
his executive authority, but legislation in this area would be
very important. I think the industry would be very pleased to
see more ability to collaborate.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Hurt, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here and presenting
us the FSOC annual report.
I do want to ask some questions about that, but I was
curious, based on just a follow-up to Mr. Bachus' questions
about the IRS issue, it seemed to me your response was, well,
in 2011, there was a hard drive crash, that is life, and that
the IRS really has done everything it can to comply with
congressional requests.
Do you think that it is important for Congress to get
answers to its questions? And is it important for Congress to
be able to see those emails, whether we recover them from IRS
or some other agency? Do you think that is important?
Secretary Lew. Not only do I think it is important, I think
that is what the IRS has been trying to do. And Commissioner
Koskinen has been working to assemble the emails to provide
them for review, the Lerner emails.
Mr. Hurt. But in your role as Secretary of the Treasury,
and ultimately the authority over the IRS, do you believe you
have the authority to independently look at what the IRS is
doing to make sure that this gets done? What have you done, and
what are you going to do to make sure that we pull out all the
stops to get these emails?
Secretary Lew. I believe that they are working quite hard.
The number of hours and man-years, person-years that have been
put into this, the amount of money that has been spent is
astronomical. They have made an enormous effort. Commissioner
Koskinen has testified at length on it. Obviously, it is not a
situation that anyone chose to have. There was a machine
failure in 2011. But they have worked as hard as they could to
reconstruct, and 70,000 emails, I believe, were turned over for
review.
Mr. Hurt. I understand. But obviously it is a very critical
time period, and I guess what I would love to hear, as a Member
of Congress who has constituents who are very worked up about
this, is I would love to know that the Secretary of the
Treasury is exercising everything within his power to make sure
that the IRS is doing that. It does not sound like you have
taken any direct role whatsoever, and that concerns me.
Secretary Lew. No. When I became aware of this, what I was
told was that the message had been sent from Treasury, I
believe appropriately, find out everything you can, find
whatever you can, and give a complete report when you have
that.
That report was completed, I concur with the advice that
was given, and if there is any more that can be done, it should
be done.
Mr. Hurt. But you are the doer. It seems to me that is a
passive--
Secretary Lew. What I can't do is make a hard drive that
broke not be broken.
Mr. Hurt. I understand that--
Secretary Lew. What they have gone and done is they have
looked at all the recipients of emails to pull them out from
the recipients' email records. They are doing everything they
can, and an enormous amount of information has been provided.
Mr. Hurt. All right. Thank you.
Let me just ask my--I only have 2 minutes left, but let me
just ask you this question. I represent Virginia's Fifth
District, a rural district, with a lot of Main Street small
businesses, family farms, and working Virginia families. Access
to capital is very important, and community banks and credit
unions play a huge role in reaching the people whom I
represent.
In the last 30 years, I am sure you know these figures, we
have gone from seeing 18,000 community banks that held 40
percent of bank assets, 18,000 to now, today, fewer than 7,000
community banks, 18,000 to 7,000, and assets amounting to 40
percent to now down to 15 percent.
And I guess my question is, as a part of the mission of the
Financial Stability Oversight Council, in your role as Chair,
does that trend concern you, the idea that we are reducing the
number of community banks and the assets that are held there?
And does that in and of itself present its own systemic risk
when you have the consolidation of these assets in banks the
way we have seen it the last 30 years? Does that concern you,
and if it does, what do we do about it? What can you do about
it? What is the FSOC doing about it?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, as the different agencies with
the responsibility for implementing Dodd-Frank have taken
action, each and every one has made efforts to try and treat
community banks in a way that reflects the importance that they
play in our economy and the fact that they are different from
large institutions. There is a lot of discussion about it,
there is a lot of attention to it, and I believe the rules
reflect that.
We have a dynamic changing landscape in the financial
services world. We have to keep an eye on what those changes
are. I think the community banks play an important part in it,
and we, as we have acted, have tried to reflect that.
Mr. Hurt. But does that trend concern you? Where do we--I
yield back my time.
Mr. Hultgren [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Hurt. Thank you.
Mr. Hultgren. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
I would like, if we could, to turn our attention first to
the upcoming July 20th deadline for the talks with Iran, which,
obviously, these can succeed, fail, or come to some
intermediate result. What sort of contingency plans are you
looking at for the financial part of the sanctions, which may
have to be strengthened or weakened or held in place?
And, second, what is the role you envision for Congress in
the overseeing and concurring on any changes to the financial
sanctions that may result as a result of these negotiations?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, we have kept in place the
architecture of our Iran sanctions even during the period of
negotiations. The Joint Plan of Action had very narrowly
defined, denominated, one-time relief, and the rest of the
sanctions stay in effect. Since we began the negotiations under
the Joint Plan of Action, we have taken over 60 enforcement
actions on the underlying sanctions. So we don't have to do
anything to put it into place; it remains in place.
The question really is, what happens if the talks fail? Do
we then go for tougher sanctions? We have made it clear that if
the talks fail, there would be, I believe, the need to take
tougher action on sanctions.
Mr. Foster. But my question is, do you have contingency
planning for the possibility of tougher sanctions, the
possibility of effectively monitoring relaxed sanctions if
there is a--
Secretary Lew. In a world where there is an agreement, that
is obviously a very different situation. And I am not going to
prejudge what the sanction regime would be after that. We have
multiple sanction regimes with Iran, and I can tell you that we
will be vigilant about implementing all sanctions that remain
in effect after an agreement.
If there is an agreement, obviously there will be some
change, but we are not announcing in advance what that is.
Frankly, we are not at the point yet where we are ready to say
that we have seen a basis for making the decision to do that.
We are going to have to see Iran making the kinds of
concessions that it has to make, which means not having nuclear
weapons.
Mr. Foster. Okay.
In your report, the section on data gaps and data quality,
which were some of your systemic concerns, you mention that
they are still unable to effectively monitor securities lending
transactions and reinvestment of the cash collateral.
So what is the nature of that situation? What action is
needed? How worried should we be about that?
Secretary Lew. Look, I think that there is both an
increasing concentration of activity in certain places because
we now, for example, in commodities have a registration, so it
is transparent, what is happening. That puts more transactions
in one place.
We also have the challenge of communicating amongst systems
which are different systems.
The reason it was highlighted as a risk there is we do have
more work to do on that. It is both a technical challenge, but
it is also a question, ultimately, of the stability of the
system. So I think that the observations in the report reflect
the fact that we are going to keep working on it.
Mr. Foster. Do you feel like you have all the legislative
authority you need in that specific area, or is this something
where Congress might have--it is my recollection that, during
the crisis, something like 40 percent of AIG's losses were from
their securities lending business.
Secretary Lew. Right.
Mr. Foster. So this is not a trivial thing, despite what
was said earlier in this hearing. And so--
Secretary Lew. We obviously have a lot more tools now. We
have a whole set of rules, particularly in the derivatives
area, that weren't there before. So we have made a lot of
progress.
I actually don't know the answer to the question of whether
we have all the authority we need, and I would like to follow
up as we learn more.
Mr. Foster. Okay.
I will do everyone a favor and yield back early.
Secretary Lew. I'm sorry?
Mr. Foster. I yield back.
Mr. Hultgren. The gentleman from Illinois yields back the
balance of his time.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Pittenger, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Lew, thank you so much for being here today. I am
always impressed by your presentations. You are a very eloquent
man, even when we don't hear what we would like to hear.
You have an amazing pedigree: Harvard undergrad; Georgetown
University; you worked for Speaker of the House Tip O'Neill;
for Bill Clinton, been in the White House. You are one of the
most powerful people in the world today.
My background is a little bit different. I grew up in
central Texas. I went to the University of Texas, a fine
university. I can't tell you I was one of the better students;
I was not. My daddy told me, he said, ``Son, if you want to be
smart, you need to hang around a lot of smart people.''
I built a real estate investment company, and one thing I
did was hire a lot of smart people. We have half a dozen
attorney groups who work with us around the country. I am no
longer part of this company. We hired securities attorneys, we
hired real estate attorneys. We hired market analysis people. I
hired an economist that we kept for 25 years.
Their good work and counsel kept us out of a lot of
trouble. I can say that after 25 years and a couple thousand
investors and maybe 60 or 70 partnerships, we never had a
failed one. That is by the grace of God, but really a lot of
good, smart people telling this little boy from central Texas
what he ought to be doing.
Today, we are looking at the operations of FSOC and what it
is doing and its designations, and that is important to a lot
of people. It is going to affect a lot of companies in the
impact of this country. A lot of families will be affected.
Yet, when I read some of the input from some of the
individuals who would be associated with FSOC and aware of it,
I find that they take a different position than the position
that you have.
I look at Doug Elliott with the Brookings Institution,
which you have been a part of yourself, who says that
heightened prudential standards would cause broad economic harm
because the insurers of one of the largest providers of long-
term investment funds, and limiting the ability of insurers to
make long-term investments would be unfortunate, since many
commenters have pointed out that they need to increase the
supply of such funds, especially with regard to massive
investments in U.S. infrastructure that are needed in the years
ahead.
We look at Roy Woodall, an FSOC member, appointed by the
President. His comment was that he felt that the FSOC's
analysis relied on scenarios antithetical to a fundamental and
seasoned understanding of the business of insurance and the
insurance regulatory environment.
Barney Frank, a former chairman of this committee, stated
that it was not his intent that asset managers be designated
for heightened prudential standards or supervision by the
Federal Reserve Board because they do not pose a systemic risk.
Mr. Lew, my point is that many of us believe that these
designations undermine the market discipline, they allow some
companies to be favored, to believe that they are protected
from further losses. Some of us see that there are structural
flaws at FSOC that allow this to continue.
I think the thing that is troubling to me is that you are a
bright guy, you are nobody's fool, you didn't get to where you
are by just slothing through, but you have some capable people
who understand the business, like the folks who understand my
business, that you don't appear to be listening to. And I would
hate to think that, years ahead, you will look back and say,
maybe I should have listened to those people a bit more.
And the concern that I have and frankly, a lot of my
constituents have, is that the folks in Washington think they
have superior knowledge, they are smarter than everybody else,
they have it all figured out. And I would just commend to you
that there is safety in good counsel, wise people who
understand the business, like Mr. Woodall. He understands this
business.
So that is really my comment, and we have 30 seconds left,
and you are welcome to say whatever you like.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, first, I appreciate the kind
personal remarks.
The process we go through in FSOC is, one, is a level of
great detail and great rigor. And all the members of the
Council have views that are worthy of being heard and
considered. There isn't always a unanimous view. I believe the
record that was built justified the action taken in the cases
where designations were made, but I don't believe it always
will.
And I just would point out that, particularly in the asset
management area, no decision to designate has been made yet, so
it is premature to know the outcome there.
Mr. Hultgren. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Mr. Hultgren. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Kildee, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you.
And welcome, Mr. Secretary. It is always good to have you
here.
Secretary Lew. It is always a pleasure to be here.
Mr. Kildee. I just want to say how much I appreciate your
participation, your candor, but also your demeanor in this
hearing. And I concur with Mr. Pittenger's commentary--while I
might not agree with his conclusions, I concur with his
commentary and applaud his demeanor, as well. I wish that were
more the norm. But your patience and politeness is noted, at
least by some of us here.
I do agree that you don't necessarily get smarter when you
come to Washington. I also have concluded that there is a
certain amount of evidence that the trend is in the other
direction. But I will say to you, I appreciate--and I am not
speaking of you; I am talking about some of us on the other
side of the dais--I appreciate your politeness.
I want to talk to you quickly about two things. One has to
do with the Department of Treasury's TARP program. As you are
aware, TARP includes a program called the Hardest Hit Fund. Mr.
Scott mentioned it. It is intended to assist those communities
and homeowners in communities that have been most negatively
affected by the financial crisis.
Some communities have had a much more difficult time coming
out of that crisis, largely because many of the communities
that were hit by the crisis had already been hit by a long-term
crisis in housing--depressed values, abandonment, et cetera.
So last fall, myself and my staff worked with your team at
Treasury; it was specifically Former Assistant Secretary Tim
Massad. And we were able to secure $100 million to be
reallocated from the particular uses that Hardest Hit allowed
to demolition.
What I would like you to consider, and you will be getting
a letter from me later this week on this, is whether there has
been any consideration or discussion within Treasury to extend
the use, the available uses, eligible uses, of Hardest Hit that
could be used for demolition beyond just residential properties
but to look at specific commercial properties and residential
communities that have negative externalities and are depressing
the value of property.
I say that because before I came to Congress, I was
involved in doing a lot of work and research and activity in
this area, and we were able to conduct a number of studies that
measured the impact of demolition on surrounding property
values.
In Flint, Michigan, my hometown, for example, we took a few
million dollars, and were able to demolish several hundred
homes, and saw surrounding property values have a positive
impact. In fact, just several million dollars unlocked the
value of local properties to the tune of about $112 million.
Changing that value equation obviously is one of the factors
that mitigates future abandonment resulting in foreclosure.
Is that something that you might consider at Treasury?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, the decision on using the
Hardest Hit Fund for housing demolition was one of the first
issues that I made a decision on when I became Secretary. And
I--
Mr. Kildee. You made a good decision. I appreciate that.
Secretary Lew. --believe the analysis was very solid, that
if your goal is to keep houses from going underwater or get
them from being underwater to being above water, having
abandoned properties on the block was something that had a
material impact. And since the purpose of those funds is to
help homeowners get out from underwater, the relationship was
quite direct.
I haven't looked at the question of commercial property. I
would be happy to look at it. But it would have to meet a test
that is permissible under the TARP program.
And I will just add, I had the pleasure of being in
Michigan the day that the demolition began--
Mr. Kildee. Right.
Secretary Lew. --in the Marygrove neighborhood in Detroit.
Mr. Kildee. Right.
Secretary Lew. And you go block to block in that
neighborhood, and you see where abandoned houses have been
allowed to sit for a year and where they have been demolished.
It has everything to do with the stopping the decline and
helping the rebirth of a neighborhood. I think we made the
right decision, and I was very pleased to be able to join the
mayor there.
Mr. Kildee. I very much appreciate it. It is definitely a
direction that makes sense. The application of the funds to
commercial properties within neighborhoods, I think, will have
as dramatic, if not a more dramatic effect. So I will be
communicating with you on that in the coming weeks.
And rather than ask a question, I just want to reiterate,
on a completely different subject, my support for the work that
Treasury continues to do in implementing sanctions regarding
Iran. As you may be aware, I have a constituent who continues
to be held in an Iranian prison; his name is Amir Hekmati. And
it has certainly made a difference. The sanctions are what have
brought the Iranian Government to the negotiating table. I
can't prejudge what will happen in the P5+1 or with July 20th
soon approaching, but we know we wouldn't be in a position to
even have the possibility of an agreement without those
sanctions. I appreciate your work on that.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Rothfus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Good afternoon, now that we have
passed the noon hour.
Just a few days after you testified before this committee
in May, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, the former Director of the
Congressional Budget Office, released a study in which he
estimated that if the FSOC designates asset managers as SIFIs,
investors could see their returns reduced by as much as 25
percent over the long term. As he puts it, designating asset
managers could cost each investor more than $100,000.
And while the OFR's asset management study considers
farfetched in the remote hypothetical situations, it never
considers the costs that will be imposed on investors and on
the economy if the FSOC designates asset managers, nor does it
consider whether the benefits of designation outweigh those
costs.
Shouldn't the FSOC's SIFI designation process consider the
costs of designation as well as its benefits?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I just want to underscore that
no decision has been made on whether to designate the asset
managers or not. So the OFR study was one piece of analysis as
part of a process.
Mr. Rothfus. And should they consider costs of designation?
Secretary Lew. The designation process is one that is aimed
at determining whether or not there is systemic risk. It is not
a--
Mr. Rothfus. So there is no consideration for the costs
that will be imposed?
Secretary Lew. The statute creates a standard that we use,
which is whether or not there is that level of risk that
warrants a decision.
Obviously, as regulators, if they take responsibility for
an area, they then weigh different approaches in terms of how
to regulate, and then it is a different issue. But the statute
does not actually create a cost-benefit standard.
I can't speak to the analysis that you are describing.
Obviously, I am aware of it, I have seen it. But it makes
assumptions about actions that have not been taken yet, so I
think it is premature for anyone to draw a conclusion--
Mr. Rothfus. If you could take a look at the OFR's, the
Office of Financial Research's September 2013 report, OFR
argues that mutual funds with a floating net asset value are
risky because they could create a run on redemptions during a
time of stress. Then, when I look back to FSOC's attempts to
subvert the SEC's jurisdiction over money market funds in 2012,
FSOC proposed a floating NAV for money market funds.
These two examples seem to be contradictory. Doesn't this
just reinforce the reason why regulating this industry should
be left to the SEC, who has the needed familiarity and
expertise?
Secretary Lew. The SEC, as I mentioned earlier, is in the
process of considering a rulemaking with regard to money market
funds, and I certainly hope that they reach a conclusion that
provides the kind of oversight of the--
Mr. Rothfus. Should that be within the discretion of the
SEC and not the FSOC?
Secretary Lew. The FSOC reached a conclusion, with the SEC
being very much a part of the process, that this was an
important area to address. The FSOC made recommendations; now
the SEC has a rulemaking.
And I will also add that, in the process of going through
the asset manager review, the SEC is fully a part of that
process. They review drafts of the OFR study. They are part of
the decision that FSOC will make, because the Chair is a voting
member of FSOC and the staff work on all the preparation to it.
So--
Mr. Rothfus. I would like to ask a question getting back to
``too-big-to-fail'' and whether it has been ended.
The President and this Administration have a sad history of
overselling its policy objectives and initiatives. They
oversold an $800 billion stimulus saying that it wouldn't
cause--or, if you passed it, unemployment wouldn't go above 8
percent. They oversold the Affordable Care Act with the famous,
``If you like your healthcare plan, you can keep it.'' They
shockingly oversold, I would say misled, about the impact of a
video in Benghazi. They oversold the ability to reset relations
with Russia. They oversold the record-retrieval capacity of the
IRS with the email scandal. They oversold their ability to
manage the VA. They oversold the demise of Al Qaeda.
Now, as recently as July 2013, you stated, as a matter of
law, that Dodd-Frank ended the notion that any firm is ``too-
big-to-fail.'' And you also said, if a financial firm fails,
the taxpayer will not bear the cost of that failure.
Now, Secretary Geithner--or, today, you seemed to backtrack
on that. When the chairman asked you if ``too-big-to-fail'' has
been ended, you testified, ``We won't know until the next
crisis.'' But that is not how Dodd-Frank was sold to the
American people.
Secretary Geithner now says that, of course, the ``too-big-
to-fail'' still exists.
Would you agree that the Administration oversold the
promises of Dodd-Frank?
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, can I have a few seconds to
answer?
Chairman Hensarling. A brief answer, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I had tried to address that
issue at some length earlier, but I believe we have taken
enormous steps to make our financial system more safe and more
sound and to make it so that, if a bank fails, a financial
institution fails, they will bear that risk themselves. That is
what the capital is going to help do; that is what the
resolution rules will help do.
What I said in the response to the earlier question is a
matter of fact. The true proof comes at the time of the next
financial crisis. I believe we have taken very dramatic steps
and made very dramatic progress.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Washington, Mr.
Heck.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you so much for your presence here
today.
As you know, in 2012, when the Congress reauthorized the
extension of the Export-Import Bank, the Secretary of Treasury
in your department was directed to enter and pursue
negotiations with other major exporting companies, with an
objective of substantially reducing and then--and with the goal
of eliminating the role of export credit authority subsidies of
goods sold.
I am curious as to whether or not, as a result of that
process or any of your other conversations with finance leaders
from other countries, has there ever been an indication to you
of a willingness on the part of those other countries to
``substantially reduce'' their export credit authority.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, there actually is a working
group on export credit subsidies that met at Treasury 2 weeks
ago, and there were 15 countries represented at that.
The issue has come up in my conversations from time to time
with other finance ministers, and I have made the same point to
them that we have made in public, which is that there has to be
a level playing field. It cannot be a question of the United
States unilaterally withdrawing from these kinds of programs
while other countries stay in, because that would put our firms
at a disadvantage.
So I think the working group is a good thing, and a level
playing field is the goal.
Mr. Heck. Have any of those countries indicated a
willingness to do away with their export credit authorities?
Secretary Lew. I am not sure they have gone that far yet,
but that is obviously one endpoint that would leave a very
level playing field. But it can't be that the United States
steps back while everybody else is subsidizing their exports.
Mr. Heck. As you are aware, China is, as we sit and speak,
developing a commercial aircraft for sale, the C919. It is my
impression that it is being substantially subsidized by China
in its development. Would that be your impression, as well?
Secretary Lew. I do understand that there is a Chinese
aircraft industry, and I don't know the exact structure of it,
but they do have many state-sponsored enterprises.
Mr. Heck. And they also have a state-sponsored enterprise
to develop small aircraft, which are being sold with the
assistance of China's export credit authority already.
What would your opinion, then, Mr. Secretary, be as to
whether or not China, in absolute dollars and as a percentage
of GDP, about the largest export credit authority on the face
of the planet, what is your opinion about whether or not the
Chinese export credit authority would engage in financing of
the sale of their C919s once they are developed?
I realize that no memo has been issued by them, but you are
a worldly guy with a strong, firm grasp of how the economy
works. Would you fully expect China to provide export credit
authority for the sale of their commercial aircraft?
Secretary Lew. I think we have seen in the commercial
aircraft industry worldwide that there is a willingness of
governments to provide export support. I have no reason to
believe that China would choose not to do that. I don't know of
the specific intention.
I do think that it is a case where we either all have to
agree to not do it or the United States has to maintain the
Export-Import Bank kinds of support so that our industries can
compete on a fair basis with other manufacturers who have
access to export support programs. There is not a place for the
middle ground where we withdraw and others don't.
Mr. Heck. I don't want to put words in your mouth, to be
sure, so let me do a little reflective listening. Here is what
I think I heard you say: If our future is that Airbus is
provided export credit authority for purchases of financing
sales and the Chinese-made, at some point in the future, C919
aircraft is provided with Chinese export credit authority
financing assistance and airplanes made in the United States of
America are not provided with export credit authority
financing, that would put us at a material disadvantage to
compete in the global market.
Secretary Lew. Yes, I think that is correct.
And I also think that our Administration's support of the
Export-Import Bank has been clear. We think it is an important
aspect of how not just our aircraft industry but many large and
small U.S. firms can play on a level playing field in a world
where other exporters have access to credits. We can discuss a
world where there were no such credits, but in a world where
others engage in that, we can't unilaterally disarm.
Mr. Heck. Thank you. Fair enough.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Pearce, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pearce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, you had written in your comments on page 2
that we learned from the 2008 financial crisis that regulators
should have asked more, not fewer, questions about the
institutions and the activities they oversaw.
So why do you think that we weren't asking enough questions
going into this 2008 time period?
Secretary Lew. I can't go back and tell you exactly why
different institutions and individuals behaved the way they
did, but I think we saw the results, that there was a financial
crisis--
Mr. Pearce. No, I am--
Secretary Lew. --that took everyone by surprise.
Mr. Pearce. I think it wasn't the institutions themselves.
It is that regulators should have asked more. Why were the
regulators not asking more questions?
Secretary Lew. There was no regulator that had broad
responsibility for looking across the financial horizon and
asking about financial stability. Regulators each had their
siloed areas of regulatory authority. And in their areas, they
asked questions the way they had in the past.
Mr. Pearce. There hadn't been anything in the past that had
caused people to say, hey, we need to start asking more
questions, we ought to work back and forth across these silos?
Nothing had come up about that?
Secretary Lew. In retrospect, there were people saying that
there were questions about that which needed to be asked, but
the system didn't respond. And--
Mr. Pearce. When you say the system didn't respond, what
does that mean?
Secretary Lew. I think that in the 1990s, there was the
debate about derivatives, and in the early 2000s, there was a
run-up in the housing market and development of highly
leveraged--
Mr. Pearce. What system was not responding?
Secretary Lew. Depending on the issue, it was different
regulators. You had relatively lax regulation in some of the
banking regulators. You had--
Mr. Pearce. Was anyone calling attention to that?
Secretary Lew. Was anyone calling attention to it?
Mr. Pearce. Yes, sure. Anyone in your field of interest,
your sphere of interest.
Secretary Lew. I was not in Washington at the time, so I
don't want to pretend to have been participating. But the
build-up in mortgage credit on riskier and riskier terms was
viewed as a narrow housing issue, not a systemic issue.
Mr. Pearce. But nothing in your experience gave you cause
where you would elevate the concerns?
Secretary Lew. It was not my set of responsibilities at the
time, but--
Mr. Pearce. If I would take a look back at 1994 to 1997,
you were Deputy Director of OMB, and in 1998, you were made the
Director. And when I take a look at the Web page for OMB, it
says that it is oversight of agency performance, oversight of
all agency performance, measures quality of agency programs,
policies, and procedures.
Now, it was exactly during that period that long-term
capital did almost exactly the same thing. They almost
collapsed the world economy, according to the leading articles
of the day. And, under your watch, you had the ability to see
that this extremely dangerous thing was occurring in the
markets.
And what they were doing was ramping up their asset--or
they were taking their asset value down as low as 3 percent.
That is exactly what Bear Stearns did 10 years later, down to 3
percent. And it was one of the original partners at Long-Term
Capital who was the head of Bear Stearns.
So, we had 10 years to assess. And the system knew exactly
what was going on. You were the one in charge of the OMB; you
were the one in charge at the White House. And yet, you make
the statement here that regulators should have asked more, not
fewer, questions. You were the one who should have been saying
to the regulators, ``Your system is not working.'' This is a
very dangerous thing that went on.
And, yet, now and today, we are sitting here, and on page 3
you say, ``As the distance in time since the financial crisis
grows, we must not forget the financial and emotional pain
endured by millions of American families who lost their homes
or retirement savings or jobs.''
It would be nice if that same perspective had been kicked
out after the Long-Term Capital failure, saying, let's not let
this happen again, but instead, 10 years later, the same thing
happens again. And I find your statements to be surprising.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Lew. Congressman, if I could just respond
briefly.
Mr. Pearce. If I have time, sure.
Secretary Lew. First of all, when I was at OMB, the Office
of Budget and Management has relatively limited insight into
independent regulatory agencies, their rules, and the actions
they make. They are independent regulators.
One of the reasons FSOC was created was to have a place
where there was an ability to look across all of the
independent regulators and work together. I think FSOC actually
is an important solution to that problem.
Mr. Pearce. Again, the warning sign was there. We almost
collapsed the world economy. You were the guy in charge of
checking the economy.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, the last 2 or 3 times you have come here, I
have focused your attention on the worldwide unitary system of
taxation. Last time you were here, you said that your Assistant
Secretary for Tax Policy had reviewed that and was anxious to
talk to me about it. He hasn't reviewed it.
I would hope that you would commit now that your Department
would devote some serious high-level time to reviewing what
would be a system that would increase our tax revenues by over
$1 trillion over 10 years and is the system that has been used
by the 50 States to deal with multi-jurisdictional income taxes
long before globalization occurred and multi-jurisdictional
income tax meant international rather than multi-State.
Can I get a commitment that you and your Department are
going to look at the--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, he has reviewed it. If he
hasn't been in touch with you, I will make sure he gets in--
Mr. Sherman. Oh, no, he was in touch. He basically--we
talked for a few minutes, but he had not looked at the issue.
Secretary Lew. My understanding is that there are people in
his office who have looked at it. I will make sure they contact
you.
Mr. Sherman. They are streamed on other things.
I have read Ayn Rand. Ex-Im Bank is not mentioned in any of
her books. I dream of a world in which all competition is fair
and as uninfluenced by government as possible.
Do you think you could be successful in getting Germany and
France and Japan to eliminate their analogs to the Ex-Im Bank
if we would just eliminate ours first?
Secretary Lew. I don't know the answer to that question.
Obviously, the engagement that is under way is aimed at trying
to answer that question.
What I do believe is that it would be wrong for us to
unilaterally withdraw from the Export-Import Bank while other
countries are providing export subsidies, putting our
manufacturers and exporters at a disadvantage. There needs to
be a level playing field.
Mr. Sherman. It is strange, because I am on the Foreign
Affairs Committee, where sometimes Members of our party are
accused of being in favor of unilateral disarmament, and then I
come here and it is folks on the other side in favor of--or at
least some, in favor of unilateral disarmament.
Secretary Lew. And I don't disagree with the notion that it
would be a good thing if there were no export subsidies. The
two positions are not inconsistent.
Mr. Sherman. Right. But if we eliminated the Ex-Im Bank,
wouldn't our foreign trading partners have absolutely no
incentive to eliminate theirs?
Secretary Lew. I think if we did it on a unilateral basis,
yes. If it was part of a negotiation, that would obviously be
very different.
Mr. Sherman. Right. That would be like doing missile
control with the Soviet Union by eliminating all our missiles
and then going to the missile control--
Secretary Lew. I am not sure I would want to compare the
stakes, but I understand the analogy.
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
You have to define SIFIs. The tendency is to define SIFIs
based on the size of their assets. I want to urge you instead
to look at the size of their liabilities.
What causes a SIFI to bring down the entire economy is that
people were expecting that they would meet their obligations
and they are unable to do so. For example, if you had a company
with a great name but modest assets that went out and incurred
a trillion dollars of contingent liabilities by writing a bunch
of credit default swaps, that entity would be a SIFI, assuming
defaulting on a trillion dollars of credit default swaps would
bring down the economy--maybe the number would be bigger--
regardless of the size of its assets. As a matter of fact, the
smaller its assets, the worse situation we are in, if they are
engaging in more than a trillion dollars of credit default
swaps.
With that in mind, as to mutual funds, they don't have
liabilities, except if they are leveraged, except for one
thing, and that is they have the contingent liability that if
the custodian function is not handled correctly and you open
the safe and there is nothing there, then they have a
liability.
So I would hope that when you are dealing with an
unleveraged mutual fund with extremely strong custodian
functions that you would not be designating that as a SIFI.
I don't know if you have a comment?
Secretary Lew. As I have said a number of times this
morning and afternoon, we have not made a decision yet, but we
definitely understand that there are different kinds of assets
in asset management funds, custodial funds. I understand the
important difference between leveraged and unleveraged funds.
We will complete this process and reach a determination as
to whether or not there is a basis for designation. But asking
the question does not mean we decided to designate.
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
And, likewise, insurance companies seem to be well-
regulated. It is when you let the unregulated portion of AIG
write credit default swaps that you have a SIFI problem.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Hultgren, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Lew, for being here.
I want to follow up on how we can work together in a
bipartisan and constructive manner, as Subcommittee Chairman
McHenry had questioned a few minutes ago.
As he noted, we have passed a couple dozen bills by super-
majorities out of this committee, including many by voice vote,
and many of those have passed the House, as well, that made
sensible reforms to Dodd-Frank.
Notably, even former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, in his last
appearance here, when asked where Congress should focus and
where the Fed would be interested in engaging, he stressed a
couple of different things: first, he stressed swaps push-out,
which creates more systemic risk and impacts end-users' ability
to hedge; second, he mentioned end-user margin, which Congress
never intended and where regulators need clarity; and third, he
said regulatory relief for banks, especially smaller financial
institutions.
I wonder, does the Administration intend to support any of
these sensible reforms? And does Treasury have a list of
bipartisan reforms that we can work on?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, as we have indicated, we think
that many of these issues are premature, that regulators are
dealing with these issues and that the need for legislation is
not yet clear.
And as I mentioned in my response to an earlier question,
the idea of going in and amending Dodd-Frank, if it is a
question of truly technical fixes that don't open other issues,
obviously is different than if it is part of an effort to take
a broader look at Dodd-Frank.
We have not thought that the legislation was appropriate up
until now. That continues to be our view. But we look forward
to working with you going forward.
Mr. Hultgren. I would say, please hurry. People are
suffering under these things. Again, as Chairman Bernanke
recognized, these do have an impact. And further delay is
absolutely impacting the economy and many of these institutions
that are just trying to get answers and trying to figure out
how to work.
And, again, when these are done in a super-majority way, to
me, it would seem like it would draw light to the
Administration and to the Treasury that this is important, that
this isn't just something that we are tinkering with or pushing
on, but instead this is what we are hearing from people who are
trying to respond in a very difficult climate already. And I
would say delay and confusion is making it worse.
Let me move over a little bit to oversight function of
FSOC. I believe oversight is extremely important, that this
committee has to be engaged in this because of the design of
FSOC, which really makes it much more opaque and unaccountable
than other regulatory agencies.
Certainly, this includes broad statutory discretion that
the FSOC has to designate certain companies as SIFIs. We have
talked about that a lot today. That is why I am a cosponsor of
Chairman Garrett's bill, the FSOC Transparency and
Accountability Act, which would implement commonsense reform
measures to the FSOC that would improve the SIFI designation
process.
One example of FSOC's inadequate structure is how it
constitutes who a voting member is. I wanted to ask you some
questions on this. The FSOC is dominated by the heads of bank
regulatory agencies: the Chairman of the Federal Reserve; the
Comptroller of the Currency; the Chairman of the National
Credit Union Administration; and the Chairman of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation. Not surprisingly, these
regulators have a bankcentric view of the world.
Secretary Lew, I wondered, can you explain to the committee
why it is that the expertise and judgment of bank and credit
union regulators should be substituted for that of the SEC in
the case of asset managers, or State insurance regulators in
the case of insurance companies, when determining how these
firms should be regulated? Are these persons really qualified
to vote on whether to designate nonbank financial institutions
as SIFIs?
Secretary Lew. I think the statute was set up quite
correctly to require all of the members of FSOC to look across
our financial system and look at risks that cut across the
responsibilities of different regulators and that might not be
visible if you looked at it just in one channel.
The view of each member of FSOC is important. And I think
that the nature of the debates, the discussions within FSOC are
very collegial and very respectful. And if you look before FSOC
existed, there were barely relationships between many of the
regulators. So, we have come a long way in terms of closing a
gap that was part of what contributed to the financial crisis.
Mr. Hultgren. I think the problem is so much of it is
bankcentric-focused and not seeing that there are very
different risks out there, depending on the group that we are
talking to.
And let me, in the last few seconds that I have, shift over
to ask about the possibility that certain mutual funds could be
designated as SIFIs.
Mutual funds use little or no leverage. In fact, the 14
largest U.S. funds had an average leverage ratio of 1.04 to 1,
compared to U.S. commercial banks, which had an average ratio
of 9 to 1.
Does the fact that mutual funds are not leveraged make it
impossible for them to fail in the same way that banks do?
Secretary Lew. Look, we are in the process now of looking
at the asset management industry and the products of the
industry, and the answer to your question will come at the end
of our inquiry, not now.
Mr. Hultgren. My time has expired, and I yield back. But I
do want to say, this has an impact on industry, and the sooner,
the better. This is taking a long time.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Nevada, Mr.
Horsford, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here today.
I want to ask a question about the effect of the housing
crisis on the majority of U.S. homeowners who are still
struggling to recover.
I am from Nevada. Unfortunately, our State is still the
third highest in the country for foreclosures, with 1 in 717
housing units currently in or pending foreclosure filing, and
some 34 percent of Nevada homes are still seriously underwater,
the highest in the Nation.
As part of the Administration's response to the housing
crisis, the Treasury, under TARP, established two central
programs, the Making Home Affordable and the Hardest Hit Fund.
And I noticed your media advisory yesterday about an
announcement that you will be making this Thursday at the
Making Home Affordable Anniversary Summit on new housing
initiatives. It is my understanding that you plan to announce
additional policies to assist struggling homeowners, provide
more affordable housing options for renters, as well as expand
access to credit for borrowers.
Can you provide any further details about these initiatives
or the announcements that you plan to make on Thursday?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, we have been looking hard at
all aspects of the authorities we have and that regulatory
agencies have that affect access to credit and relief that
might be available to homeowners.
I would refer back to the announcements made by the FHA and
the FHFA to deal with this issue of put-back risk that is
closing down the credit box so that people who are fully
creditworthy are not getting access to mortgages. I think that
is going to make a big difference.
We need to finalize the risk retention rules so we
eliminate any remaining uncertainty as to what the final rules
are.
And we are constantly looking, in the Making Home
Affordable program, at what can we do with authorities we have
to, based on the current situation in the market, provide
appropriate relief to homeowners. And I hope to be able to make
some more comments about that on Thursday.
Mr. Horsford. Wonderful. I am eager to hear about the
Treasury's efforts in this regard, particularly for struggling
homeowners, as you said, like those in my home State of Nevada.
And I would like to ask if I can meet with you and members
of your staff following your announcement on Thursday so that I
can make sure that these initiatives are helping the people who
need the relief the most at this time.
Secretary Lew. I am happy to have our staff follow up with
yours.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much.
Mr. Secretary, as well, are there any other areas that you
see, particularly around the housing area, where this committee
should be working with you and other leaders to help provide
the relief that homeowners are seeking?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, that is obviously a very
important question. If we look at the recovery to date, we are
doing pretty well in most areas, most sectors of the economy.
The place that has not been recovering where it should is
construction and housing.
Some of that is a question of market conditions. We had a
financial crisis with a huge overhang of inventory and credit-
stressed institutions and investors and borrowers. I think, as
we now get to the point of a more healthy economy, we have to
make sure that creditworthy people have access to credit and
that we don't have the pendulum go to the point where it is
blocking out of the market people who are not a risk.
It is certainly not that we need to return to the days of
before the crisis when we had low-doc, no-doc loans, people who
got into mortgages they couldn't afford. But if you have
somebody with a FICO score of 740 who can't get a mortgage,
then the system has overcorrected. And the put-back decisions,
the announcements on put-back risk, should have an effect on
that. I have talked to CEOs of banks who think it will have a
material effect.
As we go through the process of seeing what the effect of
what we have done administratively is, I would look forward to
continuing the conversation as to whether there are other
actions, other tools that we don't have the authority to do on
our own.
Mr. Horsford. One other area, in my concluding time, that I
would like to have a conversation about is the review of the
criteria that credit reporting agencies use in which to measure
consumers. That is an area that I think needs review. This
committee has not had a hearing on that in well over a year.
And we are in a different landscape and setting today than we
were pre-2008.
Secretary Lew. I think that is correct. And I think it is
also the case that there are many people for whom the credit
rating agencies miss the test of their true creditworthiness
because they are paying their utility bills and other things on
a regular basis.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Ross, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, let me ask you quickly, if I can, because I
know your time is coming to a close here, companies are
notified under Stage 3 of the SIFI designations that they have
been designated as a SIFI, correct?
Secretary Lew. That is correct.
Mr. Ross. And there is really no other opportunity to be
notified, though, other than Stage 3?
Secretary Lew. We all know notification is Stage 3, and
there is plenty of time in Stage 3--
Mr. Ross. The SIFI designation states, ``In general, this
analysis, Stage 2, will be based on a broad range of
quantitative and qualitative information available to the
Council through existing public and regulatory sources,
including industry- and company-specific metrics beyond those
analyzed in Stage 1 and any information voluntarily submitted
by the company.''
It just seems kind of odd that if they are not aware until
Stage 3, how would they know to volunteer any information at
the Stage 2 level?
Secretary Lew. The--
Mr. Ross. I guess what I am getting at is it is almost like
a ``gotcha'' situation. Because they don't want to be a SIFI if
they don't have to be, and so they would like to work with
you--
Secretary Lew. Companies know if they meet the Stage 1
standard, because the Stage 1 standard is a publicly
available--
Mr. Ross. But they are not notified that they are being
reviewed.
Secretary Lew. No, but the companies know that if they are
in the group of companies that meet the threshold, that they
can voluntarily provide information.
Mr. Ross. Yes, but they don't know if they are in Stage 2.
Don't you think it would be better and more transparent if
there was an opportunity for notification in the Stage 2 level
of a company that is under review for SIFI purposes?
Secretary Lew. The process was actually set up in a very
careful way to try to get information that was available to use
to make preliminary determinations before engaging a company in
a process where--
Mr. Ross. And it should be a cooperative process, I agree.
Secretary Lew. But if a company is notified, that creates
all kinds of other issues, which--
Mr. Ross. But it could cause self-correctness.
Secretary Lew. It could what?
Mr. Ross. It could cause self-correctness. In other words,
they could--look, they would want to cooperate, I would think.
And not only would they want to cooperate, but I think other
companies in the same industry may also want to have the
opportunity to prevent them from being under that review.
Wouldn't that be a more transparent, a more cooperative
process?
Secretary Lew. I think the tension--the transparency of the
process is very high, because Stage 3 is where the detailed
back-and-forth with the company and FSOC goes on.
Mr. Ross. I do agree. All I am saying is, if they can have
some opportunity to avoid Stage 3, wouldn't that be better and
enure to the benefit not only of the company but also--
Secretary Lew. I am not sure it would benefit the company.
I think that, for many companies, if there was a kind of
preliminary designation they were notified of, that would
create a sense that they were about to be going through Stage
3. They may have to disclose it; it could have an effect on
their business.
Mr. Ross. But most companies don't know really that they
are even going to be Stage 3.
Secretary Lew. I think the financial firms that are at the
Stage 1 threshold level do understand that they are there.
Mr. Ross. Let me change topics here. Just recently, the
International Association of Insurance Supervisors came out
with their plan to implement capital standards for insurance
companies, hopefully on a global basis. Unfortunately, they
seem to be rushing things. And I think that the NAIC's head,
former Senator Ben Nelson, has expressed his dismay and concern
that they are going at breakneck speed.
My question to you is, if the United States doesn't
participate in these global standards for capitalization for
insurance companies, really they don't become global. And, in
fact, there may be other countries that may follow our lead.
Can you give us some assurances from the Treasury and the
FIO that everything is being done to make sure that the
interests of domestic insurance carriers are being advocated
and protected as we go through this process of assessing--
Secretary Lew. Congressman, there is robust participation
by insurance commissioners and others who are expert in the
U.S. insurance industry in that process. And I can tell you
that it is with a great deal of input from the United States
that the discussion goes forward.
Mr. Ross. And with regard to statutory accounting
procedures and generally accepted accounting procedures, those
two being at odds, too, most insurance companies now having to
potentially have to keep two sets of accounting principles,
which would be very duplicative, very costly.
Can we get some assurances from Treasury that we will focus
on not a duplication but rather a continued streamline process
for accounting principles such as the SAP, or statutory
accounting principles?
Secretary Lew. I will have to get back to you on the
specific issue regarding the insurance accounting principles.
I can tell you, as a broad matter, my view has been, if we
can in international conversations eliminate some of the noise
between different systems--
Mr. Ross. And duplication.
Secretary Lew. --it would be a good thing. The problem is
that it is not always as easy to accomplish as you would like.
Mr. Ross. I agree, which is why we would like your advocacy
in that regard.
Secretary Lew. Yes.
Mr. Ross. With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The Chair intends to recognize the
gentleman from California, followed by the gentleman from
Kentucky, and then we will excuse the Secretary.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Royce, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At the outset, I would just like to set the record straight
on an issue that I think was raised twice today, and that is
the story of AIG.
If I could submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, the story
that ran in last week's American Banker?
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Royce. Thank you.
It is by Hester Pierce. It is entitled, ``AIG's Collapse:
The Part Nobody Likes to Talk About.'' And that part, of
course, is the securities lending portfolio run for the benefit
of the State-regulated life insurance subsidiaries of AIG.
And if I could briefly quote from the article: ``Government
rescue money was critical to the recapitalization effort of
AIG. Taxpayer funds were also critical in meeting securities
borrowers' demands for cash. Securities lending counterparties
received $43.8 billion in the last quarter of 2008, comparable
to $49.6 billion in collateral postings and payments to AIG's
derivatives counterparties.''
The record is pretty clear here. The taxpayer bailout
associated with AIG, which I opposed, by the way, applies both
to its Financial Products unit in London and to its State-
regulated insurance arm right here in the United States.
But on to my question here for the Secretary.
Secretary Lew, as you know, the U.S. and the EU are
currently engaged in trade talks as part of the TTIP
negotiations. And with regard to banking and securities
regulation, the EU has put forth a limited but reasonable
proposal to strengthen U.S.-EU regulatory cooperation and to
create a more results-driven dialogue that avoids market
disruption and regulatory fragmentation. It is focused on
consistency of regulation, limiting extraterritorial impact,
and laying the foundation for recognition where appropriate.
So the EU has made this a top priority. Do you not believe
that enhancing this dialogue is an important objective and
could lead to a high-standard comprehensive regulatory regime?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I believe that both TTIP and
TPP are very important trade negotiations. And I have spent a
great deal of time working with my counterparts on the aspects
of those trade negotiations that fall in my area.
I do think there are challenges in TTIP, particularly with
regard to financial services, that we have not yet reached an
agreement on.
Mr. Royce. Right, right, but this would be a way to get
there. If you feel that financial services regulatory issues
being part of TTIP discussions would be important, this would
be a way to bridge that.
Secretary Lew. Our view--my view is that, to the extent
that the question is should financial regulatory standards,
prudential standards, be subject to a trade negotiation, the
answer there, I believe, has to be ``no.'' We can't be in a
place where we are subjecting our financial regulatory
standards to trade remedies.
We have to regulate to make sure we have a sound financial
system and drive through the G-20 and other bodies to have the
international standards reflect our high standards.
I think competition in the marketplace for financial
service companies ought to be part of a discussion, and we
ought to have open access subject to our national authorities.
Mr. Royce. Here is a point. The Wall Street Journal article
recently, in which Acting CFTC Chair Mark Wetjen takes issue
with the process and policies with the CFTC cross-border
guidance, here is his quote: ``I don't think that was the right
decision. If you have equally comparable comprehensive
regulations in Europe, as an example, then what's the reason
why we wouldn't allow for substituted compliance in that
situation?''
There's the question, and if you can have that dialogue in
order to substantiate that.
And the second would be an article I am going to quote
here, ``Transatlantic Swap Liquidity Split Persists,'' which
highlights two polls that show concrete evidence that
``regulators have failed in their attempts to tackle a
liquidity split by two swap market reforms in Europe and the
United States.''
Now, the Administration has pointed to the current
regulatory dialogue, the financial management regulatory
dialogue, as an appropriate forum. But what success has that
produced? It hasn't, in terms of regulatory cooperation and
consistency.
So I think you have an opportunity here. Many of the
challenges we have seen today--uncertainty, market disruptions,
which we talked about--could be avoided if we go down the road
of this dialogue.
Secretary Lew. Mr. Chairman, if I may just very briefly
respond?
I think that in the area of substitute and compliance we
have made a good deal of progress, but the challenge is what is
true comparability. And that is something that I believe is
being worked through in the derivatives area with the CFTC and
their counterparts both in Europe and in Asia.
And if it is true substitute and compliance on a basis of
comparable standards, that is one thing. I just don't believe
that a trade context is the appropriate place to resolve those
matters.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Barr.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your patience. It looks
like I may be the very last questioner, so I appreciate your
patience.
Mr. Secretary, you have repeatedly said that an institution
can appeal its SIFI designation if it disagrees with the FSOC
determination that it poses systemic risk.
But the first appeal is to FSOC itself, an appeal that
seems useless, given that the institution is not appealing to
an independent arbiter but instead to the same agency that is
making the original designation.
And then the second appeal would be to the courts, but that
appeal would also seem fairly useless, given the fact that FSOC
has not promulgated some objective standards to guide its
terminations, and the court couldn't effectively review those
designations and would have to defer to FSOC's original
judgment.
And, secondly, the institution wouldn't challenge the
regulators' judgment anyway, for fear of retaliation in the
supervisory process. Just last month, Former Assistant Treasury
Secretary Michael Barr pointed out that institutions may refuse
to appeal these designations precisely because they fear
regulatory retaliation.
So my question is this: Given the substantial flaws in the
appeals process, both the original, initial administrative
appeal and then the judicial appeal, does the designation
process really give institutions a meaningful opportunity to
challenge their designations?
And, given these flaws, would you support an alternative
process which would create an independent ombudsman or arbiter
as an alternative to review the initial designation?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I actually don't agree with
that assessment of the current process. I think that the
engagement at the Stage 3 level is robust and it does affect
the thinking at the staff level and the principal level. I
think that when we had the one face-to face hearing, it was
actually a very substantial exchange of questions that were
responded to.
And I think that as far as recourse to judicial resolution,
it has not been the case that financial institutions or others
are afraid to challenge judgments that they don't agree with
when the regulators make them.
Mr. Barr. So you would not reform the current statutory
process?
Secretary Lew. I think the current process is actually
working pretty well.
Mr. Barr. Okay.
In regard to Ex-Im reauthorization, you have said that
every other developed country has an export credit agency, and
we shouldn't go it alone, we shouldn't unilaterally disarm,
regarding export support.
But, given the fact that we have unilaterally burdened
financial institutions with the Volcker Rule while the rest of
the world does not have a similar regulatory regime, since we
have unilaterally burdened our manufacturers with greenhouse
gas standards not imposed by other countries, since we have
unilaterally subjected our financial institutions with higher
capital standards than the rest of the world, since we have
unilaterally subjected the United States business community to
the highest corporate tax rate in the world, what is the
difference?
Secretary Lew. Congressman, I would actually counter on two
of those issues and on the third agree with you.
I think, when it comes to Volcker, you have processes going
on through other international processes, Liikanen and Vickers,
where they are looking to put in similar kinds of systems.
I think if you look at climate rules, the agreements made
in Copenhagen were very important. We are complying, meeting
our standards; other countries are doing the same.
On the tax rate, I agree with you; we need to do business
tax reform. We should not have a statutory business tax rate as
high as we do, and I would look forward to a bipartisan effort
to do that.
Mr. Barr. I am glad you at least agree on that point. And I
take it you take my point on the others, particularly with
respect to the greenhouse gas rules, which other countries,
developed countries, China, India, certainly are not adopting.
Really quickly, final minute, I do want to ask you about
the lost IRS emails. We knew that targeting of conservative
groups by the IRS began in February-March 2010. Despite
repeated inquiries from Congress in 2011, the IRS responses did
not mention knowledge of the targeting.
In fact, in February of 2012, Commissioner Shulman was
aware of the inappropriate targeting, but in March of 2012, the
Commissioner said, ``I can give you assurances''--this is to
the Ways and Means Committee--that there was absolutely no
targeting.''
There was further stonewalling. The Administration said
this was a rogue office in Cincinnati. As it turns out, we know
that was not the case. There was also the story that this was
targeting of both progressive and conservative groups. TIGTA
George confirmed that the progressive groups were not targeted.
And then we find out about these lost emails, and there was
stonewalling, when Commissioner Koskinen knew about the hard-
drive program in February and when Treasury knew about the
hard-drive program in April of early year. We didn't find out
until 11 days ago that there were these lost emails.
So when the President says there was not a smidgeon of
corruption and when we find out that the hard drive crashed 10
days after Chairman Camp first sent a letter inquiring into
this matter back in 2011, do you agree with this assessment
that there is, maybe not corruption--I am sure you don't agree
with that--but that the stonewalling is inappropriate?
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
If the Secretary wishes to give a brief answer.
Secretary Lew. If I can just responsd briefly.
Congressman, I don't believe there is any evidence of any
political interference to date. And I don't think any of the
issues that have come up undermine that view.
I think if you look at the reaction that we had when the
TIGTA report came in, the first step we took was to replace the
top leadership. Danny Werfel came in. All the leadership
between him and the program was changed at a Senior Executive
Service level. Procedures were put in place so that it was a
very different process going forward.
I think the fact that a hard drive broke is only evidence
that a hard drive broke.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman, again, has
expired.
I would like to thank the Secretary for his testimony
today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:10 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

June 24, 2014

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
