- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-27] REVIEWING DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE STRATEGY, POLICY, AND PROGRAMS FOR COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-27]

REVIEWING DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

STRATEGY, POLICY, AND PROGRAMS

FOR COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS

DESTRUCTION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MAY 4, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-464               WASHINGTON : 2022

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona, Chairman

RICK LARSEN, Washington              TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    SAM GRAVES, Missouri
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  DON BACON, Nebraska
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
JIMMY PANETTA, California            MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida, Vice   C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
Chair

Shannon Green, Professional Staff Member
Patrick Nevins, Professional Staff Member
Zach Taylor, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Gallego. Hon. Ruben, a Representative from Arizona, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations............     1
Kelly, Hon. Trent, a Representative from Mississippi, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations....     2

WITNESSES

Szymanski, VADM Timothy G., USN, Deputy Commander, U.S. Special
Operations Command.............................................     6
Vann, Brandi C., Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs, U.S.
Department of Defense..........................................     5
Walsh, Hon. Jennifer, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security, U.S.
Department of Defense..........................................     3
Williams, Rhys, Acting Director, Defense Threat Reduction Agency,
U.S. Department of Defense.....................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Gallego. Hon. Ruben..........................................    33
Kelly, Hon. Trent............................................    34
Szymanski, VADM Timothy G....................................    60
Vann, Brandi C...............................................    45
Walsh, Hon. Jennifer.........................................    35
Williams, Rhys...............................................    70

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[The information was not available at the time of printing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bacon....................................................    82
Mr. Franklin.................................................    84
Mr. Kelly....................................................    82
Mr. Larsen...................................................    81
Ms. Sherrill.................................................    85

REVIEWING DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE STRATEGY,

POLICY, AND PROGRAMS FOR COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2022

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, May 4, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:01 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Ruben Gallego (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RUBEN GALLEGO, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ARIZONA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL
OPERATIONS

Mr. Gallego. The committee will come to order. Members who
are joining remotely must be visible on screen for the person's
identity verification, establishing and maintaining a quorum,
participating in the proceeding, and voting. Those members must
continue to use the software platform as a video function while
in attendance, unless they experience connectivity issues, or
other technical problems that render them unable to participate
on camera. If the member experiences technical difficulties,
they should contact the committee staff for assistance. Video
of members' participation [will be] broadcast in the room and
via television/internet feeds. Members participating remotely
must seek recognition verbally, and they are asked to mute
their microphones when they are not speaking. Members who are
participating remotely are reminded to keep their software
platform's video function on the entire time they attend the
proceedings. Members may leave and rejoin the proceeding.
If members depart for a short while for reasons other than
joining a different proceeding, they should leave the video
function on. If members will be absent for a significant period
to depart for a different proceeding, they should exit the
software platform entirely and then rejoin if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature to
indicate with staff regarding technical or logistical support
issues only.
Finally, I designated committee staff members to, if
necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphone to cancel any
inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the proceeding.
Good morning. Today, we will be hearing the testimony
regarding the current and projected state of the defense
apparatus to counter weapons of mass destruction. The witnesses
represent the Department of Defense's extensive infrastructure
necessary to comprehensively plan for, track, and mitigate the
growing threats which [comprise] weapons of mass destruction.
Even with recent demonstrations by authoritarian regimes to
deploy biological and chemical weapons against their own
citizens, the threat of WMD is often understood as a high-yield
nuclear nation killers.
However, emerging biotechnologies and illicit narcotics
could be weaponized and present existential threats to the
country. Synthetic biology, pardon me, synthetic biological
weapons increase the opportunity for less sophisticated
adversaries to create chemical and biological weapons without
requiring funding, infrastructure, or materielly historic--or
anything that is materiel historically necessary.
Further, the 2021 Annual Threat Assessment provided by the
Director of National Intelligence highlights the growing threat
from the development of chemical precursors to produce illicit
narcotics such as fentanyl, which has already devastated
segments of the U.S. population.
The COVID-19 [coronavirus] pandemic has shown just how
devastating biological threats can be. In this case, the novel
coronavirus was not weaponized, but it could be.
I am interested in hearing what we are doing to firmly
detect and deter these amorphous threats. These threats are
exacerbated by the rapid proliferation of accessible
technologies, which are often easily accessible or commercially
available, creating an omnipresent threat that must be
considered strategically while preparing to confront the
threats tactically.
With that, let me introduce our four witnesses who are
responsible for the modernization of the Department's CWMD
[countering weapons of mass destruction] strategies, policies,
and programs to reflect today's threat environment with the
capability and the needs of tomorrow. We look forward to
hearing their testimonies regarding this critical topic.
The Honorable Jennifer Walsh, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security;
the Honorable Brandi C. Vann, Acting Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs;
and Vice Admiral Timothy Szymanski, Deputy Commander of U.S.
Special Operations Command; and Dr. Rhys M. Williams, Acting
Director, Defense Threat Reduction Agency.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you. I look forward to your
discussion and will now recognize Ranking Member Kelly for his
opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gallego can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. TRENT KELLY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSISSIPPI, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND
SPECIAL OPERATIONS

Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your opening
remarks and your leadership in organizing this morning's
posture hearing. Today, we will hear from four experts across
the countering weapons of mass destruction portfolio.
There is a lot going on from the usual bad actors of China,
Russia, Iran, North Korea, and various terrorist organizations
that I look forward to hearing about during this session. The
continued use of chemical weapons by the Assad regime,
poisoning of Alexei Navalny and Sergei Skripal by Russia, and
research of biological weapons by China are just a few
highlights of this threat.
A growing concern brought to the forefront from the ongoing
coronavirus pandemic is the threat of biological weapons
directed at our military and private citizens. The risk of
weaponized aerosol fentanyl is just one example of many
alarming and growing threats.
I am interested to hear from our witnesses today on what we
are doing to not only identify these types of threats but also
what we are doing to mitigate the threats both for our deployed
troops and our citizens here in the homeland. I am also
interested to hear our witnesses' views on the global threat
posture, especially in the context of great power competition
and potential for kinetic engagement with adversaries like
China.
Lastly, I am deeply concerned about how the Biden
administration's budget will affect our overall counter weapons
of mass destruction preparedness. The ongoing use of chemical
threats, coupled with the effects seen from the coronavirus,
illuminates the direness of this. And it seems like failing to
properly invest in these resources will have grave
consequences.
I want to thank our witnesses in advance for their time
today. I look forward to continuing work with our counter-WMD
experts during the 117th Congress to ensure we are
appropriately postured to meet and defeat the threats shaped by
weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelly can be found in the
Appendix on page 34.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly.
I greatly appreciate your comments and dealing with me.
Next, thank you--now, we are going to move on to questions and
hearing from our witnesses. We will start with Ms. Walsh. You
are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. JENNIFER WALSH, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR HOMELAND DEFENSE AND GLOBAL SECURITY,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Ms. Walsh. Thank you.
Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member Kelly, and members of the
subcommittee, I am honored to testify on the Department of
Defense's [DOD's] efforts related to countering weapons of mass
destruction or CWMD. DOD's CWMD mission is to dissuade, deter,
and, when necessary, defeat actors of concern who threaten or
use WMD against the United States and our interests. I work
alongside the members of this panel to develop the policies,
strategies, capabilities, and expertise needed to accomplish
this mission.
My written statement describes the WMD threat landscape.
And I want to emphasize that the Department continues to
improve its ability to dissuade, deter, and defeat these
threats while maintaining the ability to respond to and
mitigate the effects of WMD use. We have taken action to meet
WMD challenges, and as the nature of WMD threats is evolving,
we know we have more work to do.
The Department has three lines of effort to organize our
work to counter WMD threats: prevent acquisition, contain and
reduce threats, and respond to crises. To prevent acquisition
or contain existing threats, the Department leverages its
unique tools and expertise in support of a whole-of-government
approach to mitigate the risk of global WMD proliferation and
threat actors' pursuit of WMD advancements. Examples include
supporting global norms under the Nuclear Nonproliferation
Treaty, or NPT; remaining postured to conduct WMD interdiction,
and preparing partners to do so; and implementing United
Nations sanctions to prevent North Korean illicit trade.
Second, the Department leads the Cooperative Threat
Reduction, or CTR, program, which works with partner nations to
secure and eliminate WMD and WMD-related materials. The DOD CTR
program is active in more than 30 countries and has helped a
number of these to more rapidly identify and respond to COVID-
19. CTR is called the Nunn-Lugar program after the two
visionary Senators who championed its creation. And I want to
thank Congress for its continued support for CTR, which has
made and continues to make valuable contributions to U.S. and
global security.
Third, we developed the capability and capacity of the
joint force, allies, and partners to operate in a chemical,
biological, radiological, or a nuclear, or CBRN, contaminated
environment. As the Department increases focus on competition
among great powers, developing the capabilities necessary for
us to fight and win in a CBRN contested environment in those
theaters becomes critical. The Department also works with our
allies and partners to confirm that U.S. CBRN defense
capabilities are interoperable and to encourage partner nations
to share the burden of CBRN defense.
Achieving effects across this mission space is a
Department-wide effort, and we must make hard choices about how
we prioritize our activities and investments. The DOD CWMD-
Unity of Effort Council brings together 20-plus stakeholders
across the Department to collaborate on CWMD policy and
strategic goals. In 2020, the council helped create inaugural
Department-wide CWMD priorities approved by the Secretary of
Defense. In 2021, we are conducting an implementation review to
assess Department-wide alignment with these priorities and
guidance.
As administration officials direct and develop new national
and departmental strategy reviews and guidance documents, DOD's
CWMD stakeholders will be focused on addressing the dynamic
CWMD threat and ensuring that it gets space in these documents,
including posturing the Department to mitigate biological
threats more effectively and improving readiness for CBRN
changes in Europe and Asia.
Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member Kelly, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today,
and thank you for your continued support for the CWMD mission.
I look forward to your discussion.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Walsh can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Ms. Walsh. Now, let's move to Dr.
Vann.

STATEMENT OF BRANDI C. VANN, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR NUCLEAR, CHEMICAL, AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE PROGRAMS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Vann. Good morning, Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member
Kelly, and the distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is
an honor and a privilege to testify before you today on behalf
of the men and women of the Department of Defense that comprise
the United States counter weapons of mass destruction
enterprise. These dedicated Americans work tirelessly to defend
our brave service members, the Nation, and our international
partners and allies from the increasing threat posed by the
most devastating weapons created.
I would also like to thank my fellow witnesses for their
dedication and commitment to our joint enterprise through which
we are able to defend the Nation and our warfighters from WMD.
The CWMD enterprise ensures that the United States
maintains its enduring technological advantage when countering
present and emerging threats. The NCB [Nuclear, Chemical, and
Biological Defense Programs] office, including the Defense
Threat Reduction Agency, is responsible for ensuring the
Department maintains the capability and readiness to counter
WMD across the threat landscape. To that end, the NCB office is
aligning ourselves to meet the direction given by the
President's Interim National Security Strategic Guidance and
the Secretary's three priorities. Our efforts will enable us to
close today's gaps, rapidly mitigate vulnerabilities,
anticipate emerging threats, and strengthen our domestic and
international partnerships.
But the pace of technology continues to move faster and
faster, and as a result, the players on the world stage are
shifting, the conflict landscape is changing, and so are the
hazards that we all face, making our jobs ever more complex.
Overcoming these changes and the emergence and reemergence of
unique CBRN threats requires the Department first to understand
that emerging threats landscape and then develop adaptive
capabilities to respond to these threats as they arise. In
doing so, we can assure that the joint force can fight and win
in CBRN contested environments, prepare for surprise from
emerging threats, and reduce the risk that they pose.
To modernize the force, the Department will work closely
with Congress as we shift emphasis from legacy systems to
cutting-edge capabilities. We are moving to get ahead of the
threat by anticipating and understanding the convergence of
novel science and technological advances. And as a part of
layered defense, we can deny the effects of WMD by developing
and fielding a wide range of defensive equipment.
Further, fields such as artificial intelligence, machine
learning, additive manufacturing, and rapid medical
countermeasure development all provide us an opportunity to
adapt our defense capabilities quickly and effectively. We
should embrace the technological revolution within the private
sector, and lead game-changing technology advancements to
ensure our warfighters are best prepared for the future threat.
Finally, the NCB enterprise will expand our collaborations
with our interagency and international partners, as well as the
private sector, to spur innovation, deepen interoperability,
and leverage best practices.
Our strong relationships with our allies has brought us
incredible value to our ability to protect, detect, and
mitigate our forces against WMD threats, and have informed
great strides in our ability to develop and acquire
technologies for our force.
The NCB enterprise remains focused on anticipating the
future threat by closing capability gaps and ensuring the joint
force prevails in a contaminated environment. We will continue
to remain behind the warfighter and ahead of the threat to
ensure our joint force's ability to survive, operate, and
regenerate combat power in the future.
On behalf of the NCB enterprise, I would like to thank the
committee for its support and dedication to improving our
capabilities to address the current and emerging threats base.
Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member Kelly, thank you again for
the opportunity to testify, and I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Vann can be found in the
Appendix on page 45.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Dr. Vann.
Next, we will have Vice Admiral Szymanski.

STATEMENT OF VADM TIMOTHY G. SZYMANSKI, USN, DEPUTY COMMANDER,
U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND

Admiral Szymanski. Good morning, Chairman Gallego, Ranking
Member Kelly, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to represent the United States Special
Operations Command [USSOCOM] today. On behalf of General
Clarke, it is my privilege to join Ms. Walsh, Dr. Vann, and Dr.
Williams at this hearing on how we work together to address
some of the most critical national security challenges facing
our country.
The 2017 Unified Command Plan directed USSOCOM to
coordinate the CWMD mission across the Department, and General
Clarke has sustained that strategic course. The 2021 Unified
Command Plan reiterates USSOCOM's responsibility for planning
the Department's CWMD efforts as directed by the Secretary. We
conduct strategic planning, assess the Department's execution
of the CWMD campaign, make recommendations to the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secretary of Defense, and sustain
the DOD-wide functional campaign plan that enables the joint
force to improve coordination in countering transregional WMD
threats.
The landscape of nuclear, chemical, and biological threats
has continued to evolve over this past year. We monitor and
analyze progression of existing and over-the-horizon WMD
programs closely, with essential support from the Defense
Intelligence Agency. The classification level of this forum
limits the detail I can provide from our vantage point, but
news headlines are a good indicator of the complexity and the
nature of the threat.
We have seen norms against the use of chemical weapons
continue to erode following Russia's attempted assassination of
a former Russian intelligence officer with a Novichok nerve
agent in the United Kingdom in 2018 and, more recently, the
attempted assassination of Russian opposition leader Alexei
Navalny with another Novichok nerve agent in August 2020.
China meanwhile is continuing the most rapid expansion of
platform diversification of its nuclear arsenal in its history,
and it intends, as the Director of National Intelligence made
clear in this year's Annual Threat Assessment, to at least
double the size of its nuclear stockpile during the next decade
and to field a nuclear triad.
And, finally, COVID-19 pandemic is a stark reminder of our
collective vulnerability to biological threats. Clearly, WMDs
are complex, transregional challenges that demand the
application of specialized expertise and authorities across our
government as well as our foreign allies and partners.
The Department of Defense plays a unique and critical
supporting role to our interagency colleagues, especially at
the Departments of Energy, State, Treasury, and Commerce, as
well as our law enforcement entities, to prevent and contain
WMD threats, even as we prepare to respond to WMD crises.
We coordinate, therefore, across not only the Department of
Defense, but also with interagency colleagues and foreign
allies and partners, without whom achieving U.S. objectives
would be exceedingly difficult. We also work closely with the
Joint Staff, combatant commands, and services to regularly
assess the Department's CWMD campaign and ensure the
Department's plans appropriately address changes in the WMD
threat environment.
We strive to improve our methodology and ensure it provides
timely, reliable, relevant, and actionable information to
support senior Department decision making. Our aim is to better
support senior leaders charged with employing our joint force
today, developing and preparing it for tomorrow, and helping to
design a military that is ready to fight and win against both
current and future WMD threats.
In closing, General Clarke and I would like to thank the
members of this subcommittee for their support of this
important national security mission. It is a privilege to work
together with our colleagues to keep our country safe from the
threat of nuclear, chemical, and biological threats. We look
forward to our continued partnership with them, with Members of
Congress, and with our interagency and international partners
to ensure our safety now and into the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Szymanski can be found
in the Appendix on page 60.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Admiral.
And now we have Dr. Williams.

STATEMENT OF RHYS WILLIAMS, ACTING DIRECTOR, DEFENSE THREAT
REDUCTION AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Williams. Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member Kelly, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for your
continued support of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency, or
DTRA. On behalf of the nearly 2,200 members at DTRA, I am proud
to appear today alongside my fellow witnesses to talk about our
unique role enabling the Department of Defense, U.S.
interagency, and our many international partners to counter and
deter weapons of mass destruction and emerging threats.
The Department of Defense established DTRA to integrate and
focus the Department's expertise against the real and ever-
evolving threat of the proliferation and use of weapons of mass
destruction, or WMD. Under national and departmental policy and
guidance and through close collaboration across the Department,
interagency, and our international partners and allies, DTRA
delivers innovative capabilities that ensure a strong,
protected, and prepared joint force.
Part of DTRA's unique value stems from our roles as a
defense agency and a combat support agency. In our defense
agency role, we respond to requirements from the services as
well as from the DOD offices, including the Under Secretaries
of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, Policy, and
Research and Engineering. These lines of authority give us
strategic roles in the counter-WMD fight through nuclear
mission assurance, treaty verification, building partnership
capacity, and cooperative threat reduction, among many key
programs.
In our combat support agency role, DTRA responds to the
combatant commands and Joint Staff requirements, offering
subject-matter expertise, operational analysis, and material
and nonmaterial solution sets in support of counter-WMD
planning and operations. These roles, on behalf of both
national security policy and the warfighter, enable us to
integrate efforts such that, at home and abroad, we deliver
mission success to detect, deter, and defeat WMD and emerging
threats.
I cannot overstate that people are DTRA's most valuable
resource. Our staff includes world-class scientists developing
therapeutics for emerging pathogens, chemical threats;
technical linguists that help find common ground in complex
international engagements; tactical specialists securing
dangerous weapons and materials; and subject-matter experts on
call 24/7 to provide real-time expertise and decision support
analysis to all levels of government.
DTRA's military personnel ensure that we maintain a close
alignment with warfighter requirements. And our capabilities
are further amplified by our forward presence at the combatant
commands, within task forces, and at key interagency locales.
In addition to its unparalleled workforce, DTRA is an
agency characterized by partnerships and collaboration. The
Center of Excellence for global counter-WMD expertise, DTRA
works closely with technical peers in academia and in industry.
We team with interagency partners like the Departments of
State, Energy, Homeland Security, and Health and Human
Services, and engage equally well with international partners.
This network, spanning the breadth of the counter-WMD and
emerging threats enterprise, allows DTRA to use its unique
expertise to wide-ranging effect, providing integrated
solutions across the spectrum of competition and conflict.
There are few greater challenges to U.S. national security
than those posed by WMD and emerging threats. As the globalized
threat landscape evolves, DTRA's uniquely skilled workforce and
robust collaborative network of partners are ready to evolve
with it, continuing to safeguard the lives and interests of the
U.S. and our allies abroad.
Thank you for your time and invitation to participate
today, and I look toward to your questions
[The prepared statement of Dr. Williams can be found in the
Appendix on page 70.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Dr. Williams.
And thank you for hosting us a couple of weeks back.
We are going to now move on to the question period. Each
member will have 5 minutes to ask questions. We will alternate
between minority and majority, and I will take the first
question.
We can only defeat the threats from weapons of mass
destruction with collective action in concert with our allies,
partners, as well as international bodies. I am concerned that
we are not working as closely as we should with countries such
as South Korea, India, and Japan.
How close are we working with South Korea to succeed in the
CWMD mission? And is there anything preventing you from
sharing, collaborating with our friends in South Korea? And
then, lastly, how prepared--well, we will just go to that.
Let's just start with those two questions. And can we start
with Dr. Vann, and then, Ms. Walsh, if you can answer my first
two questions. And if you need me to repeat them, please just
ask.
Dr. Vann. Yes, thank you, Chairman Gallego, for that
question. I think that it is important to say that when we are
developing technologies with our joint force, we do work with
our allies and partners, significantly, excuse me, in order to
assess and test equipment and integrate our forces.
Specific to Republic of Korea, we have active in-country
engagements with our allies in Korea that is seeking to not
only partner in our readiness but also in reviews of our
capabilities with our Korean counterparts. The rest of it I
guess I will defer to Ms. Walsh, her response.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Doctor.
Ms. Walsh.
Ms. Walsh. Thank you very much. With any of our bilateral
defense relationships, the issues that we raise and the
capability or capacity development that we work together, it is
a bilateral process. And so it is not just about the U.S.
offering; it is about another country being a willing partner.
With respect to the Republic of Korea, we have very close
bilateral relationships, mil to mil, across the chemical,
biological, and nuclear cooperation. The Cooperative Threat
Reduction Program has activities across the chem, bio, and
nuclear space. We are working with our Republic of Korea allies
to ensure that we are ready for a WMD contingency. Regardless
of what the threat is, the Koreans bear responsibility, we bear
responsibility, to ensure that what we have committed to each
other is on track and that we can deliver those capabilities.
We meet annually in a CWMD bilateral forum with our Republic of
Korea counterparts so that we can ensure that we have trust and
confidence. And then, obviously, U.S. Forces Korea has daily
contact with their Korean counterparts. These issues are
definitely top of the list of concerns and threats, and,
therefore, these get attention to be sure that we are prepared
to work with them. With--I am sorry?
Mr. Gallego. No, go ahead. I am sorry. I apologize.
Ms. Walsh. You had also asked about Japan.
With Japan, discussions about WMD are handled through our
bilateral relationship channels. The Cooperative Threat
Reduction Program is not active in Japan. But I can assure you
that we speak regularly about ensuring that through extended
deterrence and U.S. capabilities, that these conversations do
happen on a bilateral basis with our Japanese counterparts.
With respect to India, we through--in addressing biological
threats, the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program facilitates a
Track 2 biosecurity dialogue. And then through the Cooperative
Threat Reduction Program, with respect to nuclear issues, we
have a--we support a Track 1.5 dialogue with our Indian
counterparts. Dr. Williams is probably in a better position to
speak to the details since he has oversight of CTR
implementation.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, ma'am.
Dr. Williams, please.
Dr. Williams. The only thing I would add, sir, is as far as
the Republic of Korea goes, to amplify what both Dr. Vann and
Ms. Walsh said, we have very close contact with our colleagues
both on the R&D [research and development] side of the house as
well as in the cooperative threat reduction space, so much so
that we recently, last year, just prior to COVID, hosted the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs for the Republic of Korea at DTRA
for a full day of discussion in cooperative agreements. And
then we routinely have teams going back and forth. And we also
have an embedded team, as was said, at U.S. Forces Korea that
has constant communication with our allies that are in Korea.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Dr. Williams.
And, Dr. Vann, how prepared are U.S. Forces in Korea for
CWMD situations? And how prepared are South Korean troops? I
forget who I was talking to yesterday, like my WMD experience
was, you know, on the way to the Syrian border basically
getting handed atropine and being told to just put this in my
lung in case something goes bad, which is not good.
Dr. Vann. Yes, sir. Yes, not optimal, for sure. So our
forces that are currently in Korea--well, first, let me say,
what we do to focus our programs is we actually have a service
board that sits on--sits with us as we develop RDA,--research,
development, and acquisition--capabilities for the joint force
structure. We use that service board to help identify
capability requirements for the joint force as well as help
integrate into the--and across the larger force modernization
efforts.
So, in terms of our capabilities for the joint force for
chemical and biological defense, we have rapidly developing
capabilities we are developing every single day. Last year, we
developed over a million pieces of protective and detection
equipment for our forces. We have layered defense approaches as
well, so that goes from everything from detection, both remote
and point, as well as diagnostic gear, physiological
monitoring, personal protective equipment, as well as
mitigation capabilities for disinfection or decontamination of
any of our equipment and personnel.
In addition to that, we are continuing to invest in medical
countermeasures for CBRN threats to get ahead of the atropine
and to make both vaccination or pretreatments as well as post-
exposure therapeutics more easily adaptable to new and emerging
threats as well as more effective in its pursuit to mitigate
the effects of chemical and biological weapons.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Dr. Vann.
Admiral, earlier, we were talking about working with our
allies. Is there something in our classification process right
now that doesn't make it optimal for us to be able to share
information with our allies or even across the service in order
for us to, basically, be ready for the CWMD threats of the
future?
Admiral Szymanski. Chairman, thanks for the question. I
think, over the years that SOCOM [Special Operations Command]
has had the coordinating authority, we have really tried to
break down the barriers to sharing information. I know just in
the conferences that we coordinate through the year, we always
have whatever NDS [National Defense Strategy] WMD threat
challenge that we are examining that year, we try to have the
partners, we have a day--it is usually a 2- or 3-day
conference--and we usually have a day where our foreign
partners are asked to join and participate in the conference.
Now, there always are security classification challenges
that we continue to try to overcome. I think a good example is
really what we have been doing to help NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization] both in their biological and chemical
preparedness and response as well as their allied tactical
publication that allows for more information sharing.
But information sharing outside of WMD has always been one
of those obstacles to collaboration that really needs to be
examined in the moment for the problem that you are trying to
solve at hand.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Thank you. I yield to Ranking Member
Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here.
Mr. Gallego. Ranking Member Kelly, I think I went way more
than 5 minutes, so please take whatever time you may need.
Mr. Kelly. [Inaudible] talk about the [inaudible].
Mr. Gallego. Ranking Member Kelly, one second, is it just
my connection, but you are breaking up.
Mr. Kelly. Can you hear me?
Voice. It is hard to hear Ranking Member Kelly, here in the
HASC [House Armed Services Committee] hearing room.
Mr. Kelly. How about now?
Mr. Gallego. Yeah. That is better.
Mr. Kelly. All right. As the Department balances the shift
in resources between C-VEO [countering violent extremist
organizations] with GPC [great power competition], what are the
most significant capability or resource vulnerabilities to the
countering weapons of mass destruction mission? And I will
start with you, Vice Admiral, and then the others can chime in.
Admiral Szymanski. So the resource and challenges, I think,
in General Clarke's statement a few weeks back, he talked about
the balance between readiness and modernization as we shift to
take on strategic competition. The CWMD problem set, the way we
look at the CWMD problem set, it is robust, it is complex, and
it is transregional. And there is really--as we think about
balance of those resources across all of the threat vectors,
from the most--the VEO with the most rudimentary applications
or developments of CWMD problem, to the strategic competitors
who have advanced capabilities across the biological, chemical,
and nuclear threats spectrum.
So, from a SOCOM perspective and from a, I think, from the
Department's perspective, we look at the CWMD challenge, but it
doesn't really shift across--we have to still look at that
challenge across all those threat vectors. So the shift did not
really--hasn't really changed the way we attack or go after or
try to fight the challenge of the CWMD problem set. Over.
Mr. Kelly. Anyone else want to add?
Ms. Walsh. I would like to join in and add that one of the
reasons that the Unity of Effort Council undertook a DOD-wide
CWMD prioritization effort was because we recognized this
spectrum of threats is crowded and that resources are always
going to be more limited than the threats will bear. And so, by
prioritizing the greatest WMD threats and associating those
with where the Department of Defense has the exclusive mission
to counter, so a leading versus a supporting other U.S.
Government departments and agencies, it is going to help all of
our CWMD stakeholder components focus their investments,
activities, and efforts toward those priorities. It does not
mean that we are taking our eye off the entirety of the threat
spectrum, but it is helping us make smart investments. And one
of the things that we continue to look at is where we can get
multiple returns on the same investments, whether it is
nuclear, chemical, or biological threats that we are
countering. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you. And I spoke with three of the four of
you yesterday, and one of my biggest concerns is that, as we
shift to global power or competition, that this is a zero-sum,
zero-sum game when we talk about this arena. And it is
important that we not only focus on global power, but we also
look at violent and homegrown terrorist organizations, which
can do us much, much damage.
Second, this is for you, Dr. Williams. We have been
tracking the SARS-COVID-2 origins and DOD and DTRA funding to
the Wuhan Institute of Virology through its grant to EcoHealth
Alliance. I am interested if and how each [inaudible]
government agency given its ties to the PLA [People's
Liberation Army]?
Dr. Williams. Chairman, I am afraid you cut for the middle
of that question, sir. If you could repeat it, please. Over.
Mr. Kelly. I am talking about the Wuhan Institute of
Virology and tracking the SARS-COVID-2, and I am wondering what
kind of risk assessment or risk analysis we conducted and how
the Wuhan Institute of Virology became the [inaudible] of
choice for U.S. Government agencies, given its ties to the PLA.
Dr. Williams. Sir, thank you for your question. Sir, as we
have looked at this extensively, as you know, sir, there was a
request from the Congress to the Department a year, 2 years ago
to look at this funding level as well as again most recently.
We have done a thorough look at all of our programmatic
activities to ensure that at least the Defense Threat Reduction
Agency's funding to this NGO [nongovernmental organization] was
not provided, to the best of our knowledge, into the Wuhan
Institute of Virology.
On top of it, sir, our expertise both on programmatics as
well as kind of our technical expertise looks at all of our
activities that we invest in for these types of NGOs to make
sure that the risk for government funding is minimalized, and
in keeping with the traditions and the boundaries of the
Federal acquisition process, but, equally as importantly,
policy as well. I think, Dr. Vann, did you want to add anything
to this?
Dr. Vann. I don't have much to add to that. I think that
that is a good, you know, good review. But I would like to add
that we also across the NCB did a thorough review to identify
any potential access or investment into the Wuhan laboratory,
and we have not identified any. It is something that we
continue to watch to ensure that our investments are not going
to places where they should not be.
Mr. Kelly. Chairman, I am going to ask one last question,
but I am going to ask that they submit for the record
[inaudible] the hearing.
I just want to ask how confident each of you are with the
full appreciation of the chemical and biological capabilities
of our adversaries. And if there are gaps, please in writing
let us know what we can do to close some of those gaps.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you.
I now yield time to Representative Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I hope your dog stays off
you this time.
So my question is really about legacy, and I might have
difficulty asking this because I have legacy thinking myself.
So I have to switch my brain a little bit in trying to craft
this question. I think it is for Vice Admiral Szymanski and
Director Williams.
And given what we know and what you have testified to
regarding synthetic biology, regarding 3D printing, advanced
manufacturing, these different technologies that both have
uses, good and evil, who is in charge in the Department for
ensuring that the women and men in our military understand
their uses of these technologies and--generally, and then
understanding the uses of these technologies in the field? I
can think of a--many 3D printing manufacturing, advanced
manufacturing plant being deployed with a group of women and
men in our military in the field for use for certain purposes.
Who is in charge of educating and upscaling these women and men
for the uses of these technologies?
Admiral Szymanski. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Larsen. So really there is a service requirement and
responsibility largely for the force generation and how forces
are equipped--manned, equipped, and trained. From a
coordinating authority from SOCOM, our responsibility is really
about the planning--helping the combatant--geographic combatant
commands plan against how to counter WMD. Then, annually, we
look and assess against that plan the changing conditions on
the ground, the changing threat vectors, the changing
situation, and assess if that campaign plan and that framework
is adequate or needs to be adapted.
But I think that the collaboration between what SOCOM does
as the coordinating authority and then what DTRA does I think,
more importantly to your question, is that DTRA really gets
after the unique solution of those gaps that we identify in
that plan against those changing conditions.
For instance, we may see a new biological threat. Do we
have the diagnostics? And I think Dr. Vann was pretty
articulate in her opening statement about the kinds of things
that they are doing across the spectrum of being prepared as
well as to maintain consequence as well as protective equipment
capabilities. But largely the man, train, and equipping aspects
for our individuals, for our men and women, are a service
responsibility; that is the geographical combatant commander's
responsibility for how we incorporate the plan as it relates to
the threat in their region.
Mr. Larsen. So do we have to rely on the service then to
generate that requirement if we see it otherwise? If we see
that they aren't doing them?
Admiral Szymanski. No, sir. Often we will help generate
that requirement for that. In fact, this year is the first year
that SOCOM has done a comprehensive--from a coordinating
authority lens, has submitted a for--the requirements, broad-
based requirements piece for DOD to--and each of the
geographical combatant commanders, to DTRA.
Mr. Larsen. Dr. Williams.
Dr. Williams. Sir, so as the admiral said, sir, yes, we
ingest that requirements from the services as well as from the
geographic combatant commanders on a routine basis. We actually
get four-star requirements that come in, and we rack and stack
those against the available resources, and, again, keeping with
policy to make sure it is there. As the admiral just said, I
literally sent last night to General Clarke an interim response
on that requirements letter that came in earlier this spring.
So what we end up doing is--also as part of our engagement
with the services and their man, equip, and train aspect of
things, we make sure we bring that cutting-edge technology
knowledge back into their training courses. Again, a specific
example of that, sir, we actually run the Defense Nuclear
Weapons School, which trains all the nuclear aspects of that.
Mr. Larsen. Dr. Williams, anything more, please for the
record.
And I will have questions for Dr. Vann and Ms. Walsh
regarding your definition of legacy as well as more on the
prioritization efforts of the Unity of Efforts Council. I think
we are probably going to be interested in the outcomes of that.
So, with that, I will [inaudible] that for the record, Mr.
Chair, and I will yield back.
I yield back none of the time I have in the time left.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Larsen.
Now, we have Representative Scott next.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for being with us
today. The topic kind of really better discussed, I think,
behind closed doors, but I want to encourage my colleagues to
get up to speed if you are not on the ABMS [Advanced Battle
Management System] system and some of the potential gaps or--or
not potential, but the very real gaps that we have in the
ability to pick up weapons that could and would be used against
the United States if they were, if we were to find ourselves in
a conflict with Russia or China. The systems are smaller. They
are significantly faster, and that means we have got to pick
them up with systems that we use in space.
And I will mention a couple of my concerns with that is
that, a few years ago, we were dependent on rockets from Russia
to actually launch satellites as the United States. And I am
happy to use the private sector to help us launch satellites,
but I do think that we need to be self-reliant and not
dependent on the public sector to do that. And so that is one
thing that I hope that the agency, the Defense Department will
continue to look at is making sure that while publicly traded
companies are fine to use during times when we are not in
conflict, what would happen to our ability to launch if we were
dependent on publicly traded companies during an all-out war
with Russia and China.
As we talk about ABMS versus the legacy systems, and,
Admiral, this is predominantly for you because you have been
one of the guys on the ground as a special operator. I am very
concerned about the communications aspect of the new systems.
And as we move into space, are you confident that we can handle
the communications from space and not necessarily from aircraft
for our special operators?
Admiral Szymanski. Congressman, thank you for the question.
Space and communications, as we think about strategic
competition, I think it is a problem set we think about often.
You are right, as special operations has historically been
dependent on robust tactical communications, and a lot of that
is based on space architecture. I would also say you are right
that this would be a better discussion in another setting at
another time. But let me say this: I think it is important that
we run scenarios. In fact, we've just run a scenario down at
SOCOM not related to CWMD on a day without comms
[communications]. And so how do we plan for everything from our
tactical to our strategic comms to take and survive a hit. In
good military planning, as you know, we do most likely courses
of action scenarios, and we do most dangerous.
And so what do we need to--what are the gaps in things like
comm computing, communications at the edge? And so we are kind
of going through that analysis now. How resilient and how
resilient does that comm infrastructure have to be? Obviously,
our communications are--our space communications are important,
and I think we are taking a hard look at how we won't be able
to fight and win in a contested or denied comm environment.
Mr. Scott. Space is going to be contested as well. And I
understand their concept. I won't get too much into it. I
actually like the concept. But I do want to make sure that, you
know, if we did end up in a scenario where we needed to be
doing a lot of launches, that we would not be totally dependent
on publicly traded companies to do that. And we got ourselves
in a bind a couple of years ago where we were dependent on
Russian rockets to actually launch our satellites. And I hope
that that is something that we just pay attention to. It is a
mistake we made in the past, we don't need to make in the
future.
I will mention one last thing for my colleagues on the
Democratic side. In the President's speech, he mentioned a
DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency]-like program
in the National Institute of Health. I am not so sure that it
would be better served to the general public if we did a
National Institute of Health-type program under DARPA so that
we did effectively the same thing the President is asking for.
But the model and the leadership of DARPA seems to work very
well, and I don't see why we can't increase that funding over
there with a specific focus on health.
With that, my time is up, as you just heard. And so I
appreciate all of you, and I look forward to continuing the
discussion.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Scott, and
impressive that you keep your own timer.
Now, let's move on to Representative Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank our witnesses. Public reports, including a very
recent one over the National Academy of Sciences, have detailed
the threats behind directed radio frequency energy weapons, how
that can be used. Are you doing any research or involvement in
that in terms of the scope of your work----
Ms. Walsh. I'm sorry, I had trouble hearing the question,
understanding the question.
Mr. Keating. I will try again. Public reports including the
National Academy of Sciences, have talked about directed radio
frequency, microwave [inaudible] weapons that were used. Are
you [inaudible] with that subject matter [inaudible] what kind
of research methodology do you have in terms of that?
Ms. Walsh. Sir.
Mr. Gallego. Were you able to understand that question?
Ms. Walsh. I believe so. Thank you.
Mr. Gallego. Okay.
Ms. Walsh. The Department of Defense is aware and
supporting a whole-of-government effort looking into those
issues. This is another topic that I would be happy to discuss
in a different setting.
Mr. Keating. There are, though, however, national
publications done. For instance, the National Academy of
Sciences. So can you just comment generally on whether they
present a real danger?
Ms. Walsh. What the National Academy of Sciences report
assessed is definitely something that we are continuing to look
at. It was directed at the request, I believe, of the
Department of State. And so we are taking that report and its
findings seriously. And it is part of what we are looking into
in cooperation with the State Department and other parts of the
U.S. Government.
Mr. Keating. I realize that we probably will have to deal
with more of this in a classified setting. But thank you very
much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Keating.
And I now actually lost track of who is next. Give me one
second please.
Representative Bacon, you are up.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to all of our panelists. I appreciate your
leadership. My first question is to Ms. Vann. Is Iran your
number one threat for nuclear proliferation? Thank you.
Dr. Vann. Actually, I think for that conversation, I would
defer to my colleague from Policy.
Ms. Walsh. Thank you very much. When it comes to
proliferation, we have great concerns about China. China lacks
export controls. It is not a country that exercises in great
transparency in reporting to international bodies that it has
signed up to report to, but also just being good stewards of
public information sharing. So we do have concerns about China,
the proliferation that could support WMD activities across the
board of items coming out of China and China not responsibly
monitoring what is going where.
Obviously, we look at any number of proliferation concerns
when it comes to nuclear. This could include just fissile
material, radiological material. Iran is not my number one
proliferation threat. Iran does not have a nuclear weapons
program. But there are other nuclear weapons----
Mr. Bacon. I think what I was trying to get to is--and I
think you answered it--[inaudible] a threat, and Iran is I
believe a very likely recipient of that proliferation. So that
was the intent of my question.
Framed that way, is that a concern, Iran working with
China?
Ms. Walsh. I would want to take that conversation into a
classified conversation, sir.
Mr. Bacon. So we do know in unclassified documents that
China did help out Pakistan. Pakistan helped out North Korea.
So I am concerned about what we are potentially seeing with
Iran as well.
Just this week, DIA [Defense Intelligence Agency] said that
al-Qaida is being safeguarded in Iran in an unclassified report
from DIA. Are we concerned about Iran colluding with al-Qaida
in other forms of WMD?
Ms. Walsh. Sir, we have great concerns about any number of
WMD threat actors, from state-based through non-state actors
and violent extremist organizations. We rely on the
intelligence community, DIA a leading member of that, to help
inform our policy considerations of where are the threats, who
has the intent, and where these are colliding.
So, while I can't speak specifically to the DIA report you
are referencing, I can say that we are mindful of and watching
where there are these alignments of VEOs and state actors of
concern.
Mr. Bacon. I think it is very concerning to read the DIA
report this week. It said al-Qaida's leadership is in Iran,
being protected by Iran, and that they are operationally
controlling al-Qaida from Iran. That is a concern. I want to go
with that.
Maybe one follow-up question for Dr. Williams. It is a
little off topic. What is the status of the Open Skies Treaty?
The administration has given mixed signals on this. The OC-135
aircraft are being taken to the boneyard, and yet the
administration is saying that Open Skies may not be done. Over
to you.
Dr. Williams. Sir, thank you for that question. I would
rather defer that one to Ms. Walsh, from a policy perspective,
on the future of Open Skies.
Ms. Walsh. Thank you. I think this is one that is under
review right now. And so I am not in a position to speak to
that, but I would be happy to consult with my colleagues who
have the lead for the Open Skies Treaty and circle back with
you and your team, sir.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I will just close by saying if we are
taking the aircraft over to the boneyard, it seems to be making
a statement there. But then to say that you maybe have not
abandoned Open Skies, it is mixed signals. I surely would like
to know where we are going with that. So thank you very much,
and I yield back.
Mrs. Murphy [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Bacon. And Chair
Gallego had to step away for a moment, so I am standing in for
him. And it just so happens I am next on the list, so I will
yield to myself to ask some questions here.
I just want to thank the witnesses. You know, the ODNI
[Office of Director of National Intelligence] Annual Threat
Assessment has said that China--and you all said it in your
opening--that they are undertaking one of the most rapid
expansions in platform diversification of its nuclear arsenal
in history and has pretty much indicated they are not
interested in any arms control agreements.
Also, Ms. Walsh, you just mentioned that it has been
difficult to work with them due to lack of transparency and
other such things.
While I recognize the conversation about their nuclear
arsenal might be better suited for a classified setting, what I
do want to ask about is an area where they exhibit some of the
exact same behavior--lack of transparency, lack of
cooperation--and that is in the area of their fentanyl
production.
And I just hosted a panel featuring witnesses from the DEA
[Drug Enforcement Agency] and ONDCP [Office of National Drug
Control Policy] regarding China's role in America's opioid
crisis. They have been sending precursor chemicals to countries
like Mexico, where they are made into fentanyl at labs and then
mixed with other illicit drugs before they make their way to
our homeland, where they kill Americans and are destroying
communities all across this country.
And I think the threat assessment also highlights that
Mexico will certainly make progress this year producing high-
quality fentanyl using these very chemical precursors from
China.
So the question is to Ms. Walsh and Dr. Vann, you know, how
is the Department modernizing its capabilities to track the
production and shipment of such chemical precursors from Asia
to the Western Hemisphere?
Ms. Walsh. Thank you very much, Congresswoman. There are
any number of communities across DOD that are looking at this
issue, just from different perspectives. Our Counternarcotics
and Global Threats organization. Even the DOD CWMD-Unity of
Effort Council took up the issue of fentanyl, I believe it was
2 years ago now.
And so, across many threads, we are looking at what are the
precursors, where are they coming from. We have bilateral
conversations, multilateral conversations, to make sure that
countries that are the source and origin of these are aware of
what is going on underneath their nose, giving them the
opportunity and trying to persuade them to take action to
regulate, curtail, be more aware, if not cease entirely what it
is doing.
Part of the challenge is that there are very legitimate
uses of fentanyl, and so this is the space between the
legitimate and then the illicit use with fentanyl. I will defer
to Dr. Vann, who is more of an expert on this.
Dr. Vann. Yes. Thank you, ma'am.
Fentanyl, as Ms. Walsh said, is an interesting space
because it highlights some of the dual-use nature of and dual-
use dilemma that we now face, where we have a legitimate use as
well as a potential for nefarious use.
In terms of capability development that we have against
things like the fentanyl classes, we have a very robust RDA
[research, development, and acquisition] activity to ensure
that our joint forces have the right detection equipment to
both detect and identify any potential fentanyl in the
environment, as well as a diagnostic capability so that you can
see when there is a potential human exposure to classes of
fentanyls, as well as personal protection equipment, as well as
our ability to treat any potential exposure.
So focusing specifically on delivering man-portable medical
countermeasures that could be utilized by the force if exposed
to those agents.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you.
This is to the admiral. You know, it strikes me that when
we talk about CWMD or countering violent extremists or
countering transnational organizations that deal in sort of the
illegal substances, there are a lot of similarities. Sometimes
there are state actors nefariously involved. There are networks
of people who are moving illegal money, drugs, and other
illegal substances.
Are there lessons that can be learned from our decades of
working in counterterrorism that can be applied in CWMD or
countering narcotics?
Admiral Szymanski. Congresswoman, thanks for that question.
Yes, there are absolutely lessons learned from countering
violent extremist organizations and the things we have done to
build networks to defeat a network.
And I think what you have really just described is the
basis of our functional campaign plan, which is about pathway
defeat. It is a pathway whether it is--I am sorry, did you have
a question?
Mrs. Murphy. We are just out of time, and just to be
mindful of everybody else's time. I am sorry to interrupt you.
I would love to get your response through a question for the
record, and that is a conversation I would like to continue at
a different time.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mrs. Murphy. But, with that, I will yield to the next
speaker, Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Yes. Thank you, Representative Murphy. I am
on the road, and I apologize, but I do have some questions. I
am just submitting those to the record. But I didn't want to
drive and try to ask questions at the same time.
Mrs. Murphy. Great. Well, travel safely, and we will look
forward to your questions for the record.
Next, I have Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you. Are we going back to a second round
then, Chair?
Mrs. Murphy. I think it appears that we must be.
Mr. Larsen. Okay. All right. Great.
So I will circle back to some ideas for my questions for
the record.
But, for Ms. Walsh, can you speak more particularly to the
prioritization efforts and the Unity of Effort Council?
What can you share with us about which legacies you are
looking at, which are going to survive, which aren't, and,
honestly, what new technologies that we need to put more time
into which would require us to not put time into other systems?
Ms. Walsh. Our Department priorities started with an
intelligence assessment of looking at what are the WMD threats
to U.S. interests and the U.S. homeland in particular, where
are those threats coming from.
Looking at threat actors, who has the capability, who is
trying to get more or different capability, who is modernizing
whatever capabilities they already have.
On top of the intelligence analysis, we looked at policy
considerations as well. We blended these to assess whether the
threat is more than a specific technology; it is about the
threat actor because it is the actor who will use any given
technology or capability, and that is what we have to counter.
So, while I am not able in this environment to walk you
through what those priorities are, we would certainly be happy
to have a follow-up conversation with you and share those
priorities.
And they differentiate, because it could be that one actor
has a--is further along in posing one type of WMD threat than
another. And so we do look at these by WMD threat and actor,
bring them together, and that is how we have come up with our
priority list.
Mr. Larsen. Can you answer the question in this environment
about relative DOD or other agency investment? Is it going to
require us to move money around to not spend as much on X to do
Y or Z?
Ms. Walsh. Our priority process did not tease out that
level of decision. What I will expect is that, as we go through
an implementation review this year of looking at how are our
components applying these priorities into their particular
areas of responsibility, I think that is where we will start to
determine if we have more, fewer, or different investments to
make. But this is also where we are going to look at, can we
get multiple returns on similar or same investments?
Mr. Larsen. Yeah, yeah. So I have a definition of legacy
investments in the DOD, after 20 years in Congress. A legacy
investment is something that the DOD doesn't want to do that
Congress won't let them get rid of.
So just a heads-up to, you know, maybe bring us along as
you run this set of priorities so that we aren't surprised as,
you know, oversight folks. That would just be my one little
caution on this. I am open to the smart people at the DOD
looking at this, obviously. It is just sometimes you run into
the buzz saw called Congress because sometimes we don't want to
get rid of something or sometimes we are surprised by the
result.
So I think it is just important that, especially if it
comes down to making not just a priority choice but also then
it gets to where does the money go to invest in that priority.
I think just a word of advice on that.
And, with that, Chair Murphy, I will yield back. Thank you.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
And next I yield to Ranking Member Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chairwoman Murphy.
Just on--given the increased use of chemical weapons in
Syria and the [inaudible] use of [inaudible] Russia, what can
we do to deter further use of chemical or biological weapons?
What are we doing to ensure international norms against the use
of these weapons is not eroded, or to develop new standards to
deal with the emergent chem and bio threats?
Ms. Walsh. If I don't get to all your question, please
circle back. You did break up a little bit in there. But what I
think I heard you say is you are interested in knowing what we
are doing to help preserve international norms, prevent further
erosion of them on the chemical and biological side.
I will say it starts with our own behavior and being a
leader through international fora and through bilateral
relationships. In response to Russia's 2018 use of a Novichok,
the United States, along with likeminded countries, worked
through the OPCW [Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons] to add the Novichoks to the Chemical Weapons
Convention schedule, or the list of prohibited items that
signatories agree will not be used.
We have continued to speak out when we have seen
international norms either eroded or flagrantly violated. We do
not want any nation to be able to think that they are going to
get away with this. And so diplomacy is our first course of
action.
The Department of Defense stands in support of the
Department of State. We work hard to maintain bilateral
relationships so that other countries are speaking out when
they are outraged by Russia and other nations' behavior as
well.
We continue to encourage bilateral and multilateral public
dialogues about biological agents through biological
surveillance, detection, investments that we are making in
partner countries. We are helping to build others' capacity to
not only be able to detect but also then to diagnose and
contain biological outbreaks that are naturally occurring.
We are asking and calling on our partners and likeminded
allies to speak out on these issues. COVID has certainly put a
premium on that in the last year, that we need to take this
seriously. This is not a niche issue, and this is one that can
have devastating consequences to security, economic, and just
general public health as well.
Mr. Kelly. Very quickly. I asked a question earlier, and I
still would like more a in-depth. I think a lot of this is
going to be classified, but I would like to follow up.
How confident are we that we have the full appreciation of
the chemical and biological capabilities of our adversaries?
Ms. Walsh. At an unclassified level, I can tell you that we
do have concerns because of Russia and China's lack of
transparency in meeting its obligations to notify through the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention.
That lack of transparency, behavior we have observed over
the last year of intentional misinformation about U.S.
capabilities, U.S. investments, and partner nation biological
laboratories that are serving public health and public good,
but Russia and China continue to put out propaganda that is
giving false information about what those facilities are and
what our partner nations are doing.
So I do not have trust and confidence that we know
everything. They are not living up to their end of the bargain.
Mr. Kelly. Very good. And just very very quickly--I am
signing off after this. I want to thank you witnesses again for
your testimony here today and for what you do every day to keep
this Nation safe. With that, I am signing off.
[Inaudible] status, but I am sure one of my Republican
[inaudible].
Mr. Gallego [presiding]. Thank you, Representative Kelly.
And then assuming Representative Scott will act as ranking
member after you leave. Okay, excellent.
Next we have on my list--thank you for bearing with me. I
actually jumped off to attend another hearing. Representative
Keating I have next on my list.
Mr. Keating. For the second round, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back.
Mr. Gallego. Excellent. Then after that, we have
Representative Scott.
Mr. Scott. I don't have any further questions, Mr.
Chairman. I just again would love to have the subcommittee come
to Robins Air Force Base, look at the ABMS system and, you
know, just making sure that we are--again, our dependency on
foreign sources for rocket fuel and our dependency on the
private sector, I just want to make sure that we work through
those issues. And that while we can always count on the private
sector in times of peace, you know, what would we do in a time
of war with regard to our ability to launch.
With that, I will yield, after thanking the members for
their service--the panel for their service.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Scott.
I have Representative Murphy next, if you have a second
round.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Actually, I would just like to let the admiral finish the
answer to the previous question I had regarding the lessons off
of CT [counterterrorism] and whether or not we are applying
them in this area of counternarcotics as well as counter-WMD.
Admiral Szymanski. Congresswoman Murphy, we absolutely are
applying those lessons. I think you are aware that SOCOM is
also the coordinating authority for violent extremist
organizations. We have been obviously in that fight for almost
two decades.
As I was saying, starting to say earlier, you know, all
this is really about pathway defeat. And so, when we look at
whether it is transnational criminal organizations, violent
extremist organizations, other bad actors, all are dependent on
certain pathways. And we call those the transregional enablers,
so it is things like comms, finances, and those things.
So understanding a network, regardless of what the illicit
aspects of what is being transferred, there are absolutely
lessons learned from what we have done over the years. And
with, you know, great participation of our partners as well as
the intelligence community on being able to understand
networks, really then try to understand their activities on how
they use those transregional enablers and how we get after
those enablers to actually prevent and/or counter whatever the
illicit cargo is or whatever the high-value leaders that we
need to get after.
Mrs. Murphy. So, as a Member who represents Florida, I am
always very concerned with what is going on in Latin America
and the Caribbean. And that is an area where there is quite a
bit of transnational criminal organization activity.
Are you aware of any traditional WMD threats to the United
States from state or non-state actors emanating from Latin
America or the Caribbean?
Admiral Szymanski. Ma'am, thank you for the question. I
would prefer to take that question for the record and do it in
a more classified setting.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mrs. Murphy. Great. Thank you. And then final question for
you, Admiral. With the U.S. preparing to withdraw its troops
from Afghanistan in September of this year, there are a lot of
national security risks that are involved with this decision,
as we all know. And I know you are working through a lot of
those to mitigate and prepare for them.
Can you discuss how you think withdrawal might affect
America's counter-WMD efforts in Afghanistan and the
neighboring countries, especially if the Taliban gains strength
and if Afghanistan once again becomes a haven for terrorist
groups that have an interest in using WMD.
How can we and our allies combat this threat without a
significant permanent force presence on the ground?
Admiral Szymanski. Congresswoman, again, I would like to
take that one for the record.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Admiral Szymanski. But I think there will be a significant
partner and allied piece. There is a lot going into right now
from the State Department, with diplomacy, with a number of the
neighboring countries and the Gulf coalition countries.
There are a couple recent intelligence assessments on after
withdrawal, and I would prefer to talk about those in a
classified setting. There is a lot of hope for also where the
Taliban will be for wanting to be recognized as an
international order.
So we understand it is a very uncertain time, and at the
moment we are really focused on the safe and deliberate
retrograde of all the troops and all the other U.S. and foreign
personnel that are currently deployed in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Murphy. Great. I understand the need to move this
conversation to a different classification level and look
forward to the opportunity to do that.
Thank you to the witnesses today, and I yield back my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Vice Chair Murphy.
Now I would like to move to Representative Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would just like to associate myself with
Representative Murphy's remarks and questions. Particularly in
the wake of the withdrawal, I think one of the things that is
being lost in the conversation is that even if all of our best
hopes bear out and the Taliban has had a change of heart and
decides to be a responsible international actor, no one has
been able to explain to me to date, including General Miller,
what capability they have to enforce any agreement against al-
Qaida and half the world's terrorist organizations, you know,
what capability do they have that 300,000 Afghan Army soldiers
and 40 Western nations have struggled to do over the last 40
years?
But along those lines--so I would certainly welcome if she
would have me if we have a follow-on classified brief, I would
certainly love to participate in that.
My question is, operationally, when it comes to IEDs
[improvised explosive devices], Dr. Williams, DTRA I think has
done a great job over the years of training our Afghan
partners, our partners in the Afghan Army, on counter-IED
detection and defeat.
My understanding is those trainers and those assets are
being withdrawn. What leave-behind capability through the
Afghan Security Forces Fund--whether it is IED detection kits,
nitrate kits--what leave-behind capability are we providing the
Afghan Security Forces through your programs?
And I understand there is a State Department--I cosigned a
letter for the State Department through its program to also
provide funding so that we don't have to go back, which I sadly
fear that we are going to have to do, but to bolster the Afghan
Security Force's ability to deal with IEDs, which, by the
statistics I am seeing, account for 75 percent of the
casualties.
Dr. Williams. Sir, thank you for your question. One point
of clarification. As you know, sir, the former counter-IED
activities that were done through the Defense Threat Reduction
Agency are actually transitioning at the end of this fiscal
year into the Army for continuing use for that.
In terms of your question about leave-behind, sir, as the
admiral said, I think I would like to prefer to take that in a
classified setting so we can have a little more fulsome
discussion on that, sir.
Mr. Waltz. Okay. I will just say I hope that we are not
taking that for the record because there is not really a plan
yet. I know that I am sure you are working on it. And I
struggle to understand why it is classified if we are handing
it over to the Afghans. But that is fine. We will take that to
a different setting.
The other piece that I would like to talk to that I would
imagine would be a setting is I know there are a number of
classified programs dealing with Pakistan's nuclear program and
assuring the security of those assets. So that I would like to
request in a classified setting, and the status of those
programs with no presence in Afghanistan.
And then, finally, again, probably also classified--so, Mr.
Chairman, my questions will be pretty brief--but I am
incredibly concerned and have asked this question in the past:
If we move to any type of conflict on the Korean Peninsula, I
understand there are a number of programs with SOCOM, DTRA, and
others, to secure North Korea's nuclear assets.
My concern is what type of deconfliction, if any, that we
have with China, who would obviously also want to assure that
those assets are secured. So that would be I guess then three
requests for you in a classified setting.
And, Mr. Chair, if I could just--one more before I close. I
am still not clear when we have that why a leave-behind
capability with the Afghans so that they can detect IEDs, I am
not sure why that would be classified. I mean, that should be,
I think [inaudible]----
Mr. Gallego. Would that be possible? Can you repeat
yourself?
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. And so that we can assure everyone
that they have that capability. But I will just take that for
the record and I yield. Thank you, Chairman.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Waltz.
And I believe it is my turn now. Yes, it is. Okay, great.
The Department of Defense recently, in 2017, transferred
the countering weapons of mass destruction mission lead from
U.S. Strategic Command to U.S. Special Operations Command,
signaling a shift in strategy that places greater emphasis on
identifying and preventing threats before they metastasize into
a crisis.
In addition, the Department of Homeland Security
established a CWMD office, consolidating numerous offices and
functions across the Department.
How does coordination work at the national level to ensure
that CWMD activity, authority, policy, planning, and expertise
are operating cohesively, effectively, and efficiently? And
what progress has SOCOM made to develop the infrastructure,
partnerships, expertise, strategy and tactics needed to address
this mission successfully? Let's start with the admiral.
Admiral Szymanski. Chairman, thank you for the question.
So, for the years that SOCOM has had the function--or,
excuse me, the coordinating authority for CWMD, really the
basis of the whole effort is built on functional campaign plan
and helping the combatant commanders with their campaign plans,
the geographical combatant commanders, as I kind of mentioned
in one of the opening questions, with the threat vectors and
the threat actors in their regions, and how we put that plan
together in coordination with the geographical combatant
commander, how we assess that plan against the changes to the
threat, against the changes to the actors as well as the
environment, and then make recommendations on any material
gaps, training deficiencies, et cetera.
But what we do in the meantime back here in [Washington] DC
or in CONUS [continental United States] is we hold a couple
seminars a year, called our coordination seminars or senior
leader seminars. We bring together a number of folks from
partners and allies to interagency to many members, largely
from the Unity of Effort Council across Joint Staff and DOD,
and look at a very specific problem.
And then we try to bring in a whole-of-government approach
to how we might answer that, identify not only the gaps in the
Department's, the Department of Defense's capabilities but also
potentially think more use of what Department of Energy,
Department of State, Department of Commerce could apply to that
problem set.
But from a SOCOM coordinating authority, that is really
planning and assessing and recommending. I think I would defer
to Ms. Walsh on the Unity of Effort Council and how they use
the existing processes to pull the other things that you talked
about at the beginning of your question.
Ms. Walsh. Thank you very much, Admiral.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you.
Ms. Walsh.
Ms. Walsh. The Unity of Effort Council was created after we
recognized that we had a lot of cooks in the kitchen, but we
weren't working off of the same recipe. And so, through the
Unity of Effort Council, we have convened 20 different
stakeholder organizations across the Office of the Secretary of
Defense, various Joint Staff components, all of the services,
SOCOM is our coordinating authority, and then all of our
combatant commands so that we can raise awareness among these
components of what their roles and missions are, what issues
that have been stuck or are emerging, and where we need to work
together to make sure that these issues can rise to the surface
so that senior leaders are aware of threats, opportunities,
capabilities we have but also areas where we need to develop
further capabilities or make different investments.
And over the course of the last several years, I would
argue that we have built not just awareness, but we have built
connective tissue that didn't exist previously. And so now we
are--we have a phrase of consolidated buying power of the CWMD
community and DOD is yielding benefits.
Our plans, our strategy documents, our resource
requirements, our understanding of threats, our understanding
of where we can have cross-pollination but also our
understanding that some components don't necessarily sit in all
of the meetings where resource decisions are made or
requirements are decided or prioritized and then where the
strategy documents are.
So, through the Unity of Effort Council, we have taken both
a bottom-up but also a top-down approach in identifying what
are those issues that do not get resolved in other existing DOD
fora. And through this, we have given rise to a community that
is now speaking--that is understanding more but is also
speaking with more one voice.
We expect that we will continue to see dividends from the
Unity of Effort Council as the Department goes through the
strategic review and guidance development efforts this year,
whether it is the Global Posture Review, the next National
Defense Strategy, and then any number of other reviews that the
Department is conducting. I am confident that our Unity of
Effort Council members will be able to bring WMD issues more
into the forefront. Thank you.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Ms. Walsh.
And just a general statement. You know, I feel like, across
the Federal Government, there is really good unity and
conversations happening about countering WMD measures. I worry
when it needs to come across down to your local police and
State government.
One of the things I think we saw from 9/11 was that, you
know, as much as the Federal Government is important, it is
also your local government that is important, in terms of
prevention and deterrence and even, unfortunately, maybe
sometimes reaction. So I just want to kind of remind that we
keep that in mind going into the future.
I have on my list for second question if he wants it
Representative Waltz.
Is there anybody else that has another question they want
to--Representative Scott, do you have any? Ranking Member,
anybody from your side?
Okay, great. Excellent.
Well, thank you so much for your time to all of our
presenters. You know, I did note that there were a lot of
things that were said that we are going to have to give for the
record or in a classified setting. Please make sure to follow
up with our staff to actually, you know, fulfill that. I think
there are a lot of things that we want to follow up, and there
is no need for us to leave things hanging up in the air.
Thank you for your time, and I hope to see you all soon.
[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 4, 2021

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 4, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 4, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN

Mr. Larsen. What is the Unity of Effort Council's plan on updating
Congress on its prioritization deliberations and conclusions for legacy
and emerging technology capabilities?
Ms. Walsh. The DOD CWMD-Unity of Effort (UoE) Council co-Chairs and
Vice Chair are prepared to provide a classified briefing to Congress on
the DOD CWMD priorities. These priorities consider the current and
emerging threat environment, including key actors and WMD capabilities,
and provide guidance on how the Department must address these risks.
The CWMD-UoE Council itself is not directly addressing U.S. legacy and
emerging technology capabilities.
Mr. Larsen. Are there specific examples of DOD's shift from legacy
to new technologies? Is this shift a part of the Unity of Effort
Council deliberations?
Dr. Vann. The term ``legacy'' in part refers to technologies and
weapons systems that are ill-suited against advanced threats or are no
longer operationally effective in executing the mission for which they
were originally intended. The Interim National Security Strategic
Guidance directs DOD to shift resources away from such technologies or
systems and to redirect investments to cutting-edge capabilities that
will determine our advantage in the future. Furthermore, the Secretary
has said equipment and weapon systems become obsolete when more
capable, less expensive, or more efficient replacements become
operational. While this isn't a specific topic being discussed within
the CWMD Unity of Effort (UoE) Council, the ASD(NCB), as its vice
chair, represents key equities related to advancing cutting-edge
technologies and the needed RDT&E investments to support DOD's shifting
focus to address emerging threats. This includes informing the UoE
Council's ongoing CWMD prioritization effort and the planned strategic
review and guidance development efforts in the coming year.
In an effort to modernize capabilities and in many cases drive down
costs, the Department of Defense has invested significantly in research
and development efforts leveraging technologies developed by academia
and top performers in the commercial sector. Specific technologies
include:

Organ-on-a-Chip. There is a need for alternative ways to
model human diseases and accelerate development of new drugs.
Traditional animal models (in vivo) do not accurately mimic human
pathophysiology and are time consuming. Organ-on-a-chip technologies
are cutting costs and drug development timelines while providing
results comparable to or better than traditional animal methods. The
DOD is leveraging organ-on-a-chip technology to evaluate and
characterize emerging chemical and biological threats and to advance
drug development.

Medical Countermeasure Platforms. Platform technologies
are ideal for producing new drugs against new threats and emerging
pathogens as well as reducing the costs of drug development. They do
this by employing a ``building block'' development approach, whereby
various modular components are swapped in and out to construct a
variety of therapeutics or prophylactics. The DOD is focused on
optimizing existing monoclonal antibody platforms to enhance the
identification of new targets for drug development as well as
developing new platform technologies for DNA vaccines.

Integrated Early Warning (IEW). Integrated Early Warning
describes a set of materiel and non-materiel capabilities that provide
awareness and understanding of CBRN threats and hazards. By investing
in IEW, we will enhance a commander's ability to make decisions that
enables the successful conduct of operations in CBRN environments.
Accomplishment of this end state is enabled by capabilities that align
across the Force Integration, Battlespace Awareness, Logistics, Command
and Control, Communications and Computers, and Protection Joint
Capability Areas. Rapid development of enabling technologies in
information technology, algorithm development, sensors, diagnostics,
and unmanned platforms has converged with novel non-materiel solutions,
leading to a vast landscape of potential IEW solutions. Capitalizing on
IEW materiel and non-materiel capabilities is a top priority of the
Services and Combatant Commands in order to enhance Joint Force
lethality.
Mr. Larsen. You started to address how DTRA works to upskill
service members to ensure they understand the uses of emerging
technologies generally and in the field. Could you provide a more
comprehensive explanation of this effort?
Dr. Williams. DTRA works to ensure service members are able to
understand the use of emerging technologies in several different
capacities. One of the more foundational is the Defense Nuclear Weapons
School (DNWS), from which we provide formal training on a wide variety
of radiological, nuclear and CWMD topics to the Services and other
Federal Agencies. We compliment this training with Technical Support
Groups (TSGs), which work directly with specialized forces in the
Combatant Commands. A third area we contribute is in providing threat
analyses on enemy tactics, techniques, and procedures for employing
emerging threats on the battlefield. Additionally, as we work in
research, development, test and evaluation of new (or rapid adaptation
of existing) capabilities, we engage our close partnerships with the
Combatant Commands to train and field-test those capabilities in the
field.
Finally, our work with the Services, Joint Staff, and the Combatant
Commands in consulting, developing, and executing operations plans and
exercises, as well as our 24/7 technical reachback capability, provide
DTRA a continuous voice in ensuring service members plan and train as
they will need to fight--with the best information on emerging threats
we can provide.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY
Mr. Kelly. According to USA Spend, DTRA has provided EcoHealth
Alliance grants for research to support its Biodefense mission. EHA in
recent years has chosen the Wuhan Institute of Virology as a research
partner in recent years through an NIH grant. As noted in the State
Department Fact Sheet of 1/15/21, the Wuhan Institute of Virology has
troubling links to the Chinese military. Is EHA still a grantee of
DTRA? What type of risk analysis does DTRA do to ensure that its
research dollars are wittingly or unwittingly funding a malign actor
such as China? Has EHA's relationship with the WIV and China
disqualified it as the partner of choice for DOD and DTRA?
Ms. Walsh. The Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) has not
provided funding to EcoHealth Alliance (EHA) for work at the Wuhan
Institute of Virology (WIV), or for any other activity in the People's
Republic of China (PRC). EHA is a DTRA grantee on projects in other
countries in the Indo-Pacific region. On behalf of the Chemical and
Biological Defense Program, DTRA executes requirements-based DOD
biodefense missions according to established program management
practices. For each grant DOD awards, DTRA engages with applicants
early in the project development process to confirm that only DOD-
authorized sub-recipients are considered. DTRA program managers,
certified DOD acquisition professionals, review each grant proposal
with an eye toward finding prohibited activities (technical or fiscal),
according to established procedure. Additionally, DOD performs periodic
oversight of all grants through required financial and technical
reporting, meetings with stakeholders, and site visits to ensure that
research is conducted only as authorized.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON
Mr. Bacon. For your respective organizations, what do you see as
the most critical unresolved technical challenges in the countering
weapons of mass destruction mission space?
Dr. Vann. The most critical challenge is being able to rapidly
recognize, characterize, and respond to emerging threats. The National
Defense Strategy mandates that the Department focus the readiness of
the future force against near peer adversaries, who are actively
researching novel forms of chemicals that have been or could be
weaponized. These malign states and actors are also viewing the
accelerated advances in biology and genetic engineering as new
mechanisms to develope new biological weapons. Anticipating and
overcoming these increasingly complex threats requires renewed focus,
innovative thinking, and clear priorities. The Department's CB defense
capabilities are a key component of an integrated national effort to
counter weapons of mass destruction and address traditional and
emerging CB threats.
Mr. Bacon. The University of Nebraska hosts a DOD University
Affiliated Research Center, the National Strategic Research Institute,
which is the only DOD UARC focused specifically on the CWMD mission
area including Nuclear Detection and Forensics, Detection of Chemical
and Biological Weapons, Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction,
and Consequence Management. What actions on currently underway to
leverage this UARC in support of DOD's CWMD strategy and what more
should be done to fully leverage this capability and investment?
Dr. Vann. The Chemical and Biological Defense Program (CBDP) works
closely with a range of partners in industry and academia on science
and technology (S&T) research and development (R&D) to stay ahead of
complex and rapidly changing novel and emerging threats.
University Affiliated Research Centers (UARCs) are key to driving
innovation and expediting our R&D capabilities. In particular, the
CBDP's Joint Science and Technology Office (JSTO) funds a number of
ongoing efforts with the University of Nebraska's National Strategic
Research Institute (NSRI) UARC. A recent example was testing and
assessment of the Portable Biocontainment Care Module at the Joint Base
Charleston, SC, to determine if there was a better option to transport
COVID infected military service members as compared to the capability
developed during the 2014 Ebola outbreak. In addition, the CBDP has
leveraged the unique expertise NSRI provides to enable the development
of novel capabilities for biological and chemical detection. In
February 2019, NSRI supported the CBDP's Reactive-Chemistry Orthogonal
Surface and Environmental Threat Ticket Array Program (ROSETTA) and its
Compact Vapor Chemical Agent Detector (CVCAD) Program by partnering
with the Joint Program Executive Office for CBRN Defense (JPEO-CBRND)
to host a chemical detection vendor-user interaction day. The event
brought together the Joint Services and technology vendors in industry
and in academia for information exchange to support the development of
innovative detection systems for these programs of record.
JSTO leveraged NSRI in July 2019 to host a perimeter defense
technology rodeo bringing together technology vendors and Joint Service
members on the topic of autonomous biodetection systems. In February
2020, JSTO and JPEO-CBRND partnered with NSRI to host a Proximal
Chemical Agent Detector (PCAD) tabletop exercise (TTX) for combat
developers and service members to discuss technology requirements for
this program of record. More recently in March 2021, the CBPD invested
again in NSRI's expertise to host a TTX focused on detection capability
for emerging threats. Specifically, this TTX provided the opportunity
for the Joint Services to discuss the Pharmaceutical Based Agents (PBA)
threats and learn about existing PBA detection capabilities. The CBDP
is also funding NSRI to develop innovative technologies for hazard
mitigation, advanced detection and decontamination, advanced biological
sampling, and bioaerosols detection. As threats continue to evolve and
with it, the Joint Force's requirements, the Department will continue
working with government, industry and academic partners, including the
NSRI, for innovative solutions and capabilities to meet the
Warfighter's needs.
Mr. Bacon. For your respective organizations, what do you see as
the most critical unresolved technical challenges in the countering
weapons of mass destruction mission space?
Admiral Szymanski. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Bacon. The University of Nebraska hosts a DOD University
Affiliated Research Center, the National Strategic Research Institute,
which is the only DOD UARC focused specifically on the CWMD mission
area including Nuclear Detection and Forensics, Detection of Chemical
and Biological Weapons, Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction,
and Consequence Management. What actions on currently underway to
leverage this UARC in support of DOD's CWMD strategy and what more
should be done to fully leverage this capability and investment?
Admiral Szymanski. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Bacon. For your respective organizations, what do you see as
the most critical unresolved technical challenges in the countering
weapons of mass destruction mission space?
Dr. Williams. In the countering WMD space, DTRA covers a broad
spectrum of strategic and operational functions. Responsive to both DOD
policy and validated requirements from the field, we engage in
deterrence, treaty verification, interagency and international
partnerships, and analysis, research, development, test and evaluation
portfolios that allows us to spend time exploring threat and counter-
threat concepts we think will have relevance in the future.
Widely-available commercial technologies have reduced barriers to
entry, across a variety of technologies. For instance, both the
synthetic biology and chemical threat space provide access and lower
cost for malign actors. The convergence of computer science, synthetic
biology, and related fields--previously separate disciplines--has also
opened the door to the rapid prototyping of novel threat agents, new
and difficult-to-trace delivery methods, and changes in adversary
approach to warfare. Compounding these factors, the application of
artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and big data are
transforming the nature (and potential impact) of current and future
WMD; these ``layering technologies'' will create new opportunities for
national states and transregional actors to enhance lethality and
unpredictability, increasing the potential for strategic and tactical
surprise.
We are already in competition for agile and responsive
understanding and use of these technologies; both Beijing and Moscow
have unveiled long-term strategic plans to invest in key technologies
like robotics and machine learning to offset perceived U.S. military
advantage. Our ability to forecast and rapidly identify adversary
applications of these technologies is critical to countering them. For
DTRA, we will continue to mean integrating and harnessing our core
functions: enabling strategic deterrence; supporting treaty inspection
and verification; partnering--across the DOD, U.S. Government, and with
international partners--to reduce threats; identifying vulnerabilities
and mitigation strategies; and looking over the horizon to develop and
deliver rapid capabilities.
Mr. Bacon. The University of Nebraska hosts a DOD University
Affiliated Research Center, the National Strategic Research Institute,
which is the only DOD UARC focused specifically on the CWMD mission
area including Nuclear Detection and Forensics, Detection of Chemical
and Biological Weapons, Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction,
and Consequence Management. What actions on currently underway to
leverage this UARC in support of DOD's CWMD strategy and what more
should be done to fully leverage this capability and investment?
Dr. Williams. DTRA leverages a variety of acquisition strategies
and performers including University Affiliated Research Centers (UARC)
to efficiently and effectively meet DTRA's CWMD mission. With the
National Strategic Research Institute (NSRI) UARC, DTRA manages a post-
doctoral contract for subject matter expertise from various
disciplines, including nuclear engineering, nuclear physics,
radiochemistry, Natural Language Processing, and wargaming. NSRI also
provides DTRA with solutions for advanced sensing systems designed to
support the warfighter during hard target and battlefield surveillance
and reconnaissance of WMD threats.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FRANKLIN
Mr. Franklin. Given the rising tensions with North Korea, what is
our ability to operate through a contaminated environment? What are our
greatest vulnerabilities to a chem/bio attack?
Ms. Walsh. We have answered this question in a classified
attachment.
Mr. Franklin. Dr. Vann, does the U.S. currently possess the
capabilities to adequately counter the biological threats posed by our
adversaries? If not, how do we get there and what must we prioritize in
order to be effectively postured?
Dr. Vann. Advances in biotechnology and its convergence with other
sciences and technologies is driving an unprecedented and rapidly
evolving biological threat landscape which requires creativity,
innovation, focus, and relentless prioritization. In the CWMD
portfolio, not only must our defensive capabilities outpace the threat
from our adversaries, but we must also develop a resilient response and
recovery capability to ensure the Department and the Nation can
continue to operate and thrive in the event of any future biological
incident, whether maliciously directed or naturally occurring.
The Department continues to collect and assess lessons learned from
the COVID-19 pandemic in order to improve its biodefense posture and
preparedness for the future. Nonetheless, it is clear that the
Department must continue to support cutting-edge research and
development with international, interagency, industry, and academic
partners in order to keep pace with the evolving threat landscape. Our
collaborative approach, working with partners at all echelons, breeds
innovation and reduces enterprise risk as we work to develop effective
medical and physical countermeasures against WMD threats. For example,
the Chemical and Biological Defense Program is working to develop an
agile threat characterization portfolio that leverages new and
innovative technologies to efficiently identify and rapidly
characterize novel and emerging threats, which supports our ability to
develop novel medical countermeasures, detection and diagnostic
capabilities, protective equipment, and mitigation capabilities. The
development of such capabilities removes the strategic advantage that
adversaries may see in using biological threats.
Mr. Franklin. How much concern does the Department place on state
or non-state actors weaponizing new or emerging infectious diseases
such as COVID-19, and what is DOD doing to combat this potential
threat?
Dr. Vann. Congressman Franklin, thank you for the question. I
respectfully request the opportunity respond in a classified setting to
provide an answer.
Mr. Franklin. Vice Admiral Szymanski, regarding emerging technology
and given China's known desire to create biological weapons targeting
certain genetic profiles, what national security implications do you
see for individuals who send their DNA to commercial companies for DNA
review?
Admiral Szymanski. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Franklin. Vice Admiral Szymanski, what were the most
significant findings from SOCOM's Annual CWMD Assessment?
Admiral Szymanski. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Franklin. Dr. Williams, what are the financial strains you
foresee on CWMD programs as a result of COVID-19?
Dr. Williams. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, DTRA has
prioritized programs that advance our CWMD mission. By working closely
with our academic and contract performers we have continued to deliver
capabilities in support of the Joint Force. That being said, we have
seen some lag from contract performers on non-COVID tasks, as they
navigated the challenges of reduced staffing levels. This disruption
was most prevalent in academia, as many universities shuttered research
facilities during the height of the pandemic; many of them are just now
getting back up and running. Delay in execution--and other practical
matters, like cancelling travel--has lowered our execution rates this
year. Our ability to shift some requirements to a virtual setting, and
the flexibility of various multi-year appropriations, helped mitigate
some of the financial impact.
I am certain that our national (and international) experience with
COVID will continue to lend salience to the need for robust CWMD
programs.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SHERRILL
Ms. Sherrill. What provisions are we aware of within other nuclear
weapon-states that require their chief executive to consult with
another deliberative or government body prior to undertaking a first or
preemptive nuclear strike?
What provisions exist requiring a future President of the United
States to consult with Congress, other senior executive branch
personnel, or any other government official or body prior to
undertaking a first or preemptive nuclear strike?
Dr. Vann. The President retains the sole authority to employ U.S.
nuclear weapons. He exercises this authority in his Constitutional role
as Commander in Chief of the U.S. Armed Forces. This existing command
and control system for nuclear weapons provides for consultation with
the President's senior national security and military advisors,
particularly in a case that did not involve a pre-planned deliberative
response. Any direction by the President to employ nuclear weapons
would require the involvement of several layers of military personnel
to execute the order (there is no mechanical ``button''), and U.S.
military personnel are trained in the law of armed conflict and to
comply only with lawful orders. Depending on the circumstances,
consultation with or authorization by Congress could be necessary due
to its constitutional responsibility to declare war. As with any
decision regarding the use of force by the President and matters
regarding his or her Constitutional authorities, the President would
seek the advice or opinion of the Attorney General as the chief law
officer of the Federal Government. Regarding provisions in other
nuclear weapon states, we respectfully refer you to the intelligence
community who can provide an in-depth answer to this question.
