- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-24]

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-24]
___________________________________________________________________________________

MARITIME SECURITY IN THE

INDO-PACIFIC AND THE U.N. CONVENTION

ON THE LAW OF THE SEA

__________

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER

AND PROJECTION FORCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

meeting jointly with the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC,

CENTRAL ASIA AND NONPROLIFERATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 29, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-360            WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland           TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine, Vice Chair   JIM BANKS, Indiana
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama

Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Sean Falvey, Clerk
------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC, CENTRAL ASIA AND NONPROLIFERATION

BRAD SHERMAN, California, Chairman

DINA TITUS, Nevada                   TED YOHO, Florida, Ranking Member
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia            ANN WAGNER, Missouri
AMI BERA, California                 BRIAN MAST, Florida
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia
Don MacDonald, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Bera, Hon. Ami, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia and
Nonproliferation, Committee on Foreign Affairs.................     5
Chabot, Hon. Steve, a Representative from Ohio, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia and
Nonproliferation, Committee on Foreign Affairs.................     6
Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, Committee on
Armed Services.................................................     1
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, Committee on
Armed Services.................................................     4

WITNESSES

Glaser, Bonnie S., Director, Asia Program, the German Marshall
Fund of the United States......................................    11
Russel, Hon. Daniel R., Vice President, International Security
and Diplomacy, Asia Society Policy Institute, Former Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs..........     8
Sadler, Brent D., Senior Fellow for Naval Warfare and Advanced
Technology, the Heritage Foundation............................    13
Swift, ADM Scott, USN (Ret.), Former Commander, U.S. Pacific
Fleet..........................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Glaser, Bonnie S.............................................    75
Russel, Daniel R.............................................    47
Sadler, Brent D..............................................    95
Swift, ADM Scott.............................................    61
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................    43

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
MARITIME SECURITY IN THE INDO-PACIFIC AND THE U.N. CONVENTION ON THE
LAW OF THE SEA

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Seapower and
Projection Forces, Meeting Jointly with Committee on
Foreign Affairs, Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central
Asia and Nonproliferation,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 29, 2021.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Joe Courtney (chairman of the Subcommittee on
Seapower and Projection Forces) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION
FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Good morning, everyone. This is actually I
think a pretty unique event, which is to have a joint hearing
of the Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee of the House
Armed Services Committee as well as the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia, and
Nonproliferation.
I was thinking the last time I remember Foreign Affairs and
HASC [House Armed Services Committee] actually doing a joint
hearing was really probably at the height of the surge when we
had General Petraeus come and testify before both committees.
And I really want to thank Chairman Bera and Ranking Member
Chabot, as well as my good friend and colleague, Mr. Wittman,
for working together to bring these two committees, which
really, you know, when you talk about the Indo-Pacific region,
you know, clearly is at the center I think, frankly, of the
work that we have ahead of us.
So, anyway, we have got to do the housekeeping--you know,
FedEx commercial here--so we will start out by saying I want to
welcome the members who are joining today's markup remotely.
Members are reminded that they must be visible on screen of the
software platform for the purposes of identity verification
when joining the proceeding and establishing and maintaining a
quorum.
Members participating remotely must continue to use the
software platform's video function while attending the
proceedings, unless they experience connectivity issues or
other technical problems that render them unable to fully
participate on camera. If a member experiences technical
difficulties, please contact the committee staff for help.
When recognized, remotely attending members' participation
will be broadcast in the room and via a television-internet
feed. Members are asked to mute their microphone when they are
not speaking. Members will be recognized normally for asking
questions. But if they want to speak at another time, they must
seek recognition verbally.
Members are reminded to keep the software platform's video
function on for the entirety of the time that they attend the
proceedings. A member may leave and rejoin the proceedings,
however. And if they depart for a short period of time other
than joining a different proceeding, they should leave the
video function on.
Members are also advised that I have designated a committee
staff member to, if necessary, mute unrecognized members'
microphones to cancel any background noise. Members may use the
software platform's chat feature to communicate with staff
members regarding technical or logistical support issues.
Finally, members should see a 5-minute countdown clock on
the platform's display. But, if necessary, I will remind
members when their time is up.
And, again, this is a joint hearing, so I know Mr. Bera,
you know, will be participating, you know, as well as the
ranking members on this--you know, to make this as collegial as
possible.
So, again, the genesis of this event with Chairman Bera was
just, again, a recognition about the rising challenge that we
have in the Pacific region.
As my colleagues on the House Armed Services Committee can
attest, you know, we just went through a whole series of
posture hearings with combatant commanders from every region of
the globe. And, you know, really, if there was any sort of
common theme, you know, whether it was the Arctic, the European
Command, Southern Command, AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command], and
Indo-Pacific, it really is that there is an erosion of
international rule of law that extends into the maritime realm,
into space, into cyberspace, into, you know, aerospace. And,
frankly, it is something that I think it is an all-of-
government challenge for the U.S. in terms of our diplomacy as
well as our national defense.
Today we've got, you know, some great witnesses to sort of
talk through this issue, particularly in terms of the Indo-
Pacific realm.
The Honorable Daniel Russel is Vice President of
International Security and Diplomacy at the Asia Society Policy
Institute, also former Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs.
We are additionally joined by Admiral Scott Swift, former
commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, and many of us on HASC
know well from his service for decades in the Navy.
Bonnie Glaser, Director of the Asia Program at The German
Marshall Fund of the United States.
And Mr. Brent Sadler, Senior Fellow for Naval Warfare and
Advanced Technology at The Heritage Foundation.
Welcome to all of you, and thank you for joining us, and
thank you for your written testimony, which, again, I had a
chance to read through. It had really thoughtful stuff. We are
not going to be able to go through it verbatim, so there will
be a 5-minute opening remarks. But, again, I just want to,
again, thank you for the great work that is there.
And I just want to quickly, you know, just say that from
the Seapower subcommittee--Mr. Wittman I think can attest to
this--again, we have heard from, you know, combatant
commanders, certainly Admiral Davidson, who is about to depart;
the incoming commander, Admiral Aquilino; Harry Harris, who
preceded Davidson; you know, who all described, again, this,
you know, much more contested environment in that part of the
world.
China, obviously, is, you know, pushing for rules and norms
that operate, you know, particularly in the maritime realm, far
beyond what I think our country deems as, you know, safe
maritime use of international waters. The island building
program that they have basically turned sandbars into
militarized islands that have landing strips, military
facilities. And this is happening literally in the middle of
COVID [novel coronavirus disease]. You know, we saw this with
Woody Island, where, again, they installed a new radome to
protect radar structures and solar panels for military use.
Again, this is far from the coastline of the mainland of
China. And what happens with this island building is it
basically extends what I think is a totally unsupported claim
of maritime control and closing off sea space, which is, you
know, definitely what we are seeing in terms of, you know, our
Navy platforms that are out in that part of the world.
I would note that in 2016 the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea treaty heard a claim from the Philippines
challenging China's claim for maritime control. And, again,
they issued a very strong decision, unanimous, that rejected
the nine-dash line claim that China posited as their authority
to deny sea access to the Philippines.
This was I think a very significant decision in terms of
reaffirming rule of law in that area. Unfortunately, the United
States was not a participant in that proceeding because we have
not fully ratified UNCLOS [United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea], the Law of the Sea Treaty.
The U.S. tried to get observer status even though--because,
you know, we couldn't get party status. The tribunal refused to
even give us observer status because of the lack of
ratification here in the U.S., and we had to rely on our ally,
Australia, to basically be our proxy representative, our legal
aid lawyer, during this whole proceeding.
Again, the U.S., in both the Obama administration and the
Trump administration, endorsed the tribunal's ruling. There is
no question, you know, that they were right on the law. But,
again, I think that begs a question which we have heard from
our combatant commanders that really given, again, the
contested environment that we are seeing here--again, not just
in the Indo-Pacific region but in other combatant commands in
the maritime realm--that it really is time for the U.S. to
become a full participant, along with 168 other countries, in
the UNCLOS system.
And Admiral Harris, who is never going to be accused of
being a soft power kind of guy, made it crystal clear that he
believes that the U.S. should become a participant in UNCLOS
because we lose the moral authority and the legal standing to
really challenge, you know, behavior like what we are seeing
with China.
So later today myself and Congressman Don Young, who is the
Republican from Alaska, will be introducing a resolution
citing, again, all of the testimony from our combatant
commanders in support of UNCLOS, calling on the Senate to move
forward. Senator Hirono will be introducing in the Senate,
again, a resolution for ratification of UNCLOS, and that is why
I think today's hearing is obviously very timely. It is not
really just kind of a thought discussion, which there's nothing
wrong with that, but that, you know, there really is going to
be I think bipartisan support for moving forward on this
critical issue.
So, with that, I will, again, turn it over to Chairman Bera
for his opening remarks. We will hear from the ranking members
and then just go right into the testimony of our outstanding
witnesses here today.
Mr. Bera, the floor is yours.
Mr. Falvey. Sir, this is Sean Falvey from HASC. We have got
to go over to Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Courtney. Oh, I am sorry. That was in my script, to go
to Ami, so. My good friend, Mr. Wittman.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
VIRGINIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Chairman Courtney. Joe, I
really appreciate your leadership, and thanks for bringing this
to the forefront. This is an incredibly important strategic
issue. And I also want to thank Chairman Bera and Ranking
Member Chabot for their participation in this joint hearing to
better assess our maritime policies and how they are being
applied in the INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command] regions.
As we know, tensions with China continue to increase. Even
with intense economic ties, strategic competition with China
and her neighboring countries continue to escalate. Using gray
zone paramilitary forces, militarizing South China Sea atolls,
intimidating the regional partners, developing an ever-
expanding naval force, threatening to establish a South China
Sea air defense identification zone and utterly rejecting
United Nations tribunal decisions.
China seeks to shift the regional balance and enforce an
ever-increasing hegemony on China's regional neighbors. So I am
forced to the conclusion that this increasing Chinese
brinkmanship may likely, at some point, conclude in a violent
confrontation.
I am hopeful that saner heads will prevail with our
Nation's largest economic partner, but China's rejection of
global norms and an ever-expanding intimidation of her regional
partners foretell a different outcome. To address this
seemingly preordained trajectory, the United States needs to
take several steps to deter this collision.
First, I believe the United States, in consultation with
our partners and allies, needs to affirm the global norms that
have maintained this longstanding peace and stability. And I am
pleased to know that the European Union affirmed their support
for the United States in this strategic competition and
expressed concerns for President Xi Jinping's authoritarianship
to solving global problems.
I also believe the United States should continue and
challenge excessive maritime claims and continue a consistent
level of freedom of navigation operations.
I am particularly pleased that the Biden administration
appears to have rejected the Obama administration's Chinese
appeasement strategy and has also endorsed their continued
freedom of navigation efforts.
Additionally, I believe the United States needs to
significantly expand gray zone competition. This expansion
should use the entirety of our federal capabilities to include
a more agile cyber response and a more aggressive United States
Coast Guard insertion to better manage increasing conflict in
the global climate.
Finally, I fervently believe that the best way to preserve
the peace is to prepare for war. To have foreign policy we
want, we must have the military we need. Allowing our military
forces to atrophy and diminish our ability to respond to future
conflict is the surest path to war. Weakness begets aggression,
and I categorically reject this path and look forward to
addressing the administration's reduced national security
funding later this year.
In the words of Confucius, I believe ``The strength of a
nation derives from the integrity of the home.'' I have faith
in our Nation, our democracy, and our ideals. Despite our
differences, any strategic competitor should be forewarned that
our will is strong and resolve is tremendously overwhelming in
times of peril.
Unleashing our strategic ideals on the Chinese Communist
dictates is akin to shining a light in darkness. Nothing can be
hidden. Strategic gaps become evident.
Again, I appreciate Chairman Courtney for having this
important hearing, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Courtney. All right. Well, thank you, Rob. And, again,
you know, we have worked together on these issues for many
years, and I think it is an exciting time for both
subcommittees.
And now I would like to yield to another friend on the
Subcommittee on Foreign Affairs on Asia, Mr. Bera.

STATEMENT OF HON. AMI BERA, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA,
CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC, CENTRAL ASIA AND
NONPROLIFERATION, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Mr. Bera. Great. Thanks, Chair Courtney, and to the ranking
member. I can make my opening statement really short by saying
I agree with everything that the chairman of the Seapower
Subcommittee and the ranking member just said.
When we think about the Indo-Pacific region, you know, the
United States market is a Pacific nation. And when you think
about that region, it is home to nearly 40 percent of the
world's exports and nearly 60 percent of the world's
population. So, it is a vitally important maritime region for
us. Approximately 3.4 trillion in ship-borne commerce transits
through the South China Sea alone each year.
You know, when I think about Chinese aggression in the
region, you know, whether it is what we are seeing in the South
China Sea or we are seeing around the Senkaku Islands, what we
are seeing in the Taiwan Strait, increasingly this Chinese
aggression potentially leads to a misadventure and potentially
a conflict.
That isn't what we are hoping for. What we are hoping for--
you know, we are fine with being strategic competitors with
China, but what we want to do is compete based on a rule of
law. And, you know, I know I have talked to Chairman Courtney
about this a bit, and the importance of having that rule of
law.
So, I do look forward to hearing from the witnesses as we
talk about UNCLOS and whether the ratification of UNCLOS would
strengthen our hand. The irony is we hold ourselves to these
rules, yet by not ratifying that agreement, you know, we
don't--we are in a weaker position to hold the Chinese to these
rules.
You know when I think about the importance of this region,
it is not just the South China Sea. I think about the freely
associated states as well, and, you know, the historic ties to
the United States of America going back to World War II. The
importance of our engaging with the freely associated states is
incredibly important.
In addition, you know, I applaud my friends on the
Congressional Pacific Islands Caucus who have really been
leading in this space. Representative Ed Case and Senator
Schatz and others have been working tirelessly to advance
legislation that would meaningfully benefit the Pacific Islands
and help strengthen maritime security in the South Pacific.
And as a co-chair of that caucus, I have been working
closely with them on those efforts and look forward to moving
them forward in this Congress.
So, again, knowing that we have got a number of members, I
will keep my opening statement short, and, obviously, have it
submitted for the record. But I look forward to working with
your subcommittee, Chairman Courtney, and, you know, the entire
Congress to both address these issues, and strengthen our
resolve in the maritime space in the Indo-Pacific.
You know, obviously I am thrilled that President Biden has
raised the Quad [Quadrilateral Security Dialogue] coalition--
Japan, India, the United States, and Australia--to the leaders
level. I think this is a real opportunity for us to continue to
strengthen that relationship, as well as work closely with
ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations], countries like
Vietnam, Indonesia, the Philippines, and, you know, continue to
strengthen the security apparatus in the Indo-Pacific and in
the South China Sea.
So, with that, let me go yield back, and I really am
looking forward to the testimony of our witnesses.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, chairman. And again I
think, you know, your comments really show how terrific it is
that we are working together on the two subcommittees.
And now I would like to yield to you, to the ranking member
of the subcommittee who is from the heartland, Mr. Chabot, for
his opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE CHABOT, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM OHIO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC, CENTRAL ASIA
AND NONPROLIFERATION, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Mr. Chabot. Thank you. And like Ami, I could say--I could
make my statement very short by saying that I agree with my
colleagues, but I won't.
The United States is reorienting its foreign policy to
center around the Indo-Pacific. And as we do so, it is
absolutely essential to get the maritime security aspect in the
Western Pacific and the Indian Ocean right.
The water of the Indo-Pacific are where many of this
century's most consequential questions will be decided. Whether
a rules-based international order continues to serve as the
world's operating system or the recent ``might makes right''
hegemony. Whether the U.S.-anchored system of alliance is still
up to the task of facing military authoritarians. Whether
Taiwan will remain a free country. And I don't use the term
``country'' loosely. It is a country.
Indo-Pacific waters face a wide variety of maritime
security threats. Illegal, unregulated, unreported fishing
threaten ecosystems, economies, and food supplies. Most of the
river systems responsible for the bulk of plastic waste in the
oceans empty into the Indo-Pacific.
Radical Islamist terror groups take advantage of the Indo-
Pacific loosely governed maritime boundaries. Most of the
region's coastal nations have extensive coastline, but they
have disputed maritime borders and they have to monitor and
police their maritime territory.
It is a very difficult environment but among these
challenges, one threat stands out above all the rest. That is
the maritime belligerence and gray zone warfare of the PRC
[People's Republic of China] as directed by the Chinese
Communist Party [CCP]. The PRC actions in the Indo-Pacific
waters are a true reflection of the character and nature of our
strategic competitor, or our adversary, really, if we are frank
about it.
They show CCP's willingness to flagrantly violate
international law. The PRC's fictitious nine-dash line, their
territorial claim has been vacated and debunked at
international arbitration, but China has simply relied on
Chairman Mao's old wisdom to make its territorial advancement a
reality. In his words, ``political power grows out of the
barrel of a gun.''
The PRC's maritime actions also show what little regard the
CCP has for its international agreements. Since Xi Jinping
promised the world in 2015, as we have already mentioned, not
to militarize the South China Sea, they have created over 5
square miles of artificial land and then topped them with
military bases.
This showed CCP willingness to trample the sovereignty of
smaller nations. Since early March, for example, the People's
Liberation Army's maritime militia has occupied the waters
around the Whitsun Reef in the Spratly Islands with a faux
civilian fishing boat, both [inaudible] sometimes numbering in
the hundreds.
It is a transparent attempt to intimidate the Philippines
and a transparent example of the disdain that the CCP has for
its neighbors. And the PRC's conduct in Indo-Pacific waters
also reveals CCP's military ambition.
At over 300 ships, their navy has already become the
world's largest, exceeding the U.S. Navy's 293 deployed
vessels. PRC's artificial island outposts in the Spratly
Islands are already supporting military operations far from
China's shore. Dual use ports or outright military bases are
already a reality with Cambodia, Uganda, Pakistan, and
elsewhere. The PLA's belligerence is growing dramatically.
Taken together, we are seeing a long-term attempt to
fundamentally re-engineer the strategic geography of the
region, which will challenge U.S. access and threaten the
security framework that has sustained the Indo-Pacific's
prosperity since the Second World War.
Thankfully, none of this is a foregone conclusion. The
United States has both foreign affairs and defense options to
check these threats, but doing so will require an overdue focus
on the Indo-Pacific. Bringing the proper resources to bear,
accepting that we can't control the ocean and we'll have to
take a hard look at our priorities, not least making the most
of our Indo-Pacific allies and partners. This is a major U.S.
advantage over the PRC.
And, lastly, I would like to highlight the importance of
the Quad, which was critical to this endeavor. And I joined my
colleague, Ami, with the Quad recently, and it was a very
successful evening that we had.
Tackling this topic jointly with our Armed Services
colleagues in an excellent way to continue this conversation in
Congress, and I'm glad we could bring our subcommittees
together for this hearing today on what will continue to be a
vital issue for U.S. imports in the Indo-Pacific.
Again, thank you for doing this. I yield.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, Steve, for your great
comments.
So we want to turn to our witnesses, and our first
testimony will be from Daniel Russel, who, again, I introduced
earlier, from the Asia Society Policy Institute and former
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs.
Mr. Russel, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DANIEL R. RUSSEL, VICE PRESIDENT,
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND DIPLOMACY, ASIA SOCIETY POLICY
INSTITUTE, FORMER ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EAST ASIAN
AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS

Mr. Russel. Well, good morning, Chairman Courtney, Chairman
Bera, ranking members, members of the combined committees,
thanks very much for the opportunity to testify today alongside
my very distinguished friends and colleagues on this important
issue.
So I served our country for 33 years in the Foreign
Service, and from 2009 through 2017, I was responsible for
Asia-Pacific affairs, first on the National Security Council
and then as Assistant Secretary of State. And my experience
taught me the immense importance of the Indo-Pacific to
America's economy and security. And it also showed me the
significant risks to those interests and to the interests of
our allies and partners from the growing threats to freedom of
navigation and overflight.
I was directly involved in policy and diplomacy on the
South China Sea, East China Sea, Taiwan Strait, the Western
Pacific. I worked closely with Admiral Swift and with other
distinguished defense colleagues. But despite intensive
diplomatic efforts by the United States, with Beijing, with the
various claimants, with the littoral states, the situation has
continued to deteriorate.
China, as the chairman mentioned, has gone back on its
word. It has flouted the legally binding ruling by the UNCLOS
tribunal in 2016. It has ramped up both its incursions into
Japanese-administered waters in East China Sea and its
threatening behavior in the South China Sea and the Taiwan
Strait. And these actions are raising tensions that pose
serious economic and security challenges directly to the United
States.
Throughout my career, Asian partners strongly encouraged,
begged for, a robust American presence as a stabilizing bulwark
against Chinese bullying and hegemony. But, in recent years,
the perception has grown among many of these regional
governments that the U.S. may no longer be willing or even able
to play its traditional role as the guarantor of rules-based
order. And, at the same time, China has taken a full-spectrum
push through its Belt and Road Initiative--the BRI--to bolster
its primacy across multiple domains.
Through the BRI and through China's civil-military fusion
policy, Beijing is increasing its leverage over countries in
the region, facilitating the expansion of its own navy's
logistics network. It is creating opportunities to collect vast
amounts of data and intelligence, and potentially it is gaining
the ability to curtail American access to critical waters.
So it is vitally important that the U.S. take steps that
will rebuild regional confidence and faith in the U.S.
commitment, both to the region and to the rules-based order.
Smaller nations will defend their own interests, they'll
push back against coercion from a powerful nation, if they
believe that the U.S. is present, capable, and willing to stand
up for the rights of the weaker party.
In my written testimony, I put forward a number of
practical steps that the U.S. could take to bolster that
necessary confidence. One is developing programs that will
build maritime capacity and U.S. interoperability with regional
partners. Another is building on growing strategic convergence
with India and supporting India's capabilities as an advocate
and as a provider of maritime security.
But the most powerful would be ratifying the 1982 Law of
the Sea Convention. Chairman Courtney laid out some very
powerful reasons to ratify the treaty. Look, I will admit that
in isolation, just ratifying UNCLOS alone may not do all that
much beyond removing a talking point from the Chinese script.
But, as part of a strategy, a U.S. strategy incorporating
diplomatic and military initiatives, ratification would have a
powerful galvanizing effect and really bolster U.S. credibility
and leadership.
So, with that, let me stop. Thank you, and I look forward
very much to your questions or comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russel can be found in the
Appendix on page 47.]
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Russel. And, again, your
experience I think is really perfect for today's discussion.
And thank you for your great opening remarks.
We will now hear from Admiral Scott Swift, who, again, I
introduced earlier as the former Commander of the U.S. Pacific
Fleet. Spent a lot of time in this region and, you know, dealt
with a lot of our allies and other parties there, and really
pleased that he can join us from Massachusetts where he is
enjoying his new life. The Admiral left the Navy.
And, Admiral Swift, thank you again, and the floor is
yours.

STATEMENT OF ADM SCOTT SWIFT, USN (RET.), FORMER COMMANDER,
U.S. PACIFIC FLEET

Admiral Swift. Thank you, chairman, and Chairman Bera, and
Ranking Members Wittman and Chabot, for the opportunity to
participate in this morning's hearing.
I am pleased to be before the committee today to testify on
maritime security in the Indo-Pacific and the U.N. Convention
on the Law of the Sea.
As was mentioned, I retired just short of 3 years ago from
a career as a naval officer spanning 40 years from enlistment
until my final tour as the Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet.
With the exception of the tour as the Deputy Commander of Naval
Forces Central Command and three short tours in the Pentagon,
my entire career was either centered in the Indo-Asia-Pacific
or I transited through it to the CENTCOM [United States Central
Command] area of responsibility [AOR].
Since retirement, I have remained active in national policy
and security affairs with a focus on the Indo-Asia-Pacific.
I have submitted my full statement to the combined
committee, which I ask to be made part of the record, and my
comments today are pulled from those fuller statements.
The point of my testimony today is focused on three
recommendations presented with a practitioner's view of the
challenges and opportunities faced within the region.
The first recommendation is to expand the current focus of
maritime security more broadly beyond the context of the
Department of Defense generally, and the U.S. Navy
specifically. The challenges the United States faces in the
Indo-Pacific are multifaceted and complex. They require a
multifaceted and inclusive whole of government approach that
brings to bear all of our national elements of strength to this
problem set.
While the current trend of the State Department being in
the lead on foreign policy issues, with the Department of
Defense in support where appropriate, is a positive step, other
cabinet-level departments need to play more proactive roles in
coordination with the State Department. Further, Congress needs
to be included more holistically if solutions are going to be
relevant, especially in the eyes of our allies, partners, and
friends, as well as competitors.
To my second recommendation, fully understand the
perceptions of those outside our borders who could have
significant roles to play with respect to our own national
interest. Their perceptions need to be treated as our
realities. The concept of the rebalance to the Pacific was
implemented when I was the 7th Fleet Commander. The resultant
private discussions I had with my counterparts on their
perspective on the value of the rebalance were overwhelmingly
positive, as Danny reported.
They were also overwhelmingly skeptical of the needed long-
term commitment of the United States to follow through on the
promise and vision of the rebalance. When I returned to the
Pacific as the Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet, invariably
the state of the rebalance came up in my discussions with my
friends in the region, their common response being ``We told
you so.''
Today those discussions have begun to transition from a
concern for the legitimacy of the United States and the region,
with respect to foreign policy commitments, to questions of the
United States' legitimacy.
The last recommendation in tying these two points together
is to recognize how important it is to move beyond declarations
of intent, words of warning, and posturing. The United States
is no longer being judged on what we say. We are being judged
on what we do. To be relevant on today's global stage, you need
to have a body of action against which your declarations can be
judged.
One of those actions this committee needs to consider is
becoming a party to UNCLOS. I expand on this point in my
statement for the record of how necessary it is to rethink the
logic of the argument that the United States is empowered by
remaining outside the Convention and disempowered if they were
to become a party of it.
While I can't cover this important issue fully in the time
I have here, I welcome your questions on this subject and
consideration of my full comments for the record. While action
is needed, this does not mean we need to take big, bold,
headline-grabbing actions. We need to be consistent and firm.
Many smaller actions are more meaningful than a few big
ones. Those actions should highlight our democratic ideals
while rejecting the pursuit of force and coercion. They should
embrace multilateralism as a rule, bilateralism only as a
fallback, while fully recognizing that unilateral actions are
used sparingly, when our national security interests are so
compelling, are followed, while we take this approach when
other measures have proven ineffective.
I will stop at this point, and I look forward to your
questions and the remainder of the hearing. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Swift can be found in
the Appendix on page 61.]
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you, Admiral. And I am sure there
will be lots of follow-up questions.
Our next witness is Ms. Bonnie Glaser, Director of Asia
Program with The German Marshall Fund, and no stranger to the
Hill. And it is great to have you here with us today, Bonnie.
The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF BONNIE S. GLASER, DIRECTOR, ASIA PROGRAM, THE
GERMAN MARSHALL FUND OF THE UNITED STATES

Ms. Glaser. Thank you, Chairman Bera, Chairman Courtney,
Ranking Members Chabot, Wittman, distinguished members of both
committees, and thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on what is really a crucially important topic for the United
States.
I devoted most of my career to trying to better understand
Chinese foreign and security policy. China's maritime gray zone
operations, which were mentioned by Representative Wittman,
pose serious challenges to the United States and our allies and
partners in maritime East Asia. These operations are designed
to gain advantage without provoking a conventional military
response, and they are, therefore, difficult to counter
effectively.
Beijing's objective, to be clear, in conducting these
operations, is to alter the status quo in its favor, and they
have seen some success. In the South China Sea, China is
employing gray zone tactics to advance its illegal nine-dash
line claim, and these tactics feature persistent harassment
operations by coast guard vessels and maritime militia boats in
the exclusive economic zones of other claimants.
China stepped up military coercion against Taiwan as part
of a multifaceted campaign that seeks to prevent that
democratically elected government from pushing for independence
and to erode the will of the people of Taiwan to resist, so
they will consent to unification with China.
And, of course, in the East China Sea, since 2012, China
has been engaged in an effort to undermine Japan's
administrative control of the Senkaku Islands.
International law can play an important role in managing
maritime disputes, but only if the parties to the dispute are
willing to avail themselves of the law. And the Convention of
the Law of the Sea has established norms and behavior among the
majority of sovereign states, and as Mr. Courtney noted,
ratified already by 167 states and the European Union.
Bilateral and multilateral mechanisms to manage and resolve
territorial disputes between China and its neighbors have not
been very effective. China generally prefers to use power
rather than law. And the July 2016 rule by the UNCLOS arbitral
tribunal of course found the Chinese nine-dash line has no
legal basis under international maritime law.
And although the ruling was rejected by Beijing, a growing
number of countries, including the United States, U.K. [United
Kingdom], France, Germany, jointly submitted a note verbale to
the U.N., and also Australia. All of these countries are
condemning China's unlawful behavior, and especially its
coercion that prevents smaller countries from accessing their
rightful fishing and energy resources.
Beijing is also negotiating with ASEAN on the code of
conduct for the South China Sea, but I am rather pessimistic.
Even if an agreement is reached, I don't think it will protect
the interests of smaller claimants. Let's be clear that China
has tried to use these negotiations to prevent the Southeast
Asian states from conducting military exercises with any
country that isn't party to the agreement and from joining with
foreign powers to extract oil and gas.
In my written testimony, I have included several policy
recommendations. I will cite a few here. I think that the Group
of Seven or the D10 [D10 Strategy Forums] should be issuing
collective statements in support of the preservation of freedom
of navigation, protecting the legal rights of all claimants'
resources and opposing coercion and the use of force.
Sanctions I think have a role to play. The sanctions
implemented under the Trump administration I think were
targeted perhaps at companies that have already done damage.
They have built the islands. They have already militarized. We
should be imposing sanctions on Chinese companies that conduct
surveys, energy operations, and operate maritime militia boats
illegally in other countries' EEZs [exclusive economic zones].
And the goal would be to impose costs on China's state-run
and private companies that carry out these illegal activities
and induce them to change their behavior.
Finally, I want to agree with my other witnesses, panelists
here, that the United States should ratify UNCLOS. As a party
to the Convention, the U.S. would be able to strengthen its
role in the development of the international Law of the Sea.
Joining the treaty would give the U.S. a voice in the debates
about matters that affect U.S. interests. rather than ceding
rulemaking to others.
Staying outside UNCLOS deprives the U.S. of an opportunity
to participate in dispute resolution, for example. As a treaty
member, the U.S. could legally challenge China's objections to
innocent passage in its territorial sea. It could challenge
China's straight baselines in the Paracel Islands. And as a
state party, the U.S. would be able to nominate members of the
Law of the Sea Tribunal and Continental Shelf Commission.
So the benefits of joining UNCLOS I think clearly outweigh
the costs.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Glaser can be found in the
Appendix on page 75.]
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, Bonnie, and it is
good to see you again.
Last, but not least, is Mr. Brent Sadler, who is a Senior
Fellow for Naval Warfare and Advanced Technology at the
Heritage Foundation and a Navy veteran. Again, I really
encourage everyone to read his testimony, which is quite
exhaustive on the subject we are talking about here today. I
welcome him to the proceedings, and the floor is yours, Mr.
Sadler.

STATEMENT OF BRENT D. SADLER, SENIOR FELLOW FOR NAVAL WARFARE
AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Sadler. Thank you, and good morning, everyone. Chairmen
Bera and Courtney, Ranking Members Chabot and Wittman,
distinguished members of the House, thank you for the
opportunity to join you today.
Recent events in maritime Asia definitely underscore the
timeliness of today's hearing to highlight significant
challenges confronting our Nation on the waters of the East and
South China Seas. In just the past few weeks, China's military,
or PLA, air force, and navy have conducted significant and
sustained operations around Taiwan, signaling diplomatic
displeasure, practicing wartime operations, and exhausting
Taiwan defense forces.
At the same time, over 200 Chinese fishing vessels, Chinese
coast guard, and maritime militia had massed in Philippine
waters in what could be a pretext for a season of harassment.
Last year at this time, and on the heels of Taiwan's
presidential election and inauguration, the U.S. kept a
heightened presence in the region, but it was events
surrounding survey ship West Capella, working for Malaysia's
national oil company, that was most notable.
Considering the location, China's response was muted, with
the U.S. Navy always nearby. Regardless for countries like
Malaysia, the economic and domestic political imperatives
necessitate a return to these waters. Unlike the dynamic state
of affairs in Southeast Asia, the East China Sea has Japanese
and Chinese maritime forces maintaining a tense balance.
Since 2012, the number of Chinese air and water incursions
around the Senkaku Islands remain at historic highs, and it has
fueled a shift in Japanese diplomatic and military posture.
Japan's Self-Defense Forces and Coast Guard continue to
rebalance towards these islands, sustain increased defense
spending, and revise the U.S.-Japan defense guidelines.
What the Senkaku Islands and West Capella experience has
made clear is that naval presence matters. Throughout these
incidents, a sustained presence that included rare dual
aircraft carrier operations was followed by a wave of positive
regional diplomatic and partner military actions. However, such
forward presence doesn't come cheap. For the U.S. to pace a
metastasizing risk across a spectrum of rivalry requires an
invigoration of investment in our naval forces and operations
to alter Beijing's strategic calculations as well as Moscow's.
It is also worth noting that in a remarkable display, China
and Russia flew bombers together in the Sea of Japan in July of
2019, and again in December of 2020, and the two are set to
renew a strategic partnership this July, adding complexity to
an increasingly stressing global maritime competition for our
Navy.
Given the intensifying activities in maritime Asia over the
last decade, what is China's intent? The Communist Party of
China, under President Xi Jinping, has not been vague. It is a
core national interest to prevent independence, and, if need
be, forcefully integrate Taiwan.
To act on this, the People's Liberation Army, the Party's
military, has embarked on a decades-long naval expansion,
adding 117 modern warships while our Navy adds 5, and executed
military reforms with Taiwan being the principal strategic
direction. That said, conflict engenders uncertainty, and so
the Chinese Communist Party has preferred an incremental effort
below our threshold for retaliation while tangibly changing
facts at sea in so-called gray zone operations.
So what is to be done? First, presence for purpose. Naval
presence needs to be prioritized and resourced more vigorously
to decisive theaters such as the South China Sea, and new tools
for gray zone operations provided to our deployed ships.
Second, build a new modeled Navy, by growing and equipping
the fleet to meet the combined challenge of China and Russia,
while recapitalizing shipyards and the workforce to deliver and
man those ships so urgently needed.
Third, deliver a compelling cost proposition by rethinking
the conduct of diplomacy, building partner capacity, and
economic development, in order to make a more compelling and
lasting cost proposition for our citizens as well as partners
to join and strengthen the bargain of a free and open Indo-
Pacific.
With respect to acceding to the Law of the Sea, I have
reservations. And given our track record and capacity to
compete with the Chinese and Russians to date in multilateral
forums in the near term, its efficacy as a mechanism to
influence Chinese behavior in the mid, and potential cost in
the longer term, notably the seabed comment that was brought up
earlier.
That said, the dangers at sea are real and no longer a
distant concern. Both the current and next Indo-Pacific
commanders, Admirals Davidson and Aquilino, both recently
testified as much regarding China triggering a conflict in the
next 6 years. To deter this growing armada arrayed against us
requires more than matching numbers and arsenals in fleets. We
must do this while also rethinking naval operations in a wider
diplomatic and economic statecraft context.
Needed is an approach that confounds Chinese and Russian
gray zone activities. A new naval statecraft approach is
needed.
And thank you again for the time today. Look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sadler can be found in the
Appendix on page 95.]
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you, Mr. Sadler.
And now we are going to move into the question time period.
And, again, just before beginning or asking my questions, I
just would note that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has actually
endorsed ratification, and they obviously watch closely the
issues of, you know, mineral rights and seabed access.
And actually, if people could mute their computers, that
would be much appreciated.
So, and again, the resolution that Mr. Young, Don Young,
and I will be introducing cites the chamber's position that is
on here.
But also, Admiral Swift, the citation of a comment that was
made by Admiral Harris, who is your former colleague when you
served at Pacific Fleet Command, and, again, was President
Trump's Ambassador to South Korea, and obviously a very
vigilant, forceful advocate for U.S. presence in the Indo-
Pacific region, he stated when he testified before the U.S.
Senate, and I quote, ``I think that by not signing on to UNCLOS
we lose credibility for the very same thing we are arguing for,
which is the following: accepting rules and norms in the
international arena. The United States is a beacon. We are a
beacon on a hill, but I think that light is brighter if we sign
in fully to UNCLOS.''
So, Admiral Swift, you made the comment about, you know,
the benefits or advantages of being outside of UNCLOS in terms
of trying to, again, solidify international rule of law in
maritime space versus being a full participant. And I was just
wondering, you know, using Admiral Harris' comment in terms of,
you know, his perspective as somebody who really had spent,
like you, many years of great service to our country in the
Indo-Pacific region, if you could sort of expand on that, you
know, to, sort of, the balancing act that our country needs to
determine in terms of whether becoming a full participant in
UNCLOS.
Admiral Swift. Thank you for that question, Chairman. The
first thing I would say upfront is that I do agree with my
friend, Harry Harris' assessment then and while I can't speak
for him, I suggest that his comments, if anything, would be
further increased in his view how important they are.
I just point out to the--everything that both chairmen have
said already, and the ranking members have said, about how the
competition is going with China. And speaking frankly, it is
not going well. And it is on that basis that I suggest now is
an appropriate time to revisit the ratification.
I recognize the points that others make about the downside
of ratification, but I think they have been diminished even
further with the result of the current competition.
As you mentioned, there are 168 parties that have signed on
to the Convention. Being on the outside doesn't--it isolates us
from our allies, partners, and friends. Whether you are talking
about allied partners, whether you are talking about the seven
countries that we have a defense pact with, and where it aligns
us with are those that are self-isolated themselves, the likes
of Iran, North Korea, and Venezuela, while those on the inside,
Russia and China, as Ms. Glaser pointed out, have free rein to
define the rules-based order within UNCLOS as they wish. And as
you pointed, we are excluded when an issue comes before the
tribunal.
I would underscore the fact that almost unrecognized is,
with response to the South China Sea case that was brought by
the Philippines, not only did China direct the finding of the
tribunal, they rejected the tribunal itself as having no
standing.
So if the international courts have no standing, this falls
right in line with how Rep. Chabot has represented the approach
that China has taken. Now is the time to step inside the
Convention, I would suggest, so that we are in more of a
position of power to influence more fully this continued
diminishment that is occurring in the international rules-based
order.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, Admiral.
And I will now yield to Mr. Wittman for his questions. Do
we have Rob with us?
Steve, if you are teed up and ready to go----
Mr. Wittman. All right. I am here, Joe.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. Sorry about that.
Mr. Wittman. I was just trying to go through the different
things on the screen.
Ms. Glaser and Mr. Sadler, I wanted to ask you specifically
an issue concerning our freedom of navigation operations
[FONOPs]. As we have seen through the years, we continue to
ramp up those operations. We started with doing three in 2016,
and we are up to nine in 2020. And we continue to push back
against the Chinese aggressive assertion and their unlawful
claims that they can operate freely within the South China Sea
and keep out all other forces.
And their claims in the East and the South China Sea
continue to be even more and more aggressive. If you look at
what they are doing with the East China Sea ADIZ, better known
as the air defense identification zone, they continue to push
that, are very aggressive with intercepting any aircraft that
come into that area, and now it looks like they are going to
pursue a South China Sea air defense identification zone.
So, give me your perspective on how you see this, this
additional aggressive behavior, especially in how they engage
U.S. naval forces that are freely operating under the current
law there in the South China Sea and what they are doing with
the now I believe upcoming expansion of ADIZ, if you can just
reflect on that. And would you recommend that the Biden
administration continue the aggressive efforts that we have
pursued with FONOPs operations, the freedom of navigation
Operations, and what we do to continue to contest their
assertion of the East China Sea ADIZ and now potentially a
South China Sea ADIZ.
Ms. Glaser. So thank you for that question. I will go
first, and then turn it over to Brent. I think it is an
excellent question. I very much support the routine conduct of
FONOPs. Obviously, this is a global program. It challenges
excessive maritime claims. It is not exclusively aimed at China
in the South China Sea. We also conduct FONOPs that are aimed
at demonstrating that other countries--Vietnam, for example,
does have some excessive maritime claims, and even some of our
close allies.
FONOPs in the South China Sea are necessary, but
insufficient, and I again want to emphasize that the smaller
claimants in the region hope that the United States will stand
up for the rights they have to exploit resources inside their
EEZs.
This was an important policy change that was made last July
during the Trump administration, has now been also reaffirmed
by the Biden administration, and I think it is very important.
Another point I would like to make is that, yes, China has
been conducting far more exercises in the region, and it is
shadowing, as I understand it, U.S. ships everywhere in the
South China Sea.
When, in 2014, the United States and China and other
countries agreed that we would apply the code of unplanned
encounters at sea, which had protocols to communicate when
ships encounter each other, that was useful at the time. In
this new environment in which China is behaving more
assertively, I think that we need to think about what else
should be applied in the South China Sea.
Frankly, China is not abiding by cues, as I understand it
from talking to naval operators. In many instances, it is
simply not using them. And because it is actively shadowing
U.S. naval ships, this is a change in the circumstances and the
environment in that area. And I think we need to think about
other ways that we can avoid accidents that could happen,
whether they be in the air or at sea.
Thank you.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Sadler.
Mr. Sadler. Thank you. Great question. I definitely would
echo Ms. Glaser's comments that our partners in the region
welcome and need our visible presence as they execute their
economic rights and their EEZs. As far as mechanisms, there are
mechanisms that have been in place for quite a while, harkening
back to the days following the P-3 [Hainan Island incident]
south of Hainan Island in 2001. And this is the military
maritime consultative agreement, where we meet with our Chinese
partners and discuss issues at sea and the airspace over. It
has a mixed record. It hasn't met in recent times partly
because of COVID, but also because of our relationships.
But the freedom of navigation Ops themselves, and also
associated operations, special reconnaissance-type operations,
being routinized over the last few years, is extremely
positive. Disconnecting those freedom of navigation and
execution of military operations separate from high-level
engagements and other dialogues is actually very worthwhile. It
depoliticizes what in the past has been politicized--from time
to time politicized activity. And so that is a good move, and
that should be continued against any other resistance.
What I would say on the flip side is it is also not helpful
that when we do one of these exercises against a partner or an
upcoming ally, to go public with these operations, it needs to
be thoroughly considered and due diligence given before we go
public with why and where we are doing these.
The countries that are being targeted can see, and they
know where we are when we do these. So it is not a surprise
that our presence was there, but a little bit more diligence on
the strategic communication part is probably warranted.
As far as to kind of go back to the UNCLOS comment earlier,
I am kind of the odd man out on this. My focus is strictly on
the military in the near- and the mid-term. That is where more
of my concern is. And that before we get into UNCLOS fully
formally, we should make sure that we are exercising and that
we are postured to engage in effective lawfare; in other words,
that we have resourced. And that record I am not sure is as
clear.
And with that, I will yield my time.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Rob.
And I just want to assure, you know, Mr. Sadler, you know,
you are talking to friends when you talk about trying to
increase our presence and capability in the Navy's budget and
fleet size.
So I think Mr. Chabot was having a little bit of technical
difficulty, so instead of--so to keep it Democrat, Republican,
I would now yield to Vicky Hartzler, who I think is the next in
line. Vicky, are you still with us?
Oh, oops. I am sorry. My bad. I apologize. I misread my
text here from the staff. So I will move to the chairman of the
Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, Mr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. No worries. And this just demonstrates the
bipartisan nature of how we are thinking about the strategy,
that we don't have a Democrat or Republican on this committee.
And that is something that we have talked about, you know, Mr.
Chabot and I, when we think about our strategic approach to the
Indo-Pacific region. You know, much as we had in the Cold War,
we need an American approach, and we need to play the long
game.
And I think that is a role that both of our subcommittees,
as well as Congress as a whole, really can start to think about
what that long-term strategy is from a diplomatic perspective,
from a defensive national security posture, and start making
those investments and building those alliances.
And that is part of the reason why I think it is important
for us to be in treaties like UNCLOS and international
coalitions--so we can actually be at the table influencing the
direction of these groups.
You know, let me ask a question of Mr. Russel. You know,
one of the multilateral coalitions is the Quad coalition. And
this partnership--and I won't call it an alliance, but a
partnership between the United States, Japan, Australia, and
India. And, you know, as we think about that from a strategic
perspective--and, you know, we have talked a lot about the
South China Sea, and certainly some of the, you know, Chinese
incursions there, but also the Belt and Road Initiative--and
with investments in Sri Lanka, you know, with investments in
Pakistan, you know, port development in Djibouti, if we think
about the Indian Ocean region, you know, maybe, Mr. Russel, if
you could talk a little bit about, you know, our partnership
with the Indians but also the importance with the Quad
coalition.
Mr. Russel. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Bera. I, in
my career, admit to being something of a Quad skeptic because
it always seemed to loom larger on paper than in reality.
My view of the Quad has changed, and I am now a true
believer in the wake of the very successful March Quad Leaders
Summit, the foreign ministers' meeting that preceded it,
because it was very concrete in its decisions and its ambition
and its outcome. And I think we can see that the Quad now is
greater than the sum of the parts because each of the Quad
members are contributing something unique to, in this case, the
provision of COVID-19 vaccines throughout Southeast Asia.
I think that the Quad more broadly, particularly when it
comes to security in the Indo-Pacific, is very much a work in
progress. And among the keys will be inclusivity. What we can't
allow to evolve is competition between the Quad and ASEAN as
two alternate centers of gravity.
Over time the Quad has got to work not only with the ASEAN
partners in Southeast Asia, but very importantly with the
Pacific Island nations as well, to look for the points of
common interest and to develop a common agenda. So, inclusivity
has got to be a core part of these multilateral enterprises.
Now, what we see in the Belt and Road is the execution of a
Chinese strategy to ensure dual-use capabilities to major
seaports that are adjacent to important sea lanes of
communication. So we see that in Sri Lanka in the Hambantota
Port. We see it in Myanmar in the Kyaukphyu Port, in Pakistan
in the Gwadar Port, and so on.
And what we need to be thinking of is not the emergence of
Chinese naval bases. That is 20th century thinking. But,
instead, critical nodes where the Chinese can not only
provision and support their naval vessels, but also that are
integrated into sophisticated technology centers through
China's digital Silk Road.
So this is data centers. It is undersea cables. It is what
they call ``safe cities,'' which is a euphemism for
authoritarian surveillance technologies, and so on. And related
to that is the tremendous economic leverage that China is
acquiring. So as my colleagues have made clear, really, at
essence what is needed is for the United States to be on the
field. You can't beat something with nothing. The Chinese are
bringing a lot of something to the countries along the Indian
Ocean and throughout the Pacific region.
We have got to do everything that we can, not, as Admiral
Swift made clear, limited to the military front but through the
whole range of diplomatic, informational, legal, and economic
instruments available to us.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
And if I may just ask a quick question of Ms. Glaser. I
know, you know, we have talked both about--you know, around
Taiwan about the issue of strategic ambiguity versus strategic
clarity, and I really land on, you know, what strategic
deterrence looks like in this space, and, you know, perhaps if
you could just allude to your perspective on, you know, how we
approach strategic deterrence, not just in the Taiwan Strait
but potentially in the Indo-Pacific region.
Ms. Glaser. Thank you, Chairman Bera. It is such an
important question, and I like to think of strategic clarity
and strategic ambiguity; that is, whether or not the United
States would come to Taiwan's defense in a nuclear contingency
as a spectrum.
And it is not just a choice between one or the other--and I
believe, for example, that Secretary of State Blinken when
about a week ago made a statement that it would be a mistake
for the status quo to be changed by use of force. That is an
example of a declaratory statement moving more towards
strategic clarity and away from strategic ambiguity.
But it is not a statement that says under all circumstances
we would come to Taiwan's defense. And I think that making that
kind of a statement would be problematic. It might, in fact,
provoke the attack that we seek to deter, because I think
China's domestic politics are more complicated than any of us
fully know. I mean, it is a black box decision-making within Jo
Yan Hi [phonetic] and Xi Jinping's inner circle.
And he is facing I think a very sensitive period now of
this year the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese
Communist Party, and then we have next year the 100th
anniversary of--sorry, next year we have the Olympics and then
we have a Party Congress coming up in 2022, which is the 20th
Party Congress.
And then, of course, we have the founding of the--the 100th
anniversary of the founding of the PLA, then, in 2027. These
are very important anniversaries, and we should not, I think,
say things that could end up provoking a Chinese attack.
But your question about deterrence is really important
because the United States must do more to deter an attack on
Taiwan and in other contingencies in the Indo-Pacific. And
right now--and there are others on this--in this hearing who
are far better equipped to assess where we are in terms of our
capabilities to intervene, for example, to defend Taiwan, but I
would certainly posit that we do not have enough capability to
get to the Taiwan Strait adequate military assets quickly
enough.
Taiwan also has not done enough for its part to prepare for
its own defense, and, therefore, to strengthen deterrence. So,
I agree with Brent's comments about investing in our military,
and particularly in our Navy. We want to avoid a miscalculation
from China, but we also want Xi Jinping to wake up every day
and say, ``This is not the day that I am going to put at risk
all of my other ambitious agenda items,'' whether those be
domestically or in the international community, ``and try and
reunify Taiwan by force.''
Mr. Bera. Great.
Mr. Chairman, let me yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Chairman Bera.
And so I am not sure if Steve Chabot is able to connect
back with us. Steve, are you there? Okay. It sounds like he has
a little bit of difficulty there.
So, anyway, so now I will yield to Vicky Hartzler, who is
next in line on the Republican side.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
very, very important hearing. Appreciate all of the witnesses.
And I want to just continue on the thread, a little bit, of
what you have been sharing, Ms. Glaser, about Taiwan. As you
talked about, there is a persistent harassment that is going on
there with the flyovers. And so I just wondered--you said they
are trying to erode the will of Taiwan so they acquiesce to
reunification with China.
Where do you see this going in the near term? I understand
your advice that we have got to invest in the Navy and things,
but do you see over the next 6 months Taiwan continuing this
very aggressive behavior? Or, yeah, what is your thoughts on
where this is going to go in the next 6 months?
Ms. Glaser. Well, I personally don't think that China's use
of force against Taiwan is likely in the next 6 months. But I
think what we need to focus on is the--again, it is the gray
zone actions. This is coercion against Taiwan, stealing away of
Taiwan's diplomatic allies, Taiwan is now down to 15; economic
coercion against Taiwan, which has not been used very
extensively, but we have recently seen Beijing lay down a
marker in its ban of importation of pineapples from Taiwan.
They could do more in that regard. They could put more pressure
on Taiwan's semiconductor manufacturing company, which has
become critically important for the United States and supply
chains in semiconductors.
TSMC [Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company] has
operations on the mainland and is very much I think caught in
the middle supplying semiconductors to China, but of course
also in compliance with the restrictions that the United States
has placed on the provision of very advanced semiconductors.
So we see also, as you mentioned, the military coercion
around Taiwan. So the United States, I think both under the
administrations of President Trump and President Biden, have
signaled greater support for Taiwan appropriately. And the
Biden administration has talked about having rock-solid support
for Taiwan.
There has recently been a revision of the contact guidance
with Taiwan, which is emphasizing greater--is actually
encouraging greater interaction and engagement with Taiwan,
while limiting and restricting that engagement in only very,
very narrow areas pertaining to sovereignty.
What I think we need to do is multilateralize this problem
more. We need to get other countries to stand up for Taiwan. We
should be issuing collective statements. We should be acting
together. More countries in Europe--these are countries who are
concerned about the future of democracy, even countries in Asia
who--Japan being number one--would be concerned about a
military takeover of Taiwan.
And I think that the statement between President Biden and
Prime Minister Suga, which included a reference to the
preservation of peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait, is
very important.
So I hope that we can multilateralize this problem more,
that China needs to know that it is not just the United States
that cares about Taiwan, but that there are many democratic
countries around the world that have a stake in the future of
Taiwan's democracy, and in its participation in the
international community where Taiwan has so much to offer in
terms of its expertise on global health and a range of other
areas.
And thank you for the question.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes. Thank you.
And, Mr. Sadler, you mentioned just briefly in your
statement about China and Russia working together and
exercising together. I am very concerned about those two
countries, obviously, working more and more together and having
similar objectives. Could you expand on what danger that you
see or the extent to which China and Russia are working
together militarily?
Mr. Sadler. Absolutely. This is something that I have been
very concerned about and watching quietly for years. And
understanding both kind of the nature of the relationship
between the Chinese and Beijing, as well as a long history with
the Russians, it is not a natural relationship. It is not one
that is very deep, quite frankly. So I have always been a
skeptic that the two would ever come to anything approaching a
real, in a meaningful way, strategic partnership.
That all changed when I was in Tokyo for another conference
in the summer of 2019, where the Chinese and the Russians
conducted a circumnavigation between Japan and South Korea,
Takeshima/Dokdo Islands in the Sea of Japan. And that was
interesting for me because it necessarily meant there was
significant pre-coordination or planning between the two to
pull that off, something I would have never expected despite
their years of doing very scripted exercises and very
geographically constrained exercises, still to this day.
So from the--at the macro level, it seems a little
unnatural, but there is something that is there that is
different in the last few years that causes me a lot of
concern. The challenge for the Navy is we have a global Navy,
and we have responsibilities that are really principle-based,
not territorially based. And even our economic interests are
globally spread and diffused.
So our Navy has a lot of bases to cover, and now you have
two potentially strategic nation--or partnership going on on
opposite ends of the world that will overtax the Navy's
attention and its resources. And so that is probably the most
important thing I would take away from that is while China is
definitely the pacing threat, and the number one challenge,
comprehensive challenge, Russia is always there, just enough to
be a distraction at a moment that could be very, very
disadvantageous for U.S. interest. I mean, comprehensive U.S.
interest.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Sadler. Ran over a little bit,
but the point was important, and certainly those of us on
Seapower hear you loud and clear.
So next up is Mr. Langevin. And then he will be followed by
Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank our witnesses for your testimony today.
So let me begin with Ms. Glaser. So, climate change is
obviously a major threat to the Indo-Pacific countries,
especially island countries. Ms. Glaser, can you talk about
some of the effects climate change is having on the current
maritime security situation, and what new challenges can we
expect in the future?
Ms. Glaser. Well, I have to say, Congressman, climate
change is really not in my area of expertise. There may be
other witnesses who can speak to this in more detail than I
can. But certainly, across the South Pacific, climate change is
just the number one issue, and countries are looking for
assistance in order to make themselves more resilient. They are
also looking, of course, to the leading emitters of these
emissions to take actions in order to curb the impact of global
warming.
And so they look to the United States, and I think there
was great disappointment--the United States and China is the,
of course, two leading emitters. There was disappointment in
the lack of progress over the last few years, and a lot of
expectations as to what can be done going forward in order to
help these countries.
So whether it is in terms of aid that we can give these
countries, or in terms perhaps even more importantly of
expertise, together with our ally, Australia, this will be
critically important, because if we do not step up, I guarantee
you that China will step in and provide all sorts of assistance
to countries in the South Pacific.
They have been incredibly active there economically,
politically, and I think increasingly, potentially militarily,
and there have been some suggestions that they may be seeking
port access there. So I think this is an area where we need to
really pay much more attention.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Continuing with you, Ms. Glaser,
if I could, you mentioned that a robust effort should be
undertaken to surveil, identify, and categorize Chinese
maritime militia boats engaging in coercive actions. How would
you rate our efforts so far? And do you believe that we should
do more using covert intelligence, or would you place increased
focus on open source assets?
Ms. Glaser. So I am not familiar with what has gone on in
the classified realm. In the open source area, there has been
very good work that is being done by my former organization,
CSIS [Center for Strategic and International Studies], as the
Asia maritime transparency initiative, and they are tracking
specific maritime militia boats as well as Chinese coast guard
operations and seeing how they gather together in certain areas
to intimidate.
And the episode recently at Whitsun Reef is just the latest
example. This happens around Vietnam's holdings, around other
Philippine holdings. We saw this at Thitu Island when the
Philippines was planning and starting to repair their runway on
Thitu Island.
So I think open source needs to be done. It can be done
with a great deal of open source instruments. But I am sure
that in the intelligence realm that we can do even more to
identify which boats are operating where and, importantly, what
the companies are that they are tied to.
And we can see if they are operating in different parts of
the South China Sea, and they are sitting around places like
Whitsun Reef, they are not fishing. They are bullying other
claimants. They are----
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I am going to stop you there in
the interest of timing.
I wanted to ask Admiral Swift, our operations in the South
China Sea will most likely have to be joint if we are to combat
China's increasing dominance. What were the biggest challenges
you faced as the Pacific Fleet Commander when it came to
working with the other services and functional combatant
commands? And what changes would you make to the Pacific
Fleet's posture so it can fulfill its role?
Admiral Swift. Rep. Langevin, than you for that question.
This is not an area that I think needs focus. The coordination
that is occurring amongst the component commanders has just
been extraordinary in my tenure there, and it has continued.
One of the benefits is that we are all located on an island.
I think an area to expand on is how we work with our allies
and partners in the region. We need to understand their
concerns with the definition of FONOPs. That may be a red line
for them, but understand where their red lines are, set those
aside for now, and let's focus on those areas where there is
overlap in agreement.
I recognize the time has expired here, but I would be happy
to carry this conversation on in another venue, should you have
interest.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Jim, and thank you, Admiral.
Again, if anybody wants to see the coordination with our
allies, I mean, I would encourage people to try and participate
in a CODEL [congressional delegation] during RIMPAC [Rim of the
Pacific Exercise], which is where I think many of us met
Admiral Swift, which was a very--it is an impressive, over 20-
nation event in terms of naval coordination that is out there.
So next, again, Mr. Chabot is back with us. And after Mr.
Chabot will be Congressman Sherman.
Well, I guess we just lost Mr. Chabot again, so, Dr. Green,
I think you are the Republican next in line.
Dr. Green. Can you guys hear me now?
Mr. Courtney. Yes, I can.
Dr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney. The floor is yours.
Dr. Green. Okay. Thank you, Chairman Bera, Ranking Member
Chabot, and Chairman Courtney, and Ranking Member Wittman. And
thank you to our witnesses for being here today. Greatly
appreciate it.
China's increasingly hostile actions in the Indo-Pacific
are incredibly alarming and threaten international norms and
regional stability. I am particularly concerned about, of
course, Taiwan. China has consistently denied Taiwan's
existence as a free and sovereign nation for decades.
Protecting the rights of the Taiwanese people against the CCP's
[Chinese Communist Party's] aggression has been bipartisan U.S.
policy. We seem to agree on this, and I think it is actually
one of the hopes that I have for bipartisanship in this
Congress.
The U.S. has increased the frequency of its Taiwan Strait
transit's U.S. bomber missions and arms sales, but for far too
long the global community has isolated Taiwan in order to
appease Beijing.
It is crucial that international organizations in countries
without diplomatic ties with Taipei recognize this peaceful
nation and welcome them into the international community. The
world must no longer give in to Beijing's bullying.
The U.S. could help by prioritizing a free trade agreement
with Taiwan, an initiative that would incentivize other
countries to follow suit. Additionally, the United States must
not forget the strategic importance of the Indian Ocean. While
in recent years our maritime presence there has waned, it is a
crucial area for commerce and regional stability, and it
contains three of the world's seven oil chokepoints.
While China's growing presence in the Indian Ocean is
troubling for the United States and our allies, China is not
the only adversary there. In 2020, Russia established a naval
base in Sudan, giving Moscow strategic access to the Red Sea
and, by extension, the Indian Ocean. We must insist on a free
and open Indo-Pacific and defend this region and our interests
accordingly.
A question for, really, anyone. Do you guys think that we
are doing enough right now? I mean, other than these FONOPs--
and I have heard some questions on this previously--what else
can we be doing? What else can we be doing to get our, our, you
know, allies and partners involved in this process to push
back?
And anyone--Mr. Sadler, maybe start with you.
Mr. Sadler. Yes, sir. So one of my last assignments in the
Navy was as a defense attache in Southeast Asia. So one of the
areas that I think is really ripe for consideration is in the
realm of military capacity-building, and more sustained
training and exercise kind of missions to kind of build up
shared tactics and procedures, and really dealing with this
gray zone challenge from the Chinese. It is also the Russians,
but Chinese in South China Sea. That would be one area I think
that is really ripe.
And the Japanese, for quite some time now under Prime
Minister Abe, have also recognized this need, and they are
coming into it as well.
Dr. Green. One other question I had is--and, Mr. Chairman,
I will just let you know I can't see the calendar, so I will
need your help knowing when I run out of time.
But, you know, in China's vow to bring Taiwan--you know,
they call them a renegade province--you know, back into the
fold, so to speak, they are doing it diplomatically, isolating
Taipei. I mentioned that in some of my comments. How can we
take that on? What can the United States do? What can the
Congress do?
I know we did the TAIPEI [Taiwan Allies International
Protection and Enhancement Initiative] Act, the Taiwan Travel
Act. What else can we do to get the international community to
integrate Taiwan into the community better?
Ms. Glaser, that might be one for you.
Ms. Glaser. I thought maybe Danny Russel might want to jump
in on this, as I have already talked a great deal about Taiwan.
But I think that we need to be getting other countries to work
with us to do things together with Taiwan. There is this global
cooperation training framework where we include other
countries.
You mentioned a bilateral trade agreement. I would join you
in endorsing a bilateral trade agreement. We have to start by
resuming TIFA talks with Taiwan, Trade Investment Framework
[Agreement] talks, which we have not had since the Obama
administration. It is a very high priority for Taiwan.
We should encourage Japan and Australia to be negotiating
trade agreements with Taiwan, and the EU [European Union]
should be considering negotiating an investment agreement. My
view is that for Taiwan economic prosperity is equal to
security. This is an area where we have all fallen short and we
need to do more.
Dr. Green. I am making an assumption here, Mr. Chairman,
that my time is up, so I will----
Mr. Courtney. It is.
Dr. Green [continuing]. Yield.
Mr. Courtney. But a great question, and, you know, with the
semiconductor shortage that is out there and the fact that
Taiwan probably has the most robust supply chain for
semiconductors, that might be a good incentive for other
countries to get more interested.
Dr. Green. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. So next up is Brad Sherman. And at this
point, in terms of who is left on the screen, he will be
followed by Anthony Brown and Gerry Connolly.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our relationship with
China reminds me of 120 years ago and the conflict between a
rising Germany and a status quo Britain, a rising German naval
power and a status quo Britain. That resulted in the most
enormous avoidable war in the history of humankind, and I hope
we do a better job of managing our relationship with China.
Military deployments are very expensive, and that is why I
am pleased that so much of our discussion today has focused on
ways to confront China without those deployments.
Mr. Chair, I want to join as a co-sponsor of your bill,
plus Mr. Other Chair, I--as a fellow member with you on the
Pacific Islands Caucus, I am glad you brought up the importance
of us concluding the renewal of the compacts with the Freely
Associated States, something that is critical from a strategic
standpoint, not very expensive for the United States.
Several witnesses have talked about diplomacy,
cooperability, and finally, of course, we can help Taiwan
defend itself without that necessarily meaning that we have to
build more of our own military capacity.
We have some strengths in dealing with China. Our ideology
is one of great human democracy, and we are now doing far more
on global warming. As we saw in the briefing of the Secretary
of State just a few days ago, China's plan on global warming is
to increase the amount of carbon inputs into the air until
sometime next decade. We have the relationships with countries,
and China is dependent upon the U.S. market.
Yesterday we listened to our President explain the great
domestic needs of the country, and so it is important that we
figure out how to deal with the issues we are talking about
here without the expense of a huge increase in our military in
this area. A military response is the most expensive thing we
can do when we don't use it, and when we do use it, it goes
beyond most expensive to unparalleled expenditures.
And my first question is for the admiral. We want Taiwan to
be able to defend itself. From Xi's standpoint, he knows that
if he attacks Taiwan, how the United States responds is
questionable. The Taiwanese military is there on the ground to
respond. What weapons systems should we sell to Taiwan? And
what should we encourage them to buy? And is there anything
they want to buy that we shouldn't sell them?
Admiral Swift. Well, thank you for that important question.
I am actually heartened with respect to where Taiwan is with
respect to its own defense. I won't name the individuals in
particular, but I have had the benefit of having made two trips
to Taiwan since my retirement. And my comments to senior
leadership there in a non-military context is to simply share
with them the importance of making Taiwan a bitter pill to
swallow.
As I have said before, the only thing harder than defending
against an amphibious landing or an air assault is conducting
one. The terrain of Taiwan is best suited for----
Mr. Sherman. I have got limited time. Are there particular
weapons systems that----
Admiral Swift. I would say defensive weapons, those weapons
that can defeat an amphibious landing or an air assault, as
well as weapons to defend against missile attack.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I want to move on, chair of the--
along with Mr. Chabot, who is also with us, of the India
Caucus. Chairman Bera has served as chair of that caucus as
well. Our focus has mostly been on the Pacific, but this--we
are focusing here on the Indo-Pacific.
Admiral, is there a problem with the Indian Ocean being
divided between the Indo-Pacific Command, Central Command, and
Africa Command?
Admiral Swift. I haven't seen it manifest itself. There is
great collaboration across that line at the COCOM [combatant
command] level as well as at the individual component level. So
that wasn't an issue when I have served on both sides of that
line.
Mr. Courtney. And I think that will be the final word. So
thank you, Brad, for those questions.
And so next up is Mr. Brown, Anthony Brown. You are next in
line.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am not sure who
best to answer this question, so I will leave it to the
panelists perhaps to do--you know, if they are able to answer
it, please do.
Currently, the U.S. Defense Logistics Agency, DLA,
purchases some of its fuel for Indo-Pacific operations from
foreign suppliers and is delivered on foreign flagships with
foreign crews. My concern is the availability and reliability
of that in a conflict with China in the Indo-Pacific. Can you
comment on, you know, whether increasing fuel purchases from
U.S. suppliers and requiring the delivery with flagships makes
sense in increasing reliability and availability of fuel in
time of--great time of need or in a surge?
Admiral Swift. Congressman Brown, I will respond quickly
and say that that is a concern. You are rightful to have that
concern. It is a concern that is shared by the Joint Staff. I
have had discussions with the J-4 [Joint Staff Directorate for
Logistics] in particular about these vulnerabilities. And
diversity of fuel stocks and supplies broadly is being strongly
endorsed by both the Joint Staff--and I can only speak for the
Navy. I just participated in a Navy-Marine war game on that
specific issue recently.
Mr. Brown. Do any of the other panelists want to comment on
that?
Mr. Sadler. Absolutely. So this is Brent Sadler. I was also
a WESTPAC [Western Pacific] sailor myself and operated in the
Western Pacific. This is a concern, especially if a conflict is
prolonged, going from months into years as it might be with
China. So those logistics need to be very resilient in supply
but also in transit--or transport. So more sealift and more
availability for wartime of tankers as well.
Mr. Brown. And is it your view that--or anyone's view that
this is something that the Navy could take up itself? Or do
they need guidance or direction from Congress to do this?
Mr. Sadler. At least it is my----
Mr. Brown. I mean increasing purchases, procuring fuel from
U.S. suppliers and U.S. vessels with U.S. [inaudible].
Mr. Sadler. Well, in that regard, I think it probably has
to come from outside of the Navy, I mean, because I guess my
initial argument, we go where--the best quality and the best
price would be the first thing.
And then, at the same time, this is where Congress can come
in, make sure there is more resiliency in the logistics, the
supply networks, both here in the United States as well as
forward, thinking that the assumption being that your sea lanes
do get cut at some point in time. You have to have that forward
access as well.
Mr. Brown. Does anyone else want to comment on that issue
or question?
Admiral Swift. I would strongly advocate for engaging with
the Navy to get the Navy's perspective. There are both upsides
and downsides as well. You want diversity in your logistics,
the sources.
I recognize that there certainly is a perspective from
buying those sources from the U.S. perspective, from U.S.
suppliers, but there are downsides and risk associated with
that. The tyranny of distance comes to mind. I would recommend
starting that conversation with the Navy to understand what
their requirement is, expand it from there, you know, how you
might be able to diversify it further.
Mr. Russel. Congressman Brown, this is Danny Russel. If I
could offer one thought, it is that this is really a subset of
a broader issue of U.S. access and logistic options, not only
in a period of conflict but in a period of tension when the
tremendous influence that China has acquired among the littoral
countries in the Indo-Pacific makes them think twice about
extending the kind of overflight or port access that the United
States has historically taken for granted.
And the cure for that is not just ``Buy America'', it is
for America to be in the game in the region diplomatically,
economically, and in other respects.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If there is no one else
that wants to comment on that, I will yield back the balance of
my time. I appreciate the time and attention from our
panelists.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Brown.
I will make a quick comment, which is that last year's NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act], we finally restarted a
maritime tanker program to really address this issue as well as
the Maritime Security Program, which is using U.S.-flagged
ships to boost that supply chain. But we have got more work to
do, and I look forward to doing that with you in Seapower's
mark this year.
So next up is Andy Levin, and he will be followed by Gerry
Connolly.
Mr. Levin. All right. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good to see
you, and I really thank all of the witnesses for joining us
today.
I want to talk about some of the implications that China's
activities in the Indo-Pacific have for human rights and the
health of environment in the region. There was an NBC [National
Broadcasting Company] news investigation published last year,
and it found that China had been sending industrial fishing
boats to fish illegally off the coast of North Korea.
Those findings explained a horrible mystery wherein beat-up
wooden boats, more than 500 of them between 2015 and 2020,
would wash up on the shore in Japan and in them were skeletons
of North Korean fishermen.
NBC News reported that Chinese fishing vessels had
displaced the fishermen's much smaller boats, leading them to
take major risks and go farther and farther out to sea to try
to catch fish, and they would be stranded and have these tragic
consequences.
So let me open up this question to any of our witnesses.
This is, obviously, a grim and alarming example of the
humanitarian risk posed by China's malign activities in the
Indo-Pacific. What should the U.S. do to address this kind of
situation?
Admiral Swift. Congressman, Admiral Swift here. I will jump
on this quickly, but I know both Bonnie and Danny are well-
versed in this. I want to come back to a comment that Bonnie
made earlier about this gray zone that not only is CSIS--and
Greg Poling is the individual that has done some incredible
work there--but as well Andrew Erickson at the Center for
Maritime China Studies at the War College--the term is the
People's Armed Forces Maritime Militia. This is an organized
paramilitary force. They fish sometimes for their own benefit,
but when called they are at the behest, really, of Xi Jinping
directly. There is a chain of command.
And what you are seeing them doing are efforts on their own
to displace others. We have seen this--the Indian Ocean was
mentioned. We have seen it around Gwadar, and we have seen it
around Djibouti. So this is not a global force, but it
certainly spans the area of interest of China from the Bab-el-
Mandeb all the way up into the Sea of Japan.
So I completely agree with the assessment that you have
shared here that this is something that needs to be looked at
more broadly.
Mr. Russel. Congressman, I will follow Admiral Swift, who
went with me, or I went with him, as we traveled throughout the
Pacific Islands meeting with governments there to talk about
the very relevant issue of illegal, unregulated fishing, and
the incursions in their national EEZs by, among others, the
Chinese who are overfishing and badly damaging the ecology of
the Pacific.
This connects also to Congressman Langevin's question about
climate change because extreme weather, flooding, and the
shifts in the fish stock, which is a principal source of
protein throughout the region, have huge strategic
implications.
So in terms of what--there is not much we can do for the
North Koreans, I am sorry to say, although this shows what it
means to have China as an ally. But there is a lot that we can
do for the Pacific Island nations, and there is a lot that we
can do for the other littoral states, particularly in the South
China Sea, by way of assistance in fishing agreements, the
diplomatic piece to it, maritime domain awareness, EEZ
protection, small patrol crafts, training, access to fuel, and
so on.
And I think that a sustained U.S. effort to provide the
kind of modest assistance that the countries are asking for and
desperately need would have huge strategic positive effects and
would to some degree curtail China's freedom of action.
Mr. Levin. Well, that is--you know, obviously, I am very
supportive of providing that aid, because the other example I
was going to give you was the Pacific flying squid, which I
believe Japan has been overfishing. The NBC News report
included some information about that. And that since, you know,
I guess in about the last--just the last 20 years, the squid
population has declined in South Korean and Japanese waters by
more than 70 percent, and, you know, Global Fishing Watch
attributes that to this illegal Chinese fishing.
So I think this is something we really--for ecology, for
climate, and for sustaining human populations with protein, we
really have to take this seriously.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, Andy. And, you know,
again, it is really nice to see, again, sort of, you know, a
diplomatic and military perspective in terms of how--you know,
that is really the way we hopefully can address all of these
issues.
So next up is Mr. Connolly from Virginia, and he will be
followed by his colleague from Virginia, Elaine Luria.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panel. Very thoughtful.
Mr. Russel, let me begin with you. You stressed how
important it was to ratify UNCLOS, the Law of the Sea Treaty,
in your testimony. I vividly remember then Jesse Helms, the
late Senator Jesse Helms, just browbeating--I believe it was
Tom Pickering--who had been the chief U.S. negotiator for Law
of the Sea, to try to get him to almost renounce his support
for his own treaty. That was the climate in the U.S. Senate,
unfortunately, with respect to the treaty.
By not ratifying, as you point out, we created an enormous
void that China has been only too happy to fill. You talked
about it in sort of broader terms, but maybe you could talk
about some of the specific things we lose out on by not
engaging in Law of the Sea. They have lots of structures and
committees and subcommittees we are not members of.
We don't have any influence or voice really in a lot of
that, and China does, and China has exploited that. And that
goes to, you know, ores and nodules in the sea, harvesting
natural resources, navigational policies, and so forth.
Could you just talk a little bit about some of the specific
costs to us that are not in our interest--those costs--that we
lose because we are not a member of the Law of the Sea Treaty?
Mr. Russel. Thank you, Congressman Connolly. And Tom
Pickering was my boss for many years in the Foreign Service and
true champion of U.S. interests, including in negotiating
UNCLOS.
I think that Bonnie Glaser's paper contains a number of the
very specific steps that would advantage the United States were
we to ratify and that we are disadvantaged. I won't try to
recreate all of them, but certainly our inability to weigh in
in support of the Philippine pleading to the tribunal revealed
a major weakness that flows from our self-exile, along with
North Korea and a few other unsavory states, from UNCLOS
membership.
I think that it also means that the Chinese have a much
wider purview for nominating individuals to senior positions
and positions of decisive influence within the UNCLOS system.
It typically removes us from the platform where issues that are
directly germane to our economic and security issues are being
adjudicated.
And, Congressman, this is part of a broader trend. In
multiple multilateral fora, institutional organizations, and so
on, the Chinese have stolen a march on the U.S. in their
ability to gain positions of control as director generals, as
specialized agencies, and really are stacking this up.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Russel, because of my time, I get
that, and all I can say is I do think that while we talk about
Law of the Sea, we need to be speaking in specifics in terms of
what the United States is not influencing and is losing out on
and the Chinese are gaining.
The more we can be specific, the more people get the value
of the treaty. And I think we have to move beyond, well, the
U.S. prestige and influence to, no, there are specific costs in
the United States interest and here they are. And the Chinese
are taking advantage of that and benefitting from it at our
expense.
And I just think we need to revisit this issue, and I am so
glad you pointed that out in your testimony. Thank you.
Given the interest of time, Admiral, you are in
Massachusetts. I would love to know where. I am from
Massachusetts. But I wonder if you could just address, how far
should the United States--and is the United States prepared to
be aggressive in asserting its rights in the South China Sea?
And how aggressive are we or should we be in protecting our
allies' territorial jurisdictions? Conflict is an ever-present
likelihood with China.
Admiral Swift. Yes. So easy question, I am in Westport,
Mass. But more specific to the question that you asked, I think
ask the questions of yourselves. I have said many times as the
PACFLT [U.S. Pacific Fleet] Commander that what I needed more
than anything else, was policy relief.
Deterrence is the nation's ability to act. I think
readiness, as the CNO [Chief of Naval Operations] pointed out,
is the most critical element. We are going to have to fight
with the force that we have, but it is that commitment to use
that force that comes from the civilian control of the
government that is most important.
And I note that time has expired, so I will pause there.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I just--I think we--I think the United States
has to obviously assess how much risk are we willing to take. I
am for an aggressive posture with respect to the Chinese
because otherwise they de facto create self-candidacy in this
Chinese lake. And that steps on a lot of toes, including allied
or partner toes. But we need to, as a country, have a cold-
hearted or clear-eyed look at what risks are we prepared to
take.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Gerry.
And watching Admiral Swift nodding his head shows that I
think you kind of posed the question of the day. So thank you.
So next up is, let's see, Elaine Luria. I apologize,
Elaine. You are up.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Sadler, nice to see you. Last month I wrote a
letter to President Biden detailing the need for a sense of
urgency in countering the real and proximate threat that exists
from China today in the Western Pacific. And I see you provided
in your statement--you echoed my call for a Battle Force 2025,
a plan to address today's challenges in the region, and you
also note in your statement that the Navy struggles to maintain
a persistent presence at the critical crossroads of the Pacific
and Indian Oceans, with little more than two warships on any
given day.
Yet just yesterday the CNO continued to call for reducing
the size of the fleet in the near term in order to provide
funding for programs in the future by getting rid of what he
terms as legacy platforms.
I would like to start with some simple yes/no questions. Do
you agree that naval presence matters to counter Chinese
activity in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Mr. Sadler. Yes, absolutely.
Mrs. Luria. And do you agree that it requires ships in
order to have this presence?
Mr. Sadler. Yes, absolutely again. But not in isolation.
Mrs. Luria. Admiral Swift, in your statement, you also
noted that the nation's commitment to their shared strategic
vision for free and open maritime domain is the use of their
military resources to underscore their resolve. And when you
took command of Pacific Fleet in 2015, the People's Liberation
Army Navy, the PLAN, had 255 battle force ships in its fleet
according to ONI [Office of Naval Intelligence], and today that
number is 360. And in just a few more years, it will be over
400.
The Chinese continue to pursue and build on their illegal
maritime claims in the region, along with their artificially
imposed nine-dash line. And I would argue that persistent U.S.
naval presence in the region is the best way to push back on
these claims.
So I will ask you the same question. Do you agree that
naval presence matters in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Swift. I do. Very much so.
Mrs. Luria. And do you agree that it requires ships to have
this presence?
Admiral Swift. Absolutely.
Mrs. Luria. And in order to provide this urgently needed
presence in the INDOPACOM AOR, and in the Western Pacific
specifically, do you think it is prudent to decommission ships
with remaining life, such as our cruisers and our LCS [littoral
combat ships], when remaining platforms are years away,
essentially decommission ships faster than we can replace them?
Admiral Swift. It depends. It is a complicated question. It
is, what are the trades that we are buying for reducing the
number of ships? If they are not relevant in today's conflict,
then it makes sense to me. But I would need more time to share
the details behind it.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Let me just--quickly, referring to the
cruisers, do you think that our cruiser fleet remains relevant
in the current environment?
Admiral Swift. If you are talking about some of our older
cruisers, you can see the challenge it has been to maintain
them. We have had one in particular--I am sure Rob Wittman
understands this. It sits right in his front yard. Trying to
get that cruiser underway was very problematic because of its
age.
Mrs. Luria. Yes. I understand the Vella Gulf, based here
out of Norfolk in my district, and have been tracking it
closely on the cruiser modernization.
But, you know, I just wanted to focus on the fact, in order
to be present, we need to have enough ships, and I think that
whatever we do over the next 4 years will ensure either the
U.S. maintains maritime superiority in the Western Pacific or
we cede that to China.
And I feel that we desperately need a national defense
strategy that acknowledges and prioritizes the maritime nature
of the current strategic environment.
And, you know, Mr. Sadler, I know you have written
extensively on this for The Heritage Foundation. Can you
comment--do you think the Navy has provided that brand today?
Mr. Sadler. I think Navy needs to do a better job of
getting that plan out. There has been a lot of due diligence
that is done internally, looking at the engineering and the
budget elements of the equation. But Navy definitely needs to
do a better job of getting that message out.
Mrs. Luria. So I have had some time to review the future
naval forces study, structure study, and other documents from
the Navy. In every single one of these, they use a going-in
assumption, that this is all we are going to get. We are going
to start with the fact that we are only going to see 2.1
percent growth, and then we are going to buy what we can buy
out of that allocation that they assume they are going to get.
Do you feel like they are self-constraining themselves
rather than coming to the table and telling Congress, telling
the American people, you know, what force, what fleet we need,
something along the lines of the 1984 maritime strategy that
Secretary Lehman presented in the Reagan administration? Do you
feel like that is lacking?
Mr. Sadler. Yes. I agree very much with that assessment,
with your assessment on that. I think it would be better to
start with a threat-informed or threat-led analysis that then
is budget-informed, but not the other way around. And then, of
course, at the end, having something that is structured around
an effective strategy.
So those three things have to go together, but the budget
can't be the front end. We have to focus in on the military
efficiencies and resiliency and strategic effectiveness first.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you for sharing those
comments, and I appreciate following your work with The
Heritage Foundation.
And thank you, all the witnesses, for being here today. And
I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Thank you, Elaine.
And I am now going to recognize Congresswoman Houlahan. And
I also am going to hand off the gavel to Mr. Bera because I
have a family commitment and I have got to jump off.
I want to thank all of the witnesses and all of the members
for their participation in what I think, again, is going to be
a dominant priority for both of our subcommittees as well as
Congress as a whole.
So, Congresswoman Houlahan, the floor is yours.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to all of
the witnesses and panelists.
My first question is for Mr. Russel. Just this morning,
several of my colleagues on a different subcommittee for the
HASC were looking very closely at the importance of securing
our rare earth element supply chain.
I was wondering if you could speak a little bit about the
possibility and feasibility of deep sea mining for rare earth
elements and how the UNCLOS would possibly manage or plug into
this process. And if in fact you have any input on that, are
you also aware of any other nations who are experimenting with
this undersea mining?
Mr. Russel. Well, thank you, Congresswoman Houlahan. I
regret I don't know what the right answer is to your pair of
questions. I do know, though, that not only are the Chinese
seeking to sustain a virtual monopoly on rare earths, and have
a record of using rare earths as leverage specifically against
Japan in economic retaliation for political acts, but that they
are aggressively exploring undersea mineral mining in both the
South China Sea and also they would like to do so in the
Arctic.
And I believe that, you know, at a minimum, ratification of
UNCLOS would put the United States in position to be able not
only to contest Chinese behavior within the legal context of
UNCLOS but to raise the effectiveness of our broader political
and diplomatic effort to shine a spotlight on problematic
Chinese behavior.
Ms. Houlahan. That was in fact the recommendation and the
conclusion of the panel that we were speaking with today
regarding the real concern over access to rare earth elements
and processing rare earth elements, and also, you know, the
recommendation was definitely to get back--or get involved in
the UNCLOS process and ratification thereof.
You have led me into my second question, and I want to ask
Mr. Sadler this. And then if you have anything to contribute or
add, I wonder if you might, because you mentioned the Arctic.
Do you believe that--and this is for Mr. Sadler--do you believe
that China's degree of compliance with international Law of the
Sea in the South China Sea has any implications for
understanding the potential Chinese behavior regarding its
compliance with international law in the Arctic? And what
lessons can we be learning or should we be learning from the
South China Sea as we try to look towards the Arctic and apply
those same lessons?
Mr. Sadler. Thank you for the question. I think it is
instructive to note that the Chinese change the legal basis or
their position based on the geography of the issue at hand. So
in the South China Sea, it is more of a territorial, historical
basis. That doesn't really comport with our and the popular
understandings, legal understandings, of UNCLOS.
In the Arctic, the Chinese almost sound like we do, so
there is an interesting dichotomy that is going on there. So it
is instructive as far as it is their pragmatism and where they
play very loose with legal constructs.
Ms. Houlahan. Mr. Russel, do you have anything to
contribute there, since you brought up the Arctic?
Mr. Russel. Yeah. I think that this is a classic case of
Beijing seeking to exploit the inherent rights and freedoms of
maritime user states in UNCLOS, without accepting the
limitations and the responsibilities of UNCLOS members. And our
ability to directly contest that hypocrisy is curtailed by our
status as a non-party state.
Ms. Houlahan. Thanks very much for that. I am hopeful, as
many of us are, of really looking at what is going on in the
Arctic and the concern about the possibility of China's rise
particularly in that area.
With the last 40 seconds, I just wanted to ask Mr. Swift,
Admiral Swift, we were talking with Representative Luria about
the dominance of China and the Navy and that they have the
opportunity with fishing boats, with maritime militia boats,
with coast guard cutters, and naval ships, to really flood the
region with their naval abilities.
And I was just wondering, as a practical matter, what, if
anything, could be done to roll back their increasingly
dominant--increasing dominance in land and sea, if it isn't
about solutions with our own Navy.
Admiral Swift. Well, the South China Sea is about the
legitimacy of the Communist Party and Xi Jinping himself. So
rolling back needs to be cautious, and I think Congress is the
right place for that discussion to occur.
We have sufficient force in place. What is key is
readiness, I believe.
And just to touch on the Arctic, China describes their
responsibility and abilities in the Arctic as driven by the
fact that they are a near-Arctic state. So the South China Sea
is just a petri dish of the overall view that China is applying
to the world. But thank you for that question.
Ms. Houlahan. You are welcome.
And I have run out of time, so I yield back.
Mr. Bera [presiding]. Great. Thanks, Ms. Houlahan.
And let me recognize Ms. Jacobs from California.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you so much, Chair Bera, and thank you to
all of the witnesses. It has been really interesting so far.
I wanted to ask--I know we have talked a lot about UNCLOS,
and I agree with my colleagues that we should ratify it, and
that there are a lot of drawbacks to not doing so. But let's
take, as a hypothetical, that the Senate does not do what we
want them to do and does not ratify it.
And I was hoping, Ms. Glaser, you could talk about what
other options we might have in that scenario. How would we be
able to enforce international Law of the Sea in South China Sea
and East China Sea, and mitigate some of those drawbacks that
have been so clearly articulated about not ratifying?
Ms. Glaser. Well, thank you for the question, but I am
afraid that I think that there are very few options for the
United States to enforce international law in the South China
Sea, if we are not a member of UNCLOS, because we cannot shape
the rules.
Certainly, we can enforce freedom of navigation by
conducting FONOPs and presence operations. We have that option
available to us. We can help by, as others have talked about,
bolstering the maritime domain awareness of littoral states, so
that they know what is going on inside of their exclusive
economic zones, and that might deter some of China's illegal
behavior. This is an ongoing program that we, of course, should
continue to bolster those capabilities.
But in terms of international law, UNCLOS is really all I
think that is basically available. The Chinese are the ones
that have ratified the treaty but are not abiding by it, and
the United States of course stands outside the treaty, but we
are essentially respecting it as a matter of customary law.
And I think that many countries in the world don't even
understand what that means or why we take this position. It is
baffling to the world, and the United States, therefore, is
charged by China, as others have said, as being hypocritical.
So I don't think we really have the means--I am not an
international maritime lawyer, but I don't really think we have
other legal means available to us. We can use diplomatic means
certainly. We can encourage the code of conduct to include the
right provisions. We have military means, but I don't think
there is alternative legal means.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
Do any of the other witnesses want to comment on our
alternative----
Admiral Swift. I will jump in quickly, if I could, and this
goes back to I would agree with Bonnie. The only other
alternative is diplomatic. There is a disconnect between
diplomacy and what we do in the military, and it goes back to
my comments with respect to relevancy of the United States and
now the legitimacy piece.
So the problem with FONOPs right now is the United States
has drifted from the strategic concept and objectives of
FONOPs. Peer competitors recognize this, primarily that being
China that is the most advanced and adept at adopting the
approach. And they get their word out on a FONOP before the
U.S. does, and their word is consistent.
These are actions of a faded regional colonial hegemony
using military power to back up a failed form of government,
ensuring the region remains destabilized and prevent the
nations of the regions from self-determination.
And because of their use of force and coercion other
nations are reluctant to speak up. That is why the comment
about the EU strategy being published was so important. So we
need to take a playbook from our allies, partners, and friends,
and be careful about taking a page from the playbook of the PRC
and the Chinese Communist Party in our response. That is even
more important if we don't become a party to UNCLOS.
Mr. Russel. Congresswoman, Danny Russel here. If I could
add, the situation and the challenge set that the United States
and our allies and partners face in maritime space in the Indo-
Pacific is so serious that we simply don't have the luxury of
opting to ignore one of the limited tools at our disposal. So
legal tools, diplomatic tools, military tools, economic tools,
all of these need to be applied as part of a coherent strategy
with enough enthusiasm and resolve that our partners are
convinced that we really mean it, we are here to stay, and that
our adversaries are convinced of the same thing.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
And with that, that is our last speaker.
You know, Mr. Russel, I think you summed it up, that, you
know, we need an American strategy to the region. We, as
Congress, have a real role in laying out what that strategy
looks like, and we have to play the long game here, so that
there is certainty with our allies in the region, but also
certainty that our adversaries understand that we are here to
stay.
And, again, that takes all of our resources--diplomacy,
defense, strategic partnerships with our allies, and in some
ways marrying the trans-Atlantic and trans-Pacific strategy
together as well.
And then I will just put out there, having an economic
strategy in the region, you know, that will allow us to compete
and bring nations together.
So I want to thank each of the witnesses for your
testimony, your service to our country.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 29, 2021

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 29, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
