- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-92] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-92]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES HEARING

ON

DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY

FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET REQUEST FOR SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 18, 2022

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-496                     WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland           TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine, Vice Chair   MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JIM BANKS, Indiana
SARA JACOBS, California              JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas                 JERRY L. CARL, Alabama

James Vallario, Professional Staff Member
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Naajidah Khan, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.................     1

WITNESSES

Stefany, Frederick J., Performing the Duties of Assistant
Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and
Acquisition; VADM Scott Conn, USN, Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations, Warfighting Requirements and Capabilities; and
LtGen Karsten S. Heckl, USMC, Deputy Commandant of the Marine
Corps, Combat Development and Integration......................     2

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Courtney, Hon. Joe...........................................    31
Stefany, Frederick J., joint with VADM Scott Conn and LtGen
Karsten S. Heckl...........................................    36
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection
Forces.....................................................    34

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[The information was not available at the time of printing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bergman..................................................    75
Mr. Wittman..................................................    75

DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET REQUEST FOR SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, May 18, 2022.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 8:00 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Joe Courtney (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION
FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Ladies and gentlemen, I call to order this
morning's meeting on the Seapower and Projection Forces
Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee.
Just again, to do the quick administrative and technical
notes, members are reminded that they must be visible on screen
with the software platform for the purpose of identity
verification. Members must continue to use the software
platform's video function while attending the hearing unless
they experience connectivity issues or other technical problems
that render the member unable to fully participate on camera.
If you experience technical difficulties, please contact
committee staff for assistance.
When you are recognized, video will be broadcast via
television and internet feeds. You will be recognized as normal
for questions, but if you want to speak out at another time,
you must seek recognition verbally.
Please mute your microphone when you are not speaking and
remember to unmute prior to speaking. If you are leaving to
join a different proceeding or will be absent for a significant
period of time, you should exit the software platform entirely
and then rejoin if you return.
Please be advised I have designated a committee staff
member to mute unrecognized members' microphones if necessary.
Please use the platform's chat feature to communicate with
staff regarding technical or logistical support issues.
Finally, [you will] see a 5-minute countdown clock on your
platform display. I will remind you when your time is up.
So, first of all, I want to thank the members for--and we
will get bonus points for the early start this morning. Again,
the way the floor schedule is operating, we just figured this
would be the best opportunity to have uninterrupted opportunity
to have an exchange with the subcommittee.
And, again, in the interest of time, myself and the ranking
member have agreed to waive opening statements. We will submit
our statements in writing for the record. And, again, I want to
thank all the members who are here today for joining us at this
early hour.
With that, I will yield to Mr. Wittman, the ranking member.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Courtney can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate your leadership. I want to thank our witnesses for
joining us today.
I have 8 pages of opening statement. I really wanted to
read that, but I think I am the only one in the room that
really wants that.
So with that, I will turn it back to you, and we will be
ready to get underway.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 34.]
Mr. Courtney. Thank you.
Mr. Stefany, it is my understanding you are going to do a
joint statement for all the great witnesses we have here this
morning. Is that correct?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. You may proceed.

STATEMENT OF FREDERICK J. STEFANY, PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND
ACQUISITION; VADM SCOTT CONN, USN, DEPUTY CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS, WARFIGHTING REQUIREMENTS AND CAPABILITIES; AND
LTGEN KARSTEN S. HECKL, USMC, DEPUTY COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE
CORPS, COMBAT DEVELOPMENT AND INTEGRATION

Mr. Stefany. Thank you.
Chairman Courtney, Ranking Member Wittman, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of myself, Vice Admiral
Conn, and Lieutenant General Heckl, we thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to talk about the
Department of Navy's fiscal year 2023 seapower capabilities
request. We would like to thank this subcommittee for your
leadership and your support of the programs that support our
forward deployed naval forces.
The past year has been highlighted by a number of
significant firsts for us as we provide new capabilities to the
fleet. This year we achieved the initial operational
capability, or IOC, of the USS Gerald Ford, and she is now
preparing for her first deployment. We completed operational
testing of the CH-53K heavy lift helicopter, and just last
month declared IOC of that capability. We also accomplished the
first refueling of operational aircraft from an unmanned air
vehicle, in this case, the MQ-25 prototype aircraft. And the
Navy took delivery of two prototype unmanned surface vessels
from the DOD's [Department of Defense's] Strategic Capabilities
Office, while the Marine Corps took delivery of their first
prototype long-range, unmanned surface vessel.
The Department of Navy's fiscal year 2023 budget is guided
by SECNAV's [Secretary of the Navy's] enduring priorities of
strengthening maritime superiority in defense of our Nation,
empowering our people, and strengthening strategic
partnerships. It implements the Chief of Naval Operation's
Navigation Plan to expand our fleet capabilities for
distributed operations while building upon the Commandant of
the Marine Corps Force Design 2030 to rapidly modernize the
expeditionary posture of the Marine Corps.
Consistent with recent budget requests, this budget
prioritizes the Navy's contribution to the national strategic
deterrent while balancing readiness for the fight tonight, new
capabilities for the future fight, and capacity across the near
and long term.
The fiscal year 2023 budget continues investment in more
lethal network capabilities integrated with the joint force to
address both pacing and acute threats.
As reflected in the Department's 30-year shipbuilding plan,
this budget requests over $27 billion for shipbuilding
programs, more than $5 billion above the fiscal year 2022
request, and includes 51 new-construction ships across the FYDP
[Future Years Defense Program].
This budget also invests in 96 aircraft in fiscal year
2023, including command and control, airlift, and unmanned
aircraft, and 420 aircraft across the FYDP.
The budget includes funding for Marine Corps Force Design
priorities for equipment modernization in the areas of
precision fires, resilient communication, and mobility
platforms to optimize the force for naval expeditionary warfare
in the maritime littorals.
To ensure we can maintain the forces we have now while
building the forces we need in the future, the budget increases
ship maintenance funding and expands the OPN [Other
Procurement, Navy] maintenance pilot to cover 25 private
contracted availabilities on both the east and west coasts,
with a funding of $1.2 billion.
The budget continues a once-in-a-century investment in
recapitalization of our national ship repair infrastructure as
part of our Ship--Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program,
or SIOP, with a significant increase in funding in fiscal year
2023 that is sustained across the FYDP.
Finally, with the focus on developing a fully capable
future naval force, this budget invests a record $24 billion in
research and development [R&D] priorities. It continues early
investment in our next-generation submarine and our next-
generation large surface combatant and includes continued
development and testing of hypersonic weapons and unmanned
vessel technologies.
This budget also proposes increased R&D investments in
directed energy weapons, autonomy, artificial intelligence, and
the initial instantiation of Project Overmatch.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
and your subcommittee today, and for the strong support this
subcommittee has always provided to our Marines and our
sailors.
We look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Stefany, Admiral Conn,
and General Heckl can be found in the Appendix on page 36.]
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Stefany.
And, again, I have two questions, and, again, I think a lot
of members obviously are bursting and straining at the leash to
ask a number of others.
You know, in the wake of COVID [coronavirus disease] in
terms of ship construction across the board, it is all about
trying to recover schedule because, again, there just--there is
no question there was impact. But one issue which I think the
Navy has, you know, created some schedule risk was the change
in policy for unusual hazardous risk indemnification, which,
again, there is just no question the Navy changed its policy in
the last administration in terms of how--you know, who bears
the cost in terms of indemnification.
Last NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] we included,
in the NDAA, a request to the Secretary of Defense to review
procedures and standardization. And a report to the committee
on their findings on this issue that was due on March 27th--
and, again, we have been notified that--we were notified on
March 15th that that is not coming until the end of July.
Again, this was from the Department of Defense, the request.
There is a problem here, which is that, you know, this
issue is coming to a head very quickly, and it is going to
start creating more schedule risk if we don't get, I think, a
resolution to the problem. I don't think the private industry
has been dragging its feet. They have found insurance coverage
that is the maximum allowed in the market, $2 billion of
coverage, which I think is certainly a good-faith effort.
And, you know, again, I just think if you can help us in
terms of getting that report done ASAP [as soon as possible],
and getting this issue resolved, I think it is going to
eliminate a schedule risk problem which, again, I think
everybody agrees is something that we have to address to get,
whether it is surface ship construction, submarines, you name
it, back on track.
And maybe if you could just respond to that issue because,
again, it did emanate from the Department of the Navy
initially.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. Two parts. One is,
yes, we are aware of the Department of Defense effort to
respond. They are working with the Air Force, the Army, and the
Navy across the board, and that July date that you mention is
what I understand we are working to as a group. The Secretary
of Defense owns the report, and we will go back to them and
make sure they know the urgency of getting the report done.
On the more specific Navy issue, sir, we had a blanket--I
will call it a blanket identification policy for nuclear either
propulsion or nuclear weapons, and the previous--as you pointed
out, previous SECNAV has made--has, I would say, changed that
policy to have anything that is not a nuclear propulsion system
or nuclear weapon come through in a case basis and be able to
describe, before indemnification would be put in place, the
specific case and the specific concerns and the specific risks
that would apply.
And so, we talked to our industry counterparts. We have two
of those in right now, one of them from a company that you
recognize, and we are going through that process of identifying
those specific risks that would be above a normal insurance
policy, and we will take those to the Secretary of the Navy.
So my point for you is we are working those, even without
the report from DOD going on.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you.
Again, this is not certainly a one specific yard issue. It
is in other parts of the shipbuilding's industrial base. And,
again, I think--I am just sort of throwing it out there that as
we get closer to NDAA markup, you know, we are not going to
just sort of let this issue kind of fester until after July. We
need to get a clarity to this, [inaudible] whether or not we
have to legislate on it again.
Mr. Stefany. Sir, as I think as you know, the previous
legislation has--when a request has come in, there is a clock,
a time limit when we, the Navy, have to respond to those
specific requests, which will be before that timeline. So we
will certainly be working with you, sir.
Mr. Courtney. I appreciate that.
One other question again, and I will yield to Mr. Wittman,
is the Navy's current acquisition strategy for sealift relies
heavily on procurement and conversion of used sealift vessels.
The global market, which obviously is a very dynamic and fast-
changing market, I think today looks a lot different than it
did a few years ago when the Navy sort of laid out this
strategy for recapitalizing sealift.
When was the last used sealift market analysis done?
Mr. Stefany. Sorry, I don't actually have the data on that.
I believe it was around 2 years ago, but I will have to get you
for the record when we did the last market survey, sir.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Courtney. Well, again, before we are prepared to
rubber-stamp, you know, just continuing with the used sealift
strategy and continuing to defer new construction, we need to
get, you know, some clarity on that point because, again, this
is not something that--there is high interest I think, in the
committee, on both sides, to, you know, find out more about the
used sealift market before we just totally relinquish new
construction as a way of trying to address an issue which is
quite critical.
And I will get off my soapbox at that point there. And I'll
yield to Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with
your observations fully on that. And, gentlemen, I want to
thank you so much for joining us.
Lieutenant General Heckl, I want to start with you. In your
best professional military judgment, what are the consequences
associated with supporting the 24 amphibious ship level that is
being projected by the administration? And what, in your best
professional military judgment, should be the floor for the
number of amphibious ships in our fleet?
General Heckl. Sir, thanks for the question.
I will start with--as the requirements officer for the
Marine Corps, I will start with the requirement. Our absolute
bare minimum requirement for traditional L-Class amphibious
warships is 31, and that is composed of 10 larger deck LHA/LHD
class and 21 smaller LPD/LSD-type class ships.
The fact, sir, that ships are being decommissioned faster
than they are being procured and delivered and employed, the
simple fact is that under this plan, we will go to a number of
24 amphibs in the next 3 to 5 years. What that translates to
for us is risk, which is always any military person's--one of
the prime concerns.
So while I believe that we will be able to likely provide
the appropriate support to the Indo-Pacific theater, I think we
will have to take risk in other areas, like CENTCOM [U.S.
Central Command], AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command], EUCOM [U.S.
European Command]. I don't think there is any way to avoid it.
But at the end of the day, sir, as you well know--and we
were kind of discussing here before the subcommittee kicked
off--you know, the Marine expeditionary units [MEUs] embarked
aboard amphibious ready groups are very highly in demand. Over
the last decade, we have evacuated embassies in Libya and
Yemen. We have reinforced the embassy in Iraq. We have rescued
a downed Air Force pilot in Libya, and put artillery ashore to
kill ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] in Syria. And then
most recently, the MEU that was first on the ground in
Afghanistan to assist with the evacuation.
So these things, at the end of the day, one of the most in-
demand assets by combatant commanders, so it is going to
represent risk, sir, if we go below 31.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Lieutenant General
Heckl.
Mr. Stefany, I want to look at destroyers. Does the budget
request include 10 destroyers for the next 5 years? And looking
at what the administration is proposing as far as putting
destroyers under contract, does a contract for nine destroyers
allow the administration latitude to reduce destroyers in the
future? Because the budget request is for 10, the proposal is
to put 9 under contract. So can you give us an idea about a 10-
ship multiyear versus a 9-ship multiyear? Is there some savings
that occurs with that? Why the 10 in budget request and then
going to 9 under contract? There just seems to be an
inconsistency there.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. So, first, I'll confirm that the
budget for the next 5 years has 2 per year, 10 total destroyers
for the next 5 years. And the legislative proposal that is on
its way over, not to you yet, will have nine firm in the
multiyear, plus one option year, and that will provide
flexibility, as you point out, for the administration.
As things go forward, if there is another COVID event or
world events change to allow potentially only 9 of those 10
ships to be bought, potentially, it provides that flexibility.
At the cost--there is a cost to that, right--a 10-ship
multiyear will save us more money than a 9-ship will. The delta
cost is not overly large, but that is a decision that the
Department has made of value versus flexibility, sir.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good. It just seems like in the
face of what we need, fewer ships or being able to take out
ships is not the direction we need to be going.
One last question, Mr. Chairman, and then I will yield
back.
Vice Admiral Conn, in your best professional military
judgment, does the reduction of over 1,000 missile tubes in our
Surface Navy, which is about 10 percent reduction, does that
constitute an acceptable risk to the Navy?
Admiral Conn. My best military advice would be, there is
risk associated with that reduction. That assumes we can get
the ships underway and [inaudible] operate them. I think when
we have this conversation, I understand it is a topic that
everybody is concerned with, we have to look broadly. The
United States Navy, we fight from the seabed to space; our
submarines, our surface ships, and aviation. And having the
ability to pose multi-access, multi-domain operational dilemmas
against an adversary is where we are focused on. There is
reduction in the VLS [vertical launching system] cells, and it
is a risk/reward versus what is it going to take to get those
VLS cells real, forward, versus what other investments do we
need to make that delivers a more capable, more lethal Navy in
the future.
Mr. Wittman. In your best professional military judgment,
does that, then, in turn, reduce our ability to project power
through our Navy-Marine Corps team?
Admiral Conn. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Wittman.
The chair recognizes Mr. Golden.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
I am going to follow up a little bit on the questioning
about the DDG 51 [guided-missile destroyer], specifically, the
multiyear procurement. So, I understand what you are saying
about the flexibility with nine plus one. But, you know, there
is another element at play here where the Navy is often coming
to the shipyards, specifically Bath Iron Works, I have been
there for some of these discussions, or even sitting before
this committee, and talking about a desire to see these two
yards get to a place where they can do three ships per year.
In fact, just last week, Admiral Gilday sat before the full
committee and stated that the Navy has what he called an
aspirational goal for the industrial base to get to three DDG
ships per year in regards to their capacity to build. And I am
sure some of that has to do with a little bit of overlap
between the Flight III and DDG(X) kicking in as well, which is
out there a few years, but it is not that far away. It takes
quite a while to develop skilled shipbuilders, Secretary.
So I am just curious, again, about this signal that you
send with the nine plus one. The FYDP says 10 DDGs. That is
pretty much, you know, where the shipyards are right now. Now,
nine would suggest that maybe one of these yards wouldn't even
have enough work to maintain the production rate that they have
right now, which is kind of a negative signal, which that is
where the mismatch is. Because you are saying we want you to
get to three out there in the near-term future. It is really
not that far off. And yet, a multiyear procurement like this
seems to, you know, just go in the complete opposite direction.
So I am just curious, how did the Pentagon get to this 9-
plus-1 proposal, as opposed to the one they had last time which
was 10 plus 5? And, ultimately, I think you did 12 DDGs over
that 5-year period.
Mr. Stefany. So let me point out that the current approach
for the next multiyear is very similar to the last one. We will
actually have an additional option this year to go up to
potentially 15 ships just like the last multiyear did if the
Department decides to fund a third ship in any of the years
going forward. But I think there is just--as you will remember
in the last multiyear, we ended up funding 9 and then
ultimately 10, but--on the multiyear.
So I think the administration and the Department would like
to keep that flexibility if things do not go as well as we
aspire to. If they do, then the option for a third one in each
year is there.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
Lieutenant General, I wanted to talk a little bit about the
Force Design 2030. General Berger sat in your seat. I am sure
used a lot of what he learned when he was at Combat Development
and Integration to inform a lot of his guidance to the Marine
Corps as he came in and took over as Commandant.
There have been some critics that have said that now,
several years into implementation of the Commandant's intent,
that the Marine Corps hasn't been flexible, you know, hasn't
been listening to feedback. I would be surprised if that were
entirely true, but I wanted to give you the opportunity to talk
to us a little bit about what you are seeing out there? What is
the Marine Corps learning as they are trying to implement Force
Design 2030? And how best can Congress support the Marine Corps
in making these moves?
General Heckl. Well, sir, first, thanks for the question.
And I would start off with just kind of what Mr. Stefany
did earlier, thanking the subcommittee and Congress as a whole
for the support that they have provided to the Commandant and
to the Marine Corps as we have stepped off on this Force
Design.
So in my billet as the Deputy Commandant for Combat
Development and Integration, I oversee the process that many
say doesn't exist. It has existed. It exists now and has been
used extensively over the course of the last almost 3 years. We
have a rigorous campaign of learning, and the campaign of
learning has existed at CD&I for the better part of 5 years.
This is not a new construct, but it is where we use wargaming
analysis, studies, experimentation, and feedback.
One of the big processes we have used in Force Design has
been something called IPTs, Integrated Planning Teams. And this
included--a majority of the members of these IPTs are from the
fleet to provide direct feedback. And now, sir, we are in phase
3 of Force Design where we are doing aggressive
experimentation. We are getting pieces of gear and equipment,
and the way we have structured the units out in the fleet, and
then we are getting feedback.
So we are going to continue doing this, and we have
listened. The Commandant has iterated, for instance, we were
going to go down to five cannon batteries, which was misquoted
yesterday at CSIS [Center for Strategic and International
Studies]. We are going to seven cannon batteries--four west,
three east--and we are also increasing the number of artillery
pieces in those batteries from six to eight. So--and with the
VMM [medium tilt-rotor squadron], we actually increased; we
went from 14 to 16. So we are listening, sir.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, General.
General Heckl. Sir.
Mr. Courtney. The chair now recognizes General Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Good morning, gentlemen.
Let's talk about LCSs [littoral combat ships]. Of the
Freedom class, the proposal, what is the youngest ship when it
was commissioned? What was the final cost? And what is the
sustainment cost savings of that ship?
Admiral Conn. Thank you, sir.
In terms of the LCS ships, I think the youngest ship will
be 3 years. I can get the actual date. That would be St. Louis,
LCS 19. In terms of the cost of savings, we focus on the cost
to buy back, what would it take to buy all of those ships back,
and it would be about $4.2 billion in the FYDP, that we would
have to come up with other ways to pay those bills, whether it
be----
Mr. Bergman. So you took that $4.2 billion and put it
somewhere else?
Admiral Conn. We used the $4.2 [billion] savings and
applied it to high-end capability that would deliver, in some
cases, inside the FYDP.
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Admiral Conn. That it is the opportunity that that
divestment----
Mr. Bergman. So $4.2 billion. Okay.
Of the LCSs that are being retained, what is the mission
for those in the future? Has it changed? Is it moving forward
the same, whatever?
Admiral Conn. Freedom class was part of the ASW package,
the anti-submarine warfare package. That capability has failed
in tests, and CNO has testified he is not willing to put
another dollar into that program to be able--to have a ship
that cannot find a high-end submarine in a high-end fight. And
that was, again, one of the reasons why we made a divestment.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. If ASW is not the mission for it--tried,
failed, just didn't work--has there been any evaluations?
Because I remember about 3 or 4 years ago, Admiral Faller, who
was SOUTHCOM [U.S. Southern Command], testified here that in
the Caribbean, in that SOUTHCOM AOR [area of responsibility],
that there was a mission set for the LCS. Has that changed?
Admiral Conn. No, sir. And as the 3rd Fleet commander, we
had LCS doing drug ops [operations] with the Coast Guard down
in South America.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Was there any discussion before deciding
to decommission the ships to refit them for any other missions
that maybe we don't know about? I mean, is there any other
emerging missions when you think about INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-
Pacific Command], when you think about SOUTHCOM, when you think
about Horn of Africa, other things, you know, obviously
survivability, the ability to fight? Is there a robust history,
discussion of what went through that maybe some of us who read
that kind of stuff could read?
Admiral Conn. Sir, you mentioned INDOPACOM, and that is the
exact lens that we looked at, and it is not that the LCS,
regardless of the class, have no military value. It is they
have less military value. And based on the resources that we
had, we had some hard decisions to make, and that was one of
those recommendations at this point.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Let's switch topics for a second to the
Navy Reserve. Since 2001, the Navy has cut Reserve combat
aviation squadrons from 23 to 5, I think is what the math says.
The fiscal year 2023 proposal, in that proposal the Navy,
again, is going to eliminate Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron 85.
Is it the Navy's intent to eliminate all Navy Reserve
aviation, or maybe just maintain, you know, the 737s, or
whatever, to fly, you know, goods and people around? Or, I
mean, are we just--is the Navy in its total force just looking
to reduce the overall Reserve numbers across the board, just
aviation being the one here?
Admiral Conn. No, sir, we are not trying to eliminate the
Reserve Force from aviation perspective. In fact, the Reserve
Force flies our C-130Ts right now, and we have--I think there
is an unfunded requirement request for C-130Js to begin
recapitalizing those assets for that important mission,
particularly in the INDOPACOM AOR. Our Reserves fly adversary
missions for training, our fleet replacement squadrons and our
fleet squadrons, and that is an important mission, having been
an avid--adversary pilot twice in my career.
So there is a piece and an important role that the
[inaudible] Reserves will play, but based on top funding levels
and priorities within the Navy, I think that is reflective of
what you are saying.
Mr. Bergman. Is there--and my time is about to expire, but
at some point, it would be nice to see the cost of maintaining
a squadron on Active Duty and the cost of maintaining a Reserve
squadron, and how those two numbers match.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, General.
The chair now recognizes Congresswoman Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And, Admiral Conn, on May 12th before the Senate Armed
Services Committee, Senator Tuberville recently said this
quote, and he said: ``I wanted to commend something the Navy
does exceptionally well, accountability.''
He went on to ask: ``Why is the Navy's culture of holding
senior officers accountable more important in maintaining
standards and performance?''
And then in response, Admiral Gilday very emphatically
said: ``More importantly, there is the expectation that our
sailors have that we hold their seniors accountable.''
So in the accountability section of the command
investigation into the Bonhomme Richard fire, it cited that the
action or inaction by 17 individuals listed in the report,
quote, ``directly led to the loss of the ship.'' Additionally,
the action or inaction of 17 additional individuals listed in
the report, quote, ``contributed to the loss of the ship.''
Among these 34 officers listed, there are five flag officers
who contributed to the loss of the ship.
What accountability actions have been taken against these
five flag officers named in the report?
Admiral Conn. I am very familiar with that report, being
that I signed it, and as the investigating officer, I made
recommendations up to the Pacific Fleet commander who turned
out to be the centralized disposition authority for the
accountability actions.
The results of that are with the Secretary of the Navy, and
it would be improper for me to give any specifics because I am
not sure he has made his final determination.
Mrs. Luria. So if I understand correctly, there are
recommendations that have been made with regard to this, but
they have not gone through the final approval with the
Secretary?
Admiral Conn. I will say that there are decision been made,
there is actions been taken, and there are other decisions to
be made.
Mrs. Luria. So as far as what has been publicly announced
and known to this date, the only person who has been held
accountable for the loss of a capital warship so far is an E-1.
When the report clearly says that 17 individuals were directly
responsible, 17 additional individuals contributed to the loss
who are significantly more senior and experienced than the
junior E-1 sailor, do you think that the public has the right
to know who is being held accountable?
Admiral Conn. I think the Navy is always transparent in
accountability across the board. I will say as the
investigating officer, the list that I proposed forward was not
a list of people to punish. It was a list of people that need
to go through due course and a formal adjudication process. It
was not my job to make any adjudications decisions at my level.
It was my responsibility to elevate people into a formal
adjudication process, and that is exactly what was done.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. And I will look forward to
following and tracking the results of that report.
Admiral Conn. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Luria. And to tie that back into this budget hearing,
obviously we have the loss of a capital ship. And I would like
to shift now to Lieutenant General Heckl, because we have
already discussed the number of amphibs across the fleet. I
also know in this budget request, you have pushed LHA 10 out to
2031.
Lieutenant General Heckl, can you comment on the impact of
that specific prolongation between building LHA 9 and 10? And
then also, Mr. Stefany, because that has an impact on the
industrial base going back to some of the comments my
colleagues have made.
So General Heckl first.
General Heckl. Yes, ma'am. And to my comments earlier about
the bare number, obviously, LHA 10 would prove vital in that.
Right now, between LHA 9 and LHA 10, there is an 11-year gap,
depending on when you decide it was appropriated. And,
obviously, that large deck, those--we are returning to well
decks with the flight deck. It is a very capable platform, very
important to what we are doing, very important to the Nation's
crisis response force.
And I would defer to Mr. Stefany on industrial base.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, ma'am. For the LHA-type ship, we see
about a 5-year spacing between ships is ideal from a learning
perspective and the industrial base. The suppliers staying
online and being able to produce anything more than that would
be not just degradation of the ability of the supply base to
support, but increase the cost, right, as we see reverse
learning, or negative learning, what we call it.
So 5 years is ideal. As the General mentioned, the ship now
is at the 9- or 10-year spacing from LHA 9, so we would see a
cost increase and an industrial base impact both.
Mrs. Luria. So you submitted a request--throughout all of
these hearings--I mean this is 4 years now that Mr. Golden and
I have gone through these NDAA hearings, and we hear nothing
other than we need to improve the industrial base, we need to
have trained workforce, yet you submit a request that you admit
is more expensive in the long run, and essentially guts the
workforce as far as building these large-deck amphibious ships.
Mr. Courtney. We'll--again, at this point--but again, at
the pace we are going, I think we will have a chance to do
another round, so----
Mrs. Luria. My time has expired.
Mr. Courtney. Next up is Mr. Carl from Alabama.
Mr. Carl. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you all for joining us this morning. As
you well know, it is our job to make sure the Navy is as strong
as it possibly can be, and I want you all to understand this
committee, as dysfunctional as it may seem to you, is probably
the best working committee on the Hill. It is a pleasure to
serve with these folks, and we do try to help the Navy and work
together, and that is something that needs to be pointed out.
Lieutenant Heckl, the commander of the Marine Corps sent a
letter to our chairman here and Ranking Member Wittman
expressing his requirements for 31 L-class amphibious ships,
and I know you spoke on that earlier. You touched on it a
little bit.
Can you elaborate more specifically on the LPDs, of how
these ships, the needs for these ships?
General Heckl. Sure, sir. And thanks for the question. And,
again, to your comment about this committee, I mean, I think it
is quite functional and appreciate all the support again.
So the LPDs, again, 21 is the bare requirement, in addition
to the 10 large deck. And I will tell you one of the things
over my career that we have witnessed happen, so it is fairly
recent, you know, is the disaggregation of the Marine
expeditionary unit and amphibious ready groups, right? So they
will get into an AOR, and the various combatant commanders will
need them. And one of the real capabilities of these LPDs and
the LPD Flight II's is their ability to command and control and
disaggregate.
We actually have--it is not infrequent that you will have a
Marine expeditionary unit with three ships in three different
combatant commanders' AORs at one time, which is pretty
stunning.
So the LPDs, sir, I would just simply say from the
capability of a well deck, a flight deck, the berthing, the
command and control, the ability to disaggregate, that is
probably the strongest attribute of the LPDs going forward.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, sir.
One more quick question. Does this put the Marine Corps at
risk, since the Navy plans to retire some ships, to hold onto
the LPDs buy and to delay the process?
General Heckl. Sir, are you referring to the LSDs,
decommissioning the LSDs?
Mr. Carl. Yes.
General Heckl. Yes, sir. Obviously, sir, I would support
anything that is going to give our Marines and our fleet
commanders more amphibious assets. But, obviously, that is
going to be--it is within the top-line problem where we have
priorities. But absolutely, sir, from my perspective, it would
give the fleet commanders more capability.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I give my time back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Carl.
The chair will now recognize Mr. Norcross, who is joining
us remotely, and he will be followed by our newest member,
Congresswoman Garcia.
Mr. Norcross, the screen is yours.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman.
Gentleman, good to have you here today.
Virtually every hearing we have had related to has--the
question has come up, the war in Ukraine and lessons learned,
and that is where I want to start off with for both the general
and vice admiral. We saw the sinking of the Russian flagship.
What are we learning from that experience and others that
might impact not necessarily on this immediate budget because,
obviously, it was created before that happened, but as we look
forward? Can you give us some insights on items we might have
learned, or is that not a surprise to you gentlemen?
So if we could start with the Lieutenant General, please--
or excuse me--the Lieutenant Admiral first.
General Heckl. Okay. Sir, thanks for the question.
So I think specific to the sinking of the ship, I think
what you are seeing is that small distributed lethal forces
with long-range precision fires can do a lot of damage to
capital assets. And we have seen that not just with the sinking
of the ship, but you've seen that with how the Ukrainians have
been fighting against armor and, quite frankly, with the
Javelins and the Stingers, how they have been performing the
anti-air warfare as well.
So the largest takeaway for me, again, and reinforces where
we are going with Force Design, is that, again, the distributed
lethal, well-trained, well-equipped forces can hold a larger,
heavier, less mobile adversary at great risk.
Mr. Norcross. But how about from a defense point of view?
Admiral Conn. I will cover that, sir.
I think it validates the funds, the appropriations that
this committee and others have given us towards live virtual
constructive training at sea. We do some of that in buildings,
but able to be able to stimulate training from operational
commanders down to individual level operators, radar set
controllers, in a realistic, relevant, and recordable
environment that paces--that replicates the high-end threat,
whether being targeted by cruise missiles, whether being
targeted by ballistic missiles, to be able to see that type of
complex scenario in training before they see it in combat.
Because if you see something for the first time in combat, you
will pause, and if you pause, people will die. And we are able
to replicate those scenarios and making sure our sailors and
commanding officers have the capability, capacity, and training
to execute in that type of scenario.
Mr. Norcross. We haven't been given the full download on
what happened there, but by your comments, the indication is
somebody was asleep at the switch, so to speak, on the
flagship. You are confident that given the capabilities we have
on most of our high-end ships, we could defend against a
missile of the type that was sinking the Russian flagship?
Admiral Conn. Yes, sir. I could look you in the eye and say
we are adequately prepared and equipped to execute that
mission.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Mr. Stefany, let me shift over here to a question
concerning how many ships we are going to procure,
decommission, our ability to maintain these ships. There has
been a number of questions about sustainment across our
services, but I want to focus in on our shipbuilding, and we
have been struggling. This is no surprise. Building a workforce
doesn't happen overnight. Building a relevant workforce that is
experienced is even more difficult, and we are well on our way
to that.
When we look at what we can do from our in-place
maintenance, have we looked at contracting with shipyards who
are only doing commercial work, that perhaps they may be able
to be pulled over for some of the maintenance on our naval
vessels to try to bring down that time and that risk?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. So we actually have looked and
worked with various commercial-only repair yards. Some,
frankly, don't want to do business with us, but those that
have, like, for instance, the old Mare Island Shipyard, we are
in the process of certifying them to do Navy work. Philadelphia
Shipyard, we are also looking at starting the process to
certify them to do Navy work. The certification process is
different than commercial work.
So where there is interest on the commercial sector, we are
taking those steps to bring more companies involved and get
certified to Navy requirements.
Mr. Norcross. And for the record, as I am running out of
time, if you could share with us the reasons why they might not
want to do work with us at times, maybe we can be helpful in
trying to----
Mr. Courtney. We will take that one for the record.
Mr. Stefany. Yeah, that is a good one for the record, sir.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Norcross.
We have now just been joined by Congressman Banks from
Indiana and, again, then he will be followed by Congresswoman
Garcia.
Mr. Banks, the floor is yours.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Vice Admiral Conn, the Government Accountability Office
released a report this month on uncrewed maritime systems,
specifically on how the Navy should improve its approach to
maximize early investments. The report made seven
recommendations.
Have you read the report, sir?
Admiral Conn. I have looked over the report, sir, but I
need to read it in detail.
Mr. Banks. Okay. So it is probably not fair to ask you if
you agree with the recommendations of the report?
Admiral Conn. That would be a good statement, sir.
Mr. Banks. The committee would appreciate, I would
appreciate if you could get back with us for the record and,
after you review the recommendations, let us know where you----
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Admiral Conn. Yes, sir. I can tell you what we are doing,
but I don't want to take----
Mr. Banks. Well, let me start with that. What are the
critical technological challenges that the Navy is facing in
building the autonomous vessels of the fleet?
Admiral Conn. So the importance of having land-based test
sites is very important, and that would be with land--for the
hydraulic, hull, mechanical, electrical systems which is being
done for the medium unmanned surface vessel and it will be
operational in fiscal year 2023, and the large unmanned surface
vessel will be operational to start testing shortly thereafter.
And then there is combat integration systems that have to
be done, sensor perception, and autonomy, the integration of
all of those combat systems. That is the software development
that must be done, and we cannot find ourselves in a concurrent
development of trying to create these artificial intelligent
use cases, while at the same time as we're building. So that is
where our focus is now.
One of those things you can't really see and touch, those
enablers, that are going to make these unmanned systems real,
and we have about $432 million in fiscal year 2023 and $2.2
billion inside this FYDP going exactly to what I just
described, sir.
Mr. Banks. Understood. Can you talk a little more about
what the Navy's strategy is to incorporate artificial
intelligence and machine learning to unmanned vessels'
operating systems and regular crewed ships that will command
and control unmanned vessels?
Admiral Conn. The Navy has identified an artificial
intelligence lead for the Navy, and he works at Office of Naval
Research [ONR], so he has got the lead. I won't go into long
comments about our NAVPLAN implementation framework, how we
shoot, maneuver, resupply, and defend enabled by networks,
unmanned systems, artificial intelligence.
I will spare you the details there, but artificial
intelligence is nested in many things that we are doing going
forward, but we have to change the narrative with ourselves and
with industry and be disciplined and ask what are the use cases
that we need artificial intelligence to do? We must be
specific, instead of I just need AI. No. What do we need the AI
to do for these capabilities, whether on the sea, undersea, or
in the air? And that is where we have to drive----
Mr. Banks. Agreed. But is there a strategy to do that, to
change that----
Admiral Conn. Let me take that for the record, sir, and I
will reach out to ONR, and we will get that back to you.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Banks. How is the Navy incorporating the lessons
learned from the recently stood up, unmanned task force that's
assigned to the 5th Fleet? And how have their operations
impacted the procurement plans for unmanned vessels?
Admiral Conn. The Task Force 59 in 5th Fleet was a follow-
on when I was the 3rd Fleet commander for an integrated battle
problem where we put in a number of unique unmanned systems
that were tested in isolation, but we never brought them all
together in an operationally relevant scenario to tease out the
value, the warfighting utility, how it moves the [inaudible].
Task Force 59 is doing that. It is just not U.S. It is with our
allies, our partners, because we don't have a monopoly on this
technology. Task Force 59--I am sorry. The unmanned task force
is kind of the interlocutor making sure that everybody is
communicating. But I greatly value getting input from fleet
operators on some of these prototypes, and what do we need to
iterate and learn before we decide to scale? And I think that
is a critical piece to what Task Force 59, as well as REP(MUS)
[Robotic Experimentation and Prototyping using Maritime
Unmanned Systems] exercises in 6th Fleet. We just need to
continue creating those, that type of environments for
innovation, experimentation, iteration before we scale.
Mr. Banks. Last question, sir. What is the Navy's strategy
to establish criteria in evaluating prototype unmanned vessels
and improve schedules for prototype efforts?
Admiral Conn. We are trying to accelerate getting
prototypes into the fleet inside the POM [Program Objective
Memorandum] cycle, which requires some agility in how we need
to move money around, in some cases, with your approval. We
can't just simply wait for some of these prototypes at the pace
technology is going and be handcuffed to our POM cycles. We
need to have some flexibility, and we do have some within our
own.
Mr. Banks. Have you asked for that authority or that
flexibility?
Admiral Conn. I think we have asked for it in the past.
Jay, Mr. Stefany, I will turn it over to you.
Mr. Stefany. That is one area that----
Mr. Courtney. Why don't we follow up on that afterwards.
Again, we will maybe have some extra time, folks, so maybe we
can revisit with other member questions.
Now, it is my pleasure to introduce our newest member to
the Seapower Committee. We are really pleased that
Congresswoman Garcia, Sylvia Garcia, has joined our committee
and looking forward to the contributions that she is going to
make from her great district in Texas.
And I now yield to Congresswoman Garcia.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it is great to be
here.
And while I am not as well-versed on some of the issues
that you all have been talking about, I do have some
familiarity with some of these topics. And I want to start with
the last one first that Mr. Banks was referring to, and that is
the unmanned vehicles.
You know, I come from Houston. NASA [National Aeronautics
and Space Administration] is really close to my district, and I
have always opposed unmanned space flight. So convince me today
why we need to do unmanned vehicles in the military? And what
does the continued adoption of unmanned vehicles mean for the
future of the end strength numbers?
Mr. Stefany. First of all, ma'am, I would like to point out
that the experimentation we are doing is manned/unmanned
teaming is what we call it. We do not envision, at least in the
near term, unmanned vehicles going off and doing combat
missions on their own. Right? So that human in the loop,
manned/unmanned teaming is really the main area we are
exploring right now.
And the details of it I will turn over to Admiral Conn for
any details there.
Admiral Conn. I would say what we need the unmanned systems
to do--and I completely agree with Mr. Stefany--is that there
is going to need to be a human in the loop. Particularly when
we are going to need to provide lethal fires against a target,
there is going to be a human in that loop. Machines need to
provide that human with more--I am sorry, ma'am.
Ms. Garcia. So where are you at in this? I mean, I just
joined the committee, and I will ask for a briefing from your
team----
Admiral Conn. Okay.
Ms. Garcia [continuing]. To kind of bring me up to date.
Admiral Conn. At the very broad level, we need unmanned
systems to be force multipliers, whether in the air, on the
surface, or undersea. We need unmanned systems that are
sensors, or nodes in a network to really [inaudible] for
information, sensors that can create maritime domain awareness,
that it builds in redundancy to our space-based systems,
because we don't want to put all of our eggs in that single
basket.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Well, I am not from Missouri, but you are
going to have to show me----
Admiral Conn. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Garcia [continuing]. In a big way because I am from
Texas. Okay? We do have a lot of military installations. I grew
up, sort of sandwiched between Kingsville and Corpus when I was
growing up, so I have seen Navy and Navy pilots----
Admiral Conn. I went to Beeville.
Ms. Garcia. Many, many years, so. But shifting gears a
little but, I was pleased to read the Commandant's planning
guide and see a paragraph in the core value section addressing
sexual assault.
The continued rise in reported cases leads me to conclude
that we still do not fully understand the scope and scale of
the issue despite the best efforts of individual leaders across
the force.
Mr. Stefany, I would like to have some confidence that the
measures the Navy have taken to date are preventing sexual
assaults. Excuse me. I have got sinus issues going down today.
What is the Navy doing to prevent sexual assault right now?
And what additional steps are required for prevention, victim
protection, legal support, and investigation? And how much
money is in this budget proposal to fulfill these measures?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, ma'am. So not--the budget part for that
effort is not in my area of expertise. I will have to get you
the answer on the amount of money, but I know this is a very
high priority for the Secretary of the Navy. He has put an
advocate on his direct staff to bring all of the Navy-Marine
Corps efforts together that we have been doing in disparate
manners.
And at this point, I think I really would want to turn it
over to the two service reps for more of a detail on what they
are doing within each service.
Ms. Garcia. Okay.
Mr. Stefany. So, Lieutenant General Heckl, if you want to
start.
General Heckl. So, ma'am, in the Marine Corps, as you know,
the Commandant highlighted it [inaudible] prominently in his
Force Design, and in his Commandant's Planning Guidance from 3
years ago. We are not going to have an effective force if
things like sexual assault, sexual harassment exist within the
force. So it remains a top priority for the Commandant, and
he--we will continue to move out on that.
I will turn it over.
Ms. Garcia. But what are you all doing with regard to
prevention, victim protection, legal support, and investigation
was the question? I mean, I know you all are committed, but
what are you actually doing?
General Heckl. Well, ma'am, as you probably know, the
President's budget we actually got, we are actually putting a
general officer in charge now, and we are considerably
increasing--and this is not in my lane, ma'am, but I
specifically like to talk very specifics, but we are
considerably beefing up the legal support to all the SAPRO
[Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office] cases that go
forward. Those are just two examples that are real time now.
Admiral Conn, I don't know if you have anything from the
Navy.
Admiral Conn. The investments that have been made to
provide access to care and to counsel for sexual assault
victims in terms of training people and understanding that that
type of destructive behavior, illegal behavior, jeopardizes our
ability to execute our missions from a warfighting perspective.
Because on a ship, you've got to trust----
Ms. Garcia. With all due respect, that was rather vague,
and I look forward to probing this issue more with you when I
get my briefing at a later date.
Thank you.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Thank you, Congresswoman Garcia.
So we have gone through the first run-through of our
members. Again, we have got a hard stop at 9:30, so we have got
a little more time to do another round of questions.
And I will kick it off by, again, focusing on what Admiral
Gilday described as the number one acquisition priority of the
Navy, and actually the Department of Defense, which is
recapitalizing the Ohio program, the Columbia class. Early June
we are going to have the keel-laying of the first of the
Columbia, which is the first of the fleet of SSBNs [ballistic
missile submarines], in Rhode Island.
As your document indicates, there is roughly about $6
billion in this year's budget to finish off the first boat's
funding and advance procurement for the second boat. And,
again, as we started at the beginning, you know, schedule is
everything in terms of trying to keep this on track, as I think
Admiral and Mr. Stefany know full well.
The budget is actually fairly striking in terms of the
investment that is being made into supply chain and workforce,
which has been around for a few budgets, and that really kind
of jumped off the page. And I totally support that priority
that is included in the budget.
And I also would note that, I think on page 4 or 5 of your
testimony, Mr. Stefany, you note the fact that the 2015 law
that we passed, the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund, has
generated savings with the multiyear authorities that we gave.
It is roughly about $1 billion, I think, that has been
calculated up to 2021, and that is going to continue to grow
over time.
So I would ask, number one, just again if you could sort of
talk about the investments in the sort of upstream industrial
base components of this program, and also just how you see the
multiyear authorities in terms of, again, getting costs down
over time?
Mr. Stefany. Yes. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate that
question.
So the first part, yes, we appreciate you noticing that we
put in a special dedicated amount of money for--as we go to one
Columbia a year and sustained procurement starting in 2026, as
well as two Virginias a year, a fund of $750 million this year,
and over $2 billion across the FYDP to do really four things.
One is improve the facilities at the two big shipbuilders
to make sure they can have the right facilities to support what
we call one-plus-two but, more importantly, to work on our
suppliers, to bring the supplier health up, to really focus
with the COVID and other things going on, that the suppliers
are able to be able to support that higher throughput rate;
outsourcing and actually do strategic outsourcing of parts of
these submarines to other yards, and get those outsourced yards
for the less complex parts of the submarines up to speed, and
new partners, if you will, in the shipbuilding effort. And then
the last area but probably the most large--or the largest
funding piece is for workforce development, not just workforce
development at the shipyards but in other parts of the country
where skilled labor could exist, but they are not trained in
how to work on submarines.
So we have set up pilot programs in the Pennsylvania area,
Philadelphia area, Danville, Virginia, of course, in the Rhode
Island-Connecticut area, what we call pipeline programs, and we
want to expand those to other parts of the country to bring
highly skilled workforce into the submarine-building areas.
So those are the four main areas, sir.
And then as far as the Sea-Based Deterrent Fund and the
multiyear-like capabilities that are inherent in those
authorities, we are able to do what we call continuous
building, continuous construction, where we are able to have
our suppliers build five, six, seven, eight ship sets' worth of
whatever they are building in a row as opposed to starting,
stopping, starting, stopping, starting, stopping. And that
provides much more efficiency and stability to the suppliers,
but then also reduces the cost because the workforce learns as
they go through that process as opposed to starting and
stopping, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, on behalf of the Seapower
Subcommittee on the latter point, I would just say you are
welcome, since that generated and originated in this
subcommittee back in 2015. And I know Mr. Wittman and others,
we have been watching that like a hawk ever since. And, again,
I am actually very bullish on the pipeline model in terms of
sort of fast pre-apprenticeship, you know, sort of flash-bang
process to get people with basic levels of welding skills and
sheet metal so that they can move quicker than the normal
process that prevailed, you know, prior to the creation of
those. And, again, I think the investment by the Navy in that
is quite unique and I think smart to make sure that we keep
this program on track.
With that, I will yield to Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stefany, I wanted to ask and get you to confirm that
the USS Vicksburg, CG 69, and USS Tortuga, LSD 46, are in their
current maintenance availabilities--and, by the way, they are
slated to be retired. In their current maintenance
availabilities, are they at 85 percent completion? And if that
is indeed the case, I also want to know how much money has been
expended in their maintenance availabilities to this point?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. First, confirm that they are in
their what we call cruiser mod [modernization] or LSD mod
program, that availability to provide an extension of their
service life. The cruiser Vicksburg, I think, is in that 85
percent range; Tortuga, the LSD, might be a little less, but it
is mostly complete, to your point.
How much has been spent on those availabilities in the
cruiser and the LSD, a little different, but in the 2- to $300
million range, and I can get you the exact amount of money,
sir, if that is a detail you need
Mr. Wittman. Is it closer to the 300 or the 200?
Mr. Stefany. Closer to the 300, sir.
Mr. Wittman. Gotcha. Yeah. I would like to get those exact
numbers.
Vice Admiral Conn, the Navy proposes retiring nine LCS of
the Freedom-class ships, all of the MQ-8Bs and half of the MQ-
8C Fire Scouts, and two expeditionary sea base ships.
In your best professional military judgment, will the
retirement of these various mine countermeasure platforms be
expanding or reducing the Navy's capacity to do mine
countermeasure missions?
Admiral Conn. First of all, we will have 15 LCS ships, Indy
[Independence] class, to do the mine counter mission. We are on
track to be able to divest from the legacy systems in fiscal
year 2025 in 5th Fleet, and fiscal year 2027 in 7th Fleet. From
the mission packages that we have, we believe that 13--I'm
sorry, 15 of those Indy class is sufficient to do the mine
countermeasure mission.I
Mr. Wittman. Again, the question is, will it increase--will
retiring those platforms, taking those platforms out of the
inventory, will it increase or decrease the Navy's mine
countermeasure mission capacity?
Admiral Conn. For the Freedom class, they were never going
to be MCM boats. So it would have no impact.
Do you have something to add?
Mr. Stefany. Is your question, sir, the minesweeping ships
and the minesweeping helicopters coming out of the inventory,
what that impact----
Mr. Wittman. Yes, and the expeditionary sea base ships, the
total----
Admiral Conn. It will decrease the capability once we get
rid of the legacy systems.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Courtney. The chair now recognizes Mr. Golden.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
General Heckl, a little bit more on Force Design 2030. So
as you know, the Marines have a rich history of operational
innovation, things like amphibious assault, close air support,
Marine air/ground task force, adoption of vertical short
takeoff and landing aircraft, to name just a few operational
innovations. And, of course, now you are helping to lead the
Marines in bringing about another one, distributed operations
alongside the United States Navy.
You are looking at things like the introduction of a
precision-strike regime, the ability to influence gray-zone
activities in the here and now, and then the ability to sustain
maritime campaigning, and of course, developing capabilities
like rockets, guided missiles, anti-ship capabilities, talking
about ranges from, like, 40 kilometers out to like 300, maybe
even more.
So of course, Force Design 2030 grows out of the 2018
National Defense Strategy, and General Neller--it was General
Neller who said the Marine Corps has to change, and General
Berger selected to lead this change. Now, some critics have
said that the Marines are moving too fast. I want to talk a
little bit about something a lot of us have discussed of late
in this committee, something called the Davidson window, which
we are in now through 2027, and get your feedback on how
important the changes that the Marines are making at this pace
in helping to address these concerns.
A lot of people want to talk about this in the space of
talking about building more ships. I am not knocking that, I
know it is important. But, you know, something comes to mind
that the Commandant wrote in announcing the Force Design. He
said, ``While others may wait for a clearer picture of the
future operating environment, we will focus our efforts on
driving change and influencing future operation environmental
outcomes.''
How important is what the Marine Corps [is] doing to the
here and now, General?
General Heckl. So sir, I think, getting into the gist of
your question, time represents risk when we are facing a pacing
threat in the Davidson window. And I will simply say, sir--and
I think one thing that kind of further illuminates this
discussion is operations in Ukraine. We are not drawing any
premature conclusions, but there are certainly lessons to be
learned and observations to be made.
I will simply say to your first point, time to me as a
military individual means risk. We are not moving fast enough.
So, for people to say that we are going too fast, we are not
moving fast enough. I believe we have--as you know, in March we
set up the 3rd Marine Littoral Regiment in Hawaii that is there
now. We are equipping them. They are going to be getting an
experimentation in a whole host of areas of Force Design, and
the point being as we go through and stand up two more MLRs,
potentially two MLRs in the coming years, we will be forward
operating, persisting with allies and partners inside the
Chinese weapons engagement zone and that is gray-zone
operations. And that is what we are going to be doing.
So I believe to avoid the Davidson window becoming a
reality, you have to deter, right? And you have to be there and
you have to do active campaigning, and that is what we are
doing.
Sir, did I get to the question?
Mr. Golden. Yes. Thank you. I appreciate it.
I will yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Golden.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stefany and Admiral Conn, this is regarding the FFG
[guided-missile frigate] program in Marinette, Wisconsin. The
FYDP reflects two ships in 2024, one in 2025, two in 2026, and
one in 2027. It appears, though, that the Marinette shipyard
has excess capacity to build more ships now. And as you know,
especially in the business world, if you want to get a good
product at a reduced cost, you keep production lines going,
keep workers employed, all that, because in the end, you get a
good product, and the company does well on its bottom line. And
that's--you know, we need the good products, and we need the
company rolling.
Can you walk me through the decision making by the Navy on
why the plan is to build only one ship in fiscal year 2025
instead of continuing to build at the capacity of the shipyard?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. So first of all, we recognize the
investments that the shipyard--Marinette has put in to expand
their shipyard, and I know you are aware of it, sir, as well to
be able to do one and a half and ultimately two frigates a year
in construction as they step out of LCS program into the
frigate program.
So we recognize that, and we want to take advantage of it.
What you see in the FYDP is what we call the minimum sustaining
profile--you know, one, two, one, two--which is what we work
with the shipyard as the minimum amount to use their capacity.
As far as the decision process on the quantity, I will turn
it over to Admiral Conn.
Admiral Conn. Part of that profile was an affordability.
Plain and simple.
Mr. Bergman. Was what?
Admiral Conn. Affordability. Having the resources in
[inaudible] years to throw. Initially, the initial one was to
de-risk the program to make sure that we need that boat, that
ship, on time, and we don't want to over-pressurize; but once
the contractor demonstrates that they are on plan with
resources available, we would go to two across the board, or
perhaps more in the future. But it was pure affordability in
the outyears going back to a one, once the shipbuilder
demonstrates they----
Mr. Bergman. Affordability based on moneys provided?
Admiral Conn. Top line. Correct.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So is the industrial base for
shipbuilding, where--no matter where they are located in the
country, if we were, you know, to need to surge more ships
sooner because of the world situation, is--do you feel that the
Navy has an accurate assessment of if you needed to surge,
where you could ramp up, if contracts needed to be let tomorrow
because of a need? I mean, how quickly could you, you the Navy,
get things on a higher rate of production?
Mr. Stefany. Sir, I'll be specific to shipbuilding. In the
shipbuilding world, I think we have a very good handle on where
there is capacity in our shipbuilding yards versus full
capacity. The submarine yards, we cannot add any more, right?
They are at capacity right now, as is Newport News for the
aircraft carrier. But our surface shipyards--all of our surface
shipyards have some capacity that we could quickly take
advantage of, whether that is on the west coast, Gulf Coast, or
up in Great Lakes.
Mr. Bergman. Has there been any studies done by the Navy
that looks at the current shipbuilding, again, the sites where
you build ships? Is there, again, in a worst-case scenario if
we needed to expand the capacity at any of those shipyards, has
there been any look by the Navy at--and I'm just going to pick
because it is in Wisconsin, Marinette, at the coastline of Lake
Michigan, are there any--if they needed to expand that
operation, has the Navy spent any time looking at the
coastline, the geography adjacent to any of the shipyards if we
needed expansion?
Mr. Stefany. No, sir. I don't think--we have looked at the
capacity within the shipyards. We have not looked at expanding
out beyond----
Mr. Bergman. So you have not looked at the land around it,
if you will, in a worst--because you could get a workforce
there, but if you don't have the capacity in which their
ability to work, you can't--you know, it doesn't make any
difference how many people you have.
With that, I yield back, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Thank you, Mr. Bergman.
Chair now recognizes Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And I want to reflect back on some things that Lieutenant
General Heckl has said about risk during this hearing. You
know, when we receive this budget proposal every year, we are
also supposed to receive the Chairman's Risk Assessment. We
haven't received that this year. It is supposed to be an
annually produced document. It hasn't been produced each year.
I have been asking repeatedly because I think that would help
us inform and understand what you mean by risk.
Because it's a rather vague term. So Lieutenant General
Heckl, can you expound a little bit on what you just said the
risk is with regards to reducing the size of the amphibious
force?
General Heckl. Yes, ma'am. The risk for specifically as you
mentioned, the reduction in amphibs, it simply means that we
will not be able to have adequate forces forward to respond in
a timely manner. So the Marine Corps is tasked to be the crisis
response force for the Nation. The implication of crisis
response is timely response. So, again, I come back to the
whole thing, the discussion about time can often represent risk
that can't be overcome, right?
So that is, I think, the biggest issue, ma'am, is just not
being forward and being able to provide timely and capable
response.
Mrs. Luria. So I should expect when we finally do see the
Chairman's Risk Assessment, that it will say something along
the lines, and I will paraphrase what you just said, that this
budget request does not propose a force that would give us
significant forces, amphibious forces, to have a response in a
timely manner, so not have adequate forces forward to respond
in a timely manner in a time of crisis or conflict? This budget
request does not give us adequate forces forward to respond in
a timely manner in a time of crisis or conflict. Is that what I
am understanding?
General Heckl. And ma'am, just to be clear, the Marine
Corps' concern is the coming years when we go down to 24. It is
the assessment, my assessment, that at 24, we will likely be
able to provide adequate capability in the Indo-Pacific, and we
will be forced to take risks in EUCOM, AFRICOM, and CENTCOM.
There is no two ways around it.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So you said likely be able to in Indo-
Pacific. Where is your hesitation there? Why did you use the
word ``likely''?
General Heckl. Based on readiness rates of ships. I am
always cautious. I will approach from the worst-case scenario
vice the best case. So that is why I use the word ``likely,''
ma'am.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. And so I would take away from
this that, you know, the LPD 17 production line was supposed to
go through, I think, hull number 42. This budget proposal
wanted to stop at 33. We have already discussed during this
hearing the prolongation of time between LHA 9 and 10, also the
LSD's decommissioning.
And it is curious to me because on the Navy public affairs,
every day they are literally talking about these very ships
that we plan on decommissioning as proposed in this budget.
Every day they are out there doing operations, deployed in 6th
Fleet, you know, one of them just left Little Creek in my
district recently on a deployment and they are performing
important missions for our country.
But just tell me am I correct, you are requesting to
decommission these ships in this budget?
General Heckl. I certainly am not, ma'am. And the LPD was
going to be truncated at 31 actually. We got advance
procurement on 32. And as you know, the Commandant has put LPD
33 as the top of our unfunded priority list for the United
States Marine Corps.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. I think this committee has heard that
loud and clear, and we may go above and beyond that. But I
think it is important you are using the word ``risk,'' but I
would hope that in future discussions with this committee you
can quantify, like what is the risk to our national security.
And we hope that this will be fully delineated across all
shipbuilding programs when we do finally receive the Chairman's
Risk Assessment for this budget. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. I agree with the gentlelady that
the subcommittee has heard that message loud and clear, and I
think we are going to move out with our Article 1 Section 8
authorities under the Constitution to address that when we get
closer to the mark.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Garcia.
Ms. Garcia. Mr. Chairman, thank you, again, for the warm
welcome. I have no further questions this morning. I am sure I
will have more after I sit down and visit more with them. Thank
you.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Ms. Garcia.
With that, I think we have had two good rounds of
questions. Again, I really appreciate the early start, which
again, avoided the musical chairs of floor votes and allowed a
real flow here today.
Again, thanks to the witnesses for your flexibility, and
with that, I will now call this meeting closed.
[Whereupon, at 9:14 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 18, 2022

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 18, 2022

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 18, 2022

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN

Mr. Wittman. Early cost estimates put the Light Amphibious Warship
at around $100 million per copy. Under the Navy's FY23 budget
submission, the first LAW would be procured in FY25 at a cost of $247
million, before dropping to an average cost of about $145 million in
FY27. While the first ship in any class are usually the most expensive,
what additional information can be shared about current cost estimates
for the LAW?
General Heckl. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN
Mr. Bergman. Was the Navy's 78% reduction of the Reserve aviation
force based on a risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis and why was
it not shared with Congress and other stakeholders?
Mr. Stefany. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Bergman. How does Navy retain highly skilled officers and
enlisted aviators with limited off-ramps to participate in Reserve
aviation?
Mr. Stefany. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Bergman. Was the Navy's 78% reduction of the Reserve aviation
force based on a risk assessment and cost-benefit analysis and why was
it not shared with Congress and other stakeholders?
Admiral Conn. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Bergman. Why is the Navy severely cutting capability in mission
areas such as special operations and Personnel Recovery/Combat Search
and Rescue (PR/CSAR)?
Admiral Conn. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Bergman. How does Navy retain highly skilled officers and
enlisted aviators with limited off-ramps to participate in Reserve
aviation?
Admiral Conn. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]

[all]
