- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-48] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-48]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

THE FISCAL YEAR 2022

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION

BUDGET REQUEST FROM THE

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 23, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-626                  WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

ADAM SMITH, Washington, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JACKIE SPEIER, California            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               MO BROOKS, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland,          SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California                TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 DON BACON, Nebraska
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       JIM BANKS, Indiana
JASON CROW, Colorado                 LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia, Vice      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Chair                            C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington       BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                PAT FALLON, Texas
JIMMY PANETTA, California
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Paul Arcangeli, Staff Director
Katy Quinn, Professional Staff Member
Geoff Gosselin, Professional Staff Member
Natalie de Benedetti, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Ranking Member,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     4
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

Austin, Hon. Lloyd J., III, Secretary of Defense, U.S. Department
of Defense; accompanied by Michael J. McCord, Under Secretary
of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, U.S.
Department of Defense..........................................     6
Milley, GEN Mark A., USA, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff..     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Austin, Hon. Lloyd J., III...................................    81
Milley, GEN Mark A...........................................    95

Documents Submitted for the Record:

General Hyten Letter to Mr. Turner...........................   109
``USSPACECOM Remaining at Peterson AFB is Best for American
Taxpayers''................................................   110
Superintendent of West Point Letter to Mr. Waltz.............   115

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Bacon....................................................   120
Mr. Golden...................................................   120
Dr. Green....................................................   121
Mr. Kelly....................................................   120
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   121
Mr. Larsen...................................................   119
Mrs. Luria...................................................   121
Mr. Waltz....................................................   120
Mr. Wilson...................................................   119

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bergman..................................................   135
Mr. Brooks...................................................   128
Mr. Brown....................................................   130
Ms. Escobar..................................................   136
Mr. Fallon...................................................   142
Mr. Gallagher................................................   131
Mr. Horsford.................................................   143
Ms. Houlahan.................................................   132
Mr. Kahele...................................................   139
Mr. Kelly....................................................   131
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   125
Mrs. Luria...................................................   138
Mr. Moore....................................................   141
Mr. Morelle..................................................   138
Ms. Speier...................................................   127
Ms. Strickland...............................................   139
Mr. Waltz....................................................   136
Mr. Wittman..................................................   125

THE FISCAL YEAR 2022 NATIONAL DEFENSE

AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FROM

THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, June 23, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:59 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Adam Smith
(chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. I call the meeting to order. Good morning.
We have our full committee hearing this morning on the
fiscal year 2022 National Defense Authorization budget request
from the Department of Defense.
We are honored to be joined by the Secretary of Defense
Lloyd Austin, the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff General
Mark Milley, and by Mike McCord, the Under Secretary of
Defense, the Comptroller/Chief Financial Officer for DOD
[Department of Defense], and we look forward your testimony.
We are back in the committee hearing room, which is great.
We do still allow a hybrid option for members who wish to
participate remotely and because of that, we have this set of
rules that I must read before we begin. So I will do that
before making my opening statement.
Members who are joining remotely must be visible on screen
for the purposes of identity verification, establishing and
maintaining a quorum, participating in the proceeding and
voting.
Those members must continue to use the software platform's
video function while in attendance unless they experience
connectivity issues or other technical problems that render
them unable to participate on camera.
If a member experiences technical difficulties, they should
contact the committee staff for assistance. Video members'
participation will be broadcast in the room and via the
television internet feeds. Members participating remotely must
seek recognition verbally and they are asked to mute their
microphones when they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platform's video function on the entire time they
attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding.
If members depart for a short while for reasons other than
joining a different proceeding, they should leave the video
function on. If members will be absent for a significant period
or depart to join a different proceeding, they should exit the
software platform entirely and then rejoin it if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature to
communicate with staff regarding technical or logistical
support issues only.
And finally, I've designated a committee staff member to,
if necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to cancel
any inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the
proceeding.
With that, the only other procedural thing is the Secretary
has a hard stop at 2 o'clock. We will stop at 2 o'clock. I know
we have a lot of members to ask questions.
We'll get through as many of them as fast as we possibly
can. We will also be taking a break at 11:30 for the witnesses,
a brief break, 5-ish minutes, and then get back going.
So I hope members will make note of that. Hard stop, 2
o'clock; break at 11:30. So plan accordingly.
With that, I want to thank our witnesses for being here and
thank them also for their service to our country and their
leadership at the Pentagon.
These are extraordinarily difficult times in a variety of
different ways. Certainly, we have a very complex threat
environment across the globe.
Russia, China, North Korea, Iran, transnational terrorist
groups, all of those things are things that we need to worry
about in order to maintain the security of this country. We are
actively building on our partnerships across the globe to try
and confront those threats, recognizing the need for a
cooperative effort with our allies and partners. Appreciate
that effort as well.
Much of the focus of this committee for the last couple of
weeks has been on the top line for the defense budget, which is
an area of some controversy. I, personally, you know, don't
think it should be. I think the budget the President has
submitted is more than adequate. It is a $12 billion increase
over last year's budget, and the budget before that was only a
$3 billion increase over the--over the previous budget.
Seven hundred and fifty three billion dollars is a lot of
money. Even in the United States of America it's a lot of
money, and we ought to be able to adequately defend our country
for $753 billion.
My concern, as many of you have heard before, goes more
towards how we are spending that money. Number one, making sure
that we are getting value out of it, that the programs that
we're spending the money on are meeting their budget
requirements and are meeting their requirement requirements,
basically producing what we asked them for, and we have really
struggled with that in the last couple of decades.
The members of this committee know better than anyone the
list of programs that have either been cancelled or have wound
up way over budget and under the performance expectations.
Now, I will say that in the last couple of years, I think
that's gotten better. I think a succession of Secretaries of
Defense and other members at the Pentagon have really buckled
down and looked at that.
The most optimistic thing that has happened to me in this--
in this regard, it was several weeks ago when I was briefed on
the B-21 program, which is on time, under budget, and
performing as expected.
We learned a lot of lessons from the disappointments of the
F-35 and others, and I know there are other programs that are
similarly progressing in a positive way. There are still some
that aren't.
But number one, if we--I mean, think about all the money in
the last 20 years that went to things that didn't produce. If
we just had that money back, we wouldn't be having a
conversation about what the top line budget is.
So going forward, let's make sure that we're efficient and
effective in how we spend that money.
And then the second piece of it is something that has been
a big focus of this committee for the last couple of years and
that is understanding the changing nature of warfare,
understanding how important information systems and
survivability have become.
Simply massing a huge amount of firepower in one place
isn't enough if you can't protect those systems and you can't
get adequate information and if those systems are not
survivable.
We have had two task forces in this committee. Last year,
we had the Future of Defense Task Force that really focused on
this issue. You know, what are the programs that we need going
forward. I reject the whole legacy versus the future argument
because maybe a legacy system actually fits what we need right
now. It's not a matter of old or new. It's a matter of what is
going to work for the environment that we face, and I think
that task force produced some incredibly important information
about how we do that.
We now have a task force focused on the supply chain, which
is directly tied to that as well. How are we--how can we make
sure that we get the crucial equipment and have the crucial
manufacturing capabilities that we need to perform.
Lastly, we formed a new subcommittee focused specifically
on emerging technologies, artificial intelligence being at the
top of that list, but not the only one.
That's what's really going to be the key to our ability to
defend ourselves. I know we have heard a lot about some of the
war games that have been done specifically focused on what
would happen if we got into a conflict with China, and for the
better part of, I don't know, 7, 8 years while they were doing
those war games it did not go particularly well.
But they did a new one, the Air Force did, just a few
months back that introduced some new capabilities, and it
totally flipped how that went. And it wasn't about the sheer
volume of stuff that we had. It was about having a different
set of capabilities, capabilities that could survive,
capabilities that could get information to our warfighters
reliably in crucial circumstances. That drives home that point.
It isn't how much money we're spending. It's what we're
spending it on and how it reflects the threats that we face
today.
The last point that I'm anxious to hear from our witnesses
about is we have had a fair amount of difficulty in terms of
protecting our service members. Focus has been on sexual
assault in the military. We have not adequately dealt with
that, and I think there is wide bipartisan support for the idea
that we need to make some big changes to try to address that.
Now, this committee has passed a number of provisions to
attempt to address this issue. We are not there yet. There is
going to be a big change in that.
It is, however, not just sexual assault. I know that both
of you gentlemen have looked closely at the report that came
out at Fort Hood and some of the command structure problems
that were down there that led to many problems with the force.
We need to figure out how do we recruit, train, and protect
our service members and their families, because as you all
know, that's what makes defense go. The systems are great, but
it's the people that make it happen.
We are an all-volunteer military. We need to make sure that
people still want to serve in the military, want to keep
serving in the military, and feel, most importantly, that they
and their families are safe when doing so, and I think we have
got a lot of work to do in that area.
I thank you both for being here. I look forward to your
testimony.
And with that, I will turn it over to Mr. Rogers for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALABAMA,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
the witnesses being here. I know you all are busy, but this is
very important to us and the Nation to be able to hear from
you. So thank you for your preparation and your presence and
your service to our country.
Last month, Admiral Davidson testified that, quote, ``There
is no guarantee the United States would win a future conflict
with China,'' closed quote.
In fact, in almost every war game conducted by the Pentagon
over the last decade, the United States lost to China. The
Chinese Communist Party [CCP] now controls the largest navy in
the world and the largest army in the world.
It has more troops, more ships, and more ground-based
missiles than United States, and while we're still developing
hypersonic missiles, the CCP is fielding them.
The facts couldn't be more clear. China is a very real
threat to our national security.
Both Secretary Austin and General Milley have acknowledged
that point. At his confirmation hearing, Secretary Austin said,
quote, ``China presents the most significant threat, going
forward,'' closed quote.
General Milley testified before the Senate [that] ``from a
strictly military standpoint,'' China represented our greatest
threat.
Here's the problem. The President apparently doesn't see
things the same way. If he did, I don't understand why he'd
send us a wholly inadequate defense budget.
This budget request doesn't keep pace with China. It
doesn't even keep pace with inflation. The fact--in fact, it
constitutes over a $4 billion cut in real spending dollars.
This budget cuts the size of the Navy and starves the
shipbuilding industry. It cuts procurement budgets across the
board, delaying critical modernization efforts. Air Force
procurements were slashed by 12 percent, missile defense by
more than 15 percent.
There's a $25 billion unfunded priorities list, much of
which are critical capabilities our warfighters need to counter
China. The budget accelerates divestment in important
capabilities, including over 200 fighter and reconnaissance
aircraft. It doesn't seem to matter that these are still needed
on the battlefield.
And as the services struggle to meet recruiting goals, the
budget cuts end strength. Ask the administration why they
propose such an anemic budget and they struggle for excuses.
They tell us that the savings they produce today are being
reinvested in future capabilities, except that's not the case.
Slashing procurements and accelerating divestments produces
nearly $13 billion in so-called savings. But the research and
development of new capabilities increases by only $5 billion.
Then they tell us the fact that defense spending is hemmed in
is because of fiscal realities. That might make sense if the
President wasn't proposing spending unprecedented amounts of
money on a progressive wish list but not so on national
security or defense.
The budget proposes massive increases in funding for the
EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] and the Department of
Education, HHS [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services],
and Commerce. In all, defense nondiscretionary--in all,
nondefense discretionary spending grows by an astonishing 16
percent, 10 times more than defense, and while it--and that
doesn't count the $1.9 trillion wasted on so-called COVID
[coronavirus] stimulus. More than $1.7 billion of that bill was
spent on progressive priorities like stimulus checks to
prisoners, illegal immigrants, and bailouts of union pension
funds, but not a dime for defense.
Nor does it include the infrastructure bill they're talking
about, which spends money on everything under the sun except
defense. The cost of that fiasco could range anywhere from $1
trillion to $6 trillion of new mandatory spending.
The only reason the President is not spending more on
defense is because the radical left is pushing him to cut it.
They want to slash defense spending by 10 percent or more. To
his credit, the President has not gone that far. But what he's
proposing is far from what we need for a credible deterrent.
The National Defense Strategy Commission recommends an annual
increase of 3-5 percent above inflation to stay ahead of China.
Each one of the service chiefs and combatant commanders
that I've talked with publicly has endorsed that level of
spending. Deputy Secretary Hicks supported it when she was a
commissioner on that very commission.
I suspect that the level of funding Secretary Austin and
General Milley would like to see is that same amount as well.
Given the colossal amounts of money the President and the
majority are throwing around these days, I outright reject the
notion that we can't somehow find 3-5 percent for our national
security.
If this budget was being driven by risk instead of
politics, 3-5 percent is the level of growth we would see.
Unfortunately, that's not the case.
Mr. Secretary, I know you're doing the best you can with
what you've been given, but it's wrong to put you in this
position. This budget robs our warfighters of vital
capabilities they need to carry out their mission and it fails
to adequately support our defense industrial base.
Most regrettably, it gives China more than--more time to
enhance their military advantage and undermine deterrence. I
urge my colleagues to reject this budget and work in a
bipartisan manner with our colleagues to address the urgent
needs on national defense.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. LLOYD J. AUSTIN, III, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE; ACCOMPANIED BY MICHAEL J. McCORD,
UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Secretary Austin. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers,
and distinguished members of this committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about the President's budget
request for fiscal year 2022.
I'm pleased to appear alongside General Milley, whose
counsel has been crucial to us as we developed our budget and
as we continue to defend this Nation, which remains our top
priority.
I'm also grateful to have our comptroller, Mike McCord,
with us today, and let me say at the outset that I believe our
budget requests will help us match our resources to strategy,
and strategy to policy, and policy to the will of the American
people.
This budget is informed by the President's interim national
security guidance and by my own message to the force. We
believe that it funds the right mix of capabilities that we
need most to defend this Nation now and in the future.
It invests in hypersonic weapons, artificial intelligence,
microelectronics, 5G technology, in space-based systems,
shipbuilding, and nuclear modernization, to name a few.
In fact, this budget asks you to approve nearly $28 billion
to modernize our nuclear triad, and $112 billion for research,
development, testing, and evaluation, which is the largest R&D
[research and development] request ever put forth by this
Department.
Our request also gives us the flexibility to divest
ourselves of systems and platforms that no longer meet our
needs, including older ships, aircraft, ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] platforms that demand more
maintenance, upkeep, and risk than we can afford.
The Department must be ready to keep pace with our
competitors and, if necessary, to fight and win the next war
and not the last one. And that's why we have commissioned the
Global Posture Review and a new National Defense Strategy which
will further inform and guide our resource decisions.
This budget reflects our focus on the pacing challenge that
we clearly see from the People's Republic of China [PRC], and
to include more than $5 billion for the Pacific Deterrence
Initiative.
Earlier this month, our--after our China Task Force
completed its work, I issued an internal directive kicking off
department-wide efforts that will, among other things, help
bolster our deterrence against the PRC and revitalize our
network of regional allies and partners, and accelerate the
development of cutting-edge capabilities and new operational
concepts.
However, China is not our only challenge. Our budget also
invests $617 million to counter the damaging effects of climate
change and additional funds to prepare for future challenges
like another pandemic.
It helps us to counter belligerence from Russia, especially
in the cyber realm, and you'll see more than $10 billion
devoted to cybersecurity, cyberspace operations, and cyber
research and development.
With this emphasis on space and missile defense and more
sophisticated sensors, our budget will also help us counter the
increasing ballistic missile capabilities of nations like North
Korea and Iran.
It funds a troop presence and counterterrorism capabilities
in the Middle East and South Asia to meet the threats posed not
only by Iran but also by terrorist networks like ISIS [Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria] and al-Qaida, and in Africa like those
posed by al-Shabaab.
And it helps us maintain the integrated deterrent
capability and global posture necessary to back up the hard
work of our diplomats, allies, and partners.
Now, I know that Afghanistan remains at the top of all of
our minds, and I can report that our withdrawal remains on
pace. Last week in Brussels, we updated our NATO [North
Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies and I was encouraged by
their continued support for the new direction that we're
taking.
We have accomplished the mission for which our troops were
sent--were sent to Afghanistan some 20 years ago, and I'm very
proud of the brave men and women who made it possible and those
who gave their lives for that mission.
And I'm also deeply grateful to the families of our service
members who have endured so much as they sent their sons,
daughters, husbands, and wives into battle.
We will now transition into a new bilateral relationship
with our Afghan partners, one that helps them meet their
responsibilities to their citizens but one that will not
require a U.S. footprint larger than what's necessary to
protect our diplomats.
And that's one reason why we're asking to move overseas
contingency operations funding inside the budget. This will add
greater transparency, accountability, and predictability to the
budgeting process, and, frankly, it's overdue.
Now, this budget also takes care of our people. It
increases funding to support in-home care and support, which
has become increasingly important during this pandemic.
We also seek to improve military base pay and retention
bonuses and other incentives that will help us attract and
retain the best talent. And we will be working hard to combat
challenges that make service in the ranks more difficult for
all the men and women of the Department, from getting a better
handle on the extent to which we experience extremist behavior
to combating sexual assault and harassment.
As you know, my first directive as Secretary of Defense
issued on my first full day in the office was to service
leadership about sexual assault. Yesterday, I received the
final recommendations and complete report of the Independent
Review Commission [IRC], and I want to thank Lynn Rosenthal for
her exceptional leadership on this commission as well as the
talented experts who worked so hard and so diligently to
support her.
The result is a comprehensive assessment across four lines
of effort: accountability, prevention, climate and culture, and
victim care and support; and that assessment recommends
creative and evidence-based options.
In the coming days, I'll present to President Biden my
specific recommendations about the commission's finding, but I
know enough at this point to say that I fully support removing
the prosecution of sexual assaults and related crimes from the
military chain of command.
We are prepared to work with Congress to amend the Uniform
Code of Military Justice in this regard. The IRC also
recommended the inclusion of other special victims crimes
inside this independent prosecution system to include domestic
violence, and I support this as well, given a strong
correlation between these sorts of crimes and the prevalence of
sexual assault.
As we move forward, I believe that it's important to make
changes that are both scoped to the problem that we're trying
to solve and properly resource. The Department will likely need
new authorities to implement many of the IRC's recommendations
and we will most assuredly require additional resources both in
personnel and in funding.
And we look forward to having those discussions with this
committee and we must treat this as the leadership issue that
it is.
And Chairman Smith and members of the committee, we field
the greatest military in human history made up of the finest
men and women who have ever donned the cloth of this Nation. We
also enjoy a civilian workforce deeply committed to every
mission that we take on.
No adversary can match the quality of our people, and I am
immensely proud and humbled to serve with them again and I can
assure you that the President's budget request for fiscal year
2022 fulfills our obligations to them and to their families.
And I thank you for your steadfast support of the
Department of Defense and for all that you do to ensure that we
remain ready to defend this Nation, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Austin can be found in
the Appendix on page 81.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
General Milley.

STATEMENT OF GEN MARK A. MILLEY, USA, CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF
STAFF

General Milley. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today. It remains my distinct
honor and privilege to represent the United States joint force,
the most capable military in the world.
Our troops remain the best led, best equipped, and best
trained force anywhere and that is largely due to the efforts
of this Congress, and I want to personally thank Secretary
Austin and his steady leadership and wise guidance.
Your joint force is standing watch, protecting American
interests in all domains--air, sea, land, cyber, and space--
around the globe 24/7. We're also fully engaged here at home in
both defense support to civil authorities through COVID-19
medical support, as well as homeland defense to keep Americans
safe.
We are conducting major exercises in Europe. We are
monitoring the DMZ [demilitarized zone] in Korea. We are
conducting freedom of navigation operations in the strategic
waterways of the global commons. We are sustaining operations
in space and cyberspace. We are supporting our allies and
partners in Africa and Latin America. We are patrolling the
skies of the Middle East.
And our joint force is currently conducting a safe,
responsible, and deliberate strategic retrograde from
Afghanistan in good order while ensuring the continued support
of the Afghan National Security Force.
The purpose of the United States military is simple. It is
to protect and defend the Constitution of the United States of
America against all enemies, foreign and domestic, and with
that comes two key tasks.
Task one is to prepare for war in order to deter our
enemies, and key task two is to fight and win America's wars if
deterrence fails. The United States military is a critical
component of our overall national power; the combination of our
diplomatic efforts, economic strength, and the overriding hope
of the American message, and our military capability, will
deter adversaries and preserve great power peace in this era of
great power competition.
The current geostrategic landscape is witnessing rapid
change, and the potential for threats to peace and stability in
various regions, and indeed the world, is increasing, not
decreasing.
States and nonstate actors are rapidly transforming
technologically and we are bearing witness to a fundamental
change in the character of war, as Chairman Smith pointed out.
In particular, China is increasing its military capability
at a very serious and sustained rate, and we must ensure that
we retain our competitive and technological edge against this
pacing threat.
Readiness, modernization, and combat power are key to deter
war and maintain the peace, and equally important are the
combat multipliers of teamwork, cohesion, and well-led units.
We must resolve the issue of sexual assault and I and all the
chiefs are in alignment with what the Secretary of Defense just
said.
And we must confront the issue of extremism. Both are
corrosive and the very essence of what it means to be in the
military is negatively impacted if we allow them to continue.
Additionally, we must continue to invest in leader
development and talent management required for a future
operating environment and, finally, we must continue to nurture
and sustain a key strategic source of our strength, which is
our network of many close allies and partners around the world.
The joint force appreciates the work that our elected
representatives do to ensure that we have the resources needed
to be ready. The days of the Budget Control Act are over, and
repeated continuing resolutions, hopefully, are behind us for
good.
The joint force will deliver modernization of our Armed
Forces and security to the people of the United States at the
fiscal year 2022 President's proposed budget request of $715
billion. The American people have entrusted to us a significant
commitment of treasure and we will work diligently to ensure it
is spent prudently in the best interest of the Nation.
In alignment with the Interim National Security Strategic
Guidance, this budget makes hard choices. But it delivers a
ready, agile, and capable joint force that will compete
successfully. It will deter and it will win across all domains
and which is postured for continued overmatch in the future.
This budget's focus is on the future and prioritizes
nuclear modernization, long-range fires, hypersonic technology,
artificial intelligence, shipbuilding, microelectronics, space,
cyber, and 5G. These investments, in concert with our recently
developed joint warfighting concept, will pave the way for the
joint force of the future.
The President's budget for fiscal year 2022, this request
increases the readiness and ensures our people are our number
one priority. Consistent predictable budgets informed by the
will of the people are critical to our Nation's defense, and
the passage of this budget in a timely way is important.
The fiscal year 2022 Presidential budget strikes an
appropriate balance between preserving present readiness and
future modernization. It's a down payment on the investment of
the future with a bias toward the future operating environment
and the change in the character of war.
It is now that we must set ourselves on a path to modernize
the joint force and this budget contributes to doing just that.
Many enemies, historically, have grossly underestimated the
United States and our people. We are ready now and we will
remain so in the future, and any adversary of the United States
of America should not underestimate our military capability,
our skill, and our combat power.
Our job as your joint force, our contract with the American
people, is that we, the United States military, will be able to
fight and win when called upon and we will support and defend
the Constitution of the United States always and forever.
And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Milley can be found in
the Appendix on page 95.]
The Chairman. Thank you both.
The unfunded requirements is something that has always sort
of struck me as odd. Every budget I've ever seen--I think there
may be a couple of years where we didn't do them--no matter how
large the budget, there's always this list of unfunded
requirements, and it strikes me as simply a way to try to--a
forcing mechanism to no matter what force more money into the
system, when as I said in my opening remarks what we really
need to do is to force more effectiveness out of the money that
we get.
But we have this $25 billion list of unfunded requirements.
Do you agree with that? Do you think that there are things in
that $25 billion list that we haven't done that are somehow
going to make it impossible for you to do your job? And if not,
please explain why not.
Secretary Austin. Chairman, as I said in my opening
remarks, I think that this budget provides us the flexibility
to go after the capabilities that we need to support the
operational concepts that will allow us to be not only
competitive against any near peer, but actually dominant in
that battlespace. And so I'm comfortable that this budget
provides us what we need.
You've heard me say also that our pacing challenge is
China. If you look at the types of things that we're investing
in, 20--almost $20.5 billion for missile defeat and defense,
$6.6 billion for long-range fires, $52.4 billion for a lethal
Air Force, $34.6 billion for combat-effective naval forces, and
$12.3 billion for effective ground forces, not to mention the
almost $28 billion that we're invested in--investing in
modernizing the nuclear triad.
So I believe that it gives us, you know, the right
flexibility to go after the capabilities that we need to be
successful, going forward.
The Chairman. I don't know, General Milley, if you want to
dive in here. So how would you explain this, and I've argued
that we should have gotten rid of the unfunded requirements
list a long time ago.
But how do you explain the service chiefs submitting this
list? You know, I agree with Secretary Austin. I think he's
absolutely right about where the budget is at. But what are we
doing with this list of things that to members up here makes us
think that we're not meeting our needs?
General Milley. As a former service chief, [inaudible]
Chief of Staff of the Army, the unfunded requirements list, and
everyone probably looks at it slightly differently, but
generally speaking, I would say that requirements always--I
can't think of a budget where requirements do not exceed
resources, and the whole purpose of a budget is to prioritize
that which is most important down to that which is least
important.
And the unfunded requirements list, given an amount of
money to a given service, anything that goes beyond what the
budget is that they're given goes onto an unfunded requirements
list and these things are pages long, as you said, and billions
of dollars.
The key question, though, is relative to your opponent.
Everything's relative to someone. In this case, relative to the
pacing threat of China, relative to Russia, terrorists, et
cetera.
Are those unfunded requirements critical path capabilities
that are required to succeed? And the answer is no, in my
opinion--in my professional opinion. Others may have different
opinions.
If they were critical, then they need to be higher on the
priority list and in the base budget, and the chiefs--service
chiefs and service secretaries all go through that drill. It's
a hard drill. I had to do it with several service secretaries,
we had night courts and so on.
But the unfunded requirement lists are less important than
that which is in the base budget. The reason they're submitted
is to provide the committee and Congress, the representatives
of the people, to determine if those unfunded requirement lists
meet the needs, and you have to make some assessments and
determine to take such and such out of the base budget and add
something from the requirements.
So this is a flexibility option for the committee and it
gets submitted every year. Try to minimize them to the amount
possible because we really want the base budget is what needs
to be passed.
The Chairman. Thank you. I think that's a good explanation.
And again, I'll stand by the statement that, you know, over the
last 15 years in particular, the amount of money that has gone
to programs that haven't performed, I mean, I'd rather have the
service chiefs go through and tell us how they're going to make
sure that their programs are actually going to perform as
intended and on budget and the mistakes that we've made with
the money that has been wasted so we don't do that again.
And I have no doubt whatsoever if we did that we'd have
more than enough money to meet the requirements as we do, and
as I mentioned, again, I want to compliment this Department in
the last couple of years, a series of Secretaries of Defense
who have done the hard work to do that scrub, to go back in
there and learn the lessons for what went wrong and try and fix
it. And I think that is the most important thing we can do to
meet our defense needs, going forward.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Milley, as I noted in my opening statement, China
already has a larger navy, more troops, more missiles, and more
hypersonics than we do. Where are you most concerned that China
has gained or may soon gain an advantage against us?
General Milley. I would--there's several areas. Yeah, if
you roll the clock back to 1975 and the reforms of Deng
Xiaoping, the Chinese economy has risen at a rate of about 10
percent down to 6 or 7 percent recently, and it's projected to
reduce a little bit more.
But with that massive economy, with that massive amount of
money, China has developed an extraordinarily capable military.
They are not--to be clear, they are not currently superior to
the United States military. But their aim, their object, is to
be at least co-equal to if not superior, and that is possible.
If we stood still, that will be possible in a certain
amount of years. And I think that the area of cyber and space,
those are two critical areas, and subsurface, submarines, are a
third area, all of which we need to watch. But there's also
emerging technologies that are very concerning, things like
hypersonics, a man-machine interface, changing the relationship
of men or human beings to the machine, linking that to
various--very high-powered computer systems. There's a wide
variety of information technologies that they're working on.
These are all concerning.
And then I would throw in robotics and most importantly is
artificial intelligence. These are emerging technologies that
are going to hit in time and space in the next 10 to 15 to 20
years max and, we, the United States, need to be out in front
in all of them. Otherwise, we're going to be setting up future
generations for a very difficult situation relative to China.
Mr. Rogers. That's a great answer, and I agree that the
real threat is down the road. But that's the point. We can't
put off--we can't keep deferring taking action on keeping pace
with China, because it's going to get us in a bad situation.
So while this budget is, basically, level funding, just a
little bit of a dip, it's irresponsible in the long term, and
I'm not just going off on this President. The last President
came to us with a budget that was inadequate, and we got him to
a better place and I'm hoping we get this President to a better
place.
And I frankly hate it for y'all because y'all are
outstanding military leaders, and you know what we need and
you're just doing your job trying to spin this thing up or
shine it up. But it's not what we need for our long-term
military growth.
General Milley, as the chairman just alluded to, we got a
$25 billion unfunded priority list that came to us, and
included in that are priorities such as $1.7 billion for a new
destroyer, $1.4 billion for F-15Xs, and $300 million for the
defense of Hawaii and Guam. You don't think those should be in
this year's funding priorities?
General Milley. A couple of points. Hawaii and Guam--no
one, China, Russia, or anyone else should think Hawaii and Guam
are not defended. Because they're unfunded requirements doesn't
mean Hawaii and Guam aren't defended.
We have a tiered capability in the Pacific arrayed
explicitly to defend U.S. territory. The United States of
America mainland and Hawaii, Guam, and our allies and partners
are very well defended.
So I don't want anyone to misinterpret that. There are
capabilities that we'd like to improve on. But they didn't meet
the threshold of the base budget. Therefore, they're in an
unfunded requirement list. For the destroyer, we're adding
another destroyer next year. So it's going to be in the 2023
budget vice 2022.
Again, hard choices, prioritization. That's what budgets
are all about. And that's what the services did, that's what
the Secretary of Defense did, and I fully support it. And I
think this budget, $715 [billion], provides for the adequate
defense of the United States of America for fiscal year 2022.
Mr. Rogers. Again, I understand--I know this is the
President's budget and you got to do your best, but the
commander of INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command] says we need
an Aegis destroyer on Guam and we need a new radar system on
Hawaii. Granted, they're defended, not defended as well as they
need to be, and we need to be taking action to protect them.
General Milley, you testified before the Senate and said
that China and Russia combined are spending more money on
defense than the United States. How much risk are we inviting
by failing to keep pace with China when it comes to this kind
of spending?
General Milley. I think--I think we are keeping pace and I
think we're ahead of China, individually, as a country. When
you combine China and Russia-- and we would have to go into a
classified session to show how we do this mathematically--but
the combined budgets, when everything is taken into account and
you normalize for the cost of personnel, et cetera, then you
will find that the combined budgets of China and Russia do
exceed that of the U.S. Department of Defense budget.
In certain areas I'm concerned, like research, development,
and some of the advanced modernization technologies. Those are
areas which I'd rather go into a classified session. But in an
open hearing and factually correct, we are keeping pace. In
fact, we're exceeding China or Russia in the specific niche
capabilities.
And I don't want anyone to walk away from any hearing--and
we're talking to more people than just in this room right now--
I don't want China or Russia to ever think that the United
States military is not better than their military. We are; in
all domains, every day, 24/7. And that's not just bragging.
That's fact.
Mr. Rogers. And I completely agree. Everything you just
said is accurate, today. But you and I both know, as you
alluded to earlier, if we don't step it up they are going to
meet us or possibly surpass us in capability if we don't get on
pace to make sure we never lose standing with them.
Now, listen, I know what y'all got to say to this, but I
got to ask it. Every combatant commander and service chief that
has been before this committee I've asked did they support the
National Defense Strategy Commission's recommendation that we
increase defense spending in the foreseeable future 3-5 percent
over inflation.
Both of you have publicly stated before the President's
budget came out that that is the way you felt as well. How do
you feel today? Do you still believe that that should be what
we are doing when it comes to defense spending?
Secretary Austin, you first.
Secretary Austin. I support the President's budget and I--
as I stated earlier, sir, I think that this budget gives us the
ability to go after the things that we need to be very
competitive going forward, and I absolutely agree with you that
we are not only sighted on what we're doing today, but we must
be sighted on what the requirements are and the capabilities
will be in the future.
And so we're working hard to build those capabilities, to
meet those requirements, and I think--I think this budget does
that.
Mr. Rogers. General Milley.
General Milley. I agree. I fully support this budget. I
wouldn't have said it was adequate if I didn't. As far as the
3-5 percent, of course, 3-5 percent or 1 percent or 2 percent,
we could spend it appropriately with the UFR [unfunded
requirements] list, et cetera.
But the President is looking at a wider angle view for our
Nation's strength, not just a military strength, and it's a
combined strength of the Nation. It's critically important that
we have an incredibly healthy economy. Otherwise, you'll never
have a military. You have to have an educated workforce. You
have to have all of these things in order to have a good
military.
So if this President's budget requires other parts of the
government to have increases for various reasons, fine. This
budget is adequate to defend the United States of America, and
if given more money, we would certainly spend it appropriately
in a disciplined way in accordance with the priorities on the
UFR list. But I fully support this budget. Absolutely.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. Last question. Both the chairman and I
have been very frustrated that we got this budget so late and I
fear it's going to make it difficult for us to get an approps
[appropriations] bill, defense approps, and NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act] passed in a reasonable amount of
time. That may force a CR [continuing resolution]. Secretary
Austin, could you tell me what the implications of another CR
would be?
Secretary Austin. So if we have a CR, Ranking Member
Rogers, it will adversely affect readiness. It will slow down
our ability to modernize. It will adversely--also adversely
affect the industry, and so I think that's really important.
I think we need to do everything we can to prevent having a
detrimental effect on our ability to man, train, and equip the
force. And what--obviously, what the CR does is it prevents you
from initiating new starts and that's a--that's a problem.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for your testimony today and for your service to our
Nation.
I want to pick up where we left just a few minutes ago,
talking about preparing and investing for not only today, but
for tomorrow, and because that revolves around research and
development.
Mr. Secretary, the fiscal year 2022 budget is the largest
request for research, development, testing, and evaluation
[RDT&E] to date, and which I applaud. Yet, overall basic and
applied research funding is down from fiscal year 2021. I think
this is a mistake.
And given, just by way of example, that a COVID-19 vaccine
was a result of basic defense research 5 to 10 years ago, which
resulted in the mRNA vaccine being developed that was directly
from a DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency]
project, that early and applied research, thank God that that
research actually bore fruit and that it happened in the first
place.
So I appreciate that in our conversation on Monday you said
that you would look into it. My question is, will you commit to
getting me a firm assessment of why we cut these vital budget
lines by mid-July so that we can consider it during the NDAA?
Secretary Austin. Let me just say, again, that this is the
largest investment in RDT&E that this Department has ever made,
which speaks to our commitment to ensure that we're investing
in the right things to make sure that we're relevant in the
future, and I absolutely agree with you on the importance of
resourcing science and technology and other things.
And I would also say that the areas that you're concerned
about, while if you look at our investment this year, for this
budget for 2022, it's actually above what the forecasted
investment was in 2021. Not what they were resourced for but
actually what they asked for in the budget. You know, we've
asked for more.
So, again, we'll work hard to make sure that we have, you
know, the right monies in the right place to ensure that we
maintain a robust capability in this realm. But----
Mr. Langevin. Okay. If you could just give me, you know, a
yes or no answer. If you'd look into that assessment. You said
you'd give--if we can get it before the timeframe so that we
consider it in the NDAA I would appreciate that.
Secretary Austin. Okay.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Next, I'm really concerned with
how the Department has addressed electromagnetic spectrum
operations. Our adversaries are, clearly, investing in
technologies to dominate the domain while we continue to
consider it an afterthought, in some ways, from my perspective.
What--when can we expect the electromagnetic spectrum
superiority strategy implementation plan, and what do you think
is the first step to regaining our advantage?
Secretary Austin. Well, the first step to making sure that
we maintain an advantage is to make sure that we have a
coordinated effort across the board to identify what the
threats are and make sure that we have the right capabilities
to be dominant in that space.
Our vice chairman is currently leading this effort on--you
know, for our forces and, you know, I'm confident that as he
works his way through this, along with our deputy secretary,
he'll come back with some good recommendations and we'll
implement those that are appropriate.
Mr. Langevin. Secretary, the next--the Department of
Defense officially recognizes five domains of warfare. I think
we all agree that cybersecurity is the national security
challenge of the 21st century.
The four--four of those domains--the senior civilian is a
service secretary. Cyber has a deputy assistant secretary,
which is four rungs lower than the other warfighting domains.
Why does this make sense, especially when U.S. service members
are in contact with engaging our adversaries in cyberspace
daily?
Secretary Austin. Well, cyber is, obviously, incredibly
important to us. I think we're very effective in this domain
and I think, currently, we have the right oversight for our
cyber efforts.
Matter of fact, I was just out with General Nakasone here a
couple of weeks ago reviewing what he's doing and looking at
his programs, talking to his troops, and I'm very impressed by
the capability that he continues to develop.
And we are investing in cyber. You know, $10.4 billion in
this budget focused on cyber, and so it's important to us and
it will remain important to us.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
our witnesses for your service. As a 31-year Army veteran
myself, as the grateful dad of four sons who have served in
Iraq, Egypt, and Afghanistan, I particularly appreciate your
dedication and what you mean for our troops and military
families.
And for each of you, the issue of pit production. I'm
grateful that in the fiscal year 2022 Presidential budget
request it fully funds the modernization of our nuclear triad.
A credible nuclear deterrent is key to maintaining peace during
great power competition. This requires modernized and robust
nuclear weapons infrastructure, including the capability to
produce plutonium pits.
Dr. Charlie Verdon, the Acting Administrator of the
National Nuclear Security Administration [NNSA], Secretary of
Energy Jennifer Granholm, NNSA nominee Jill Hruby, and Admiral
Charles Richard are all on record supporting a two-site
solution for pit production.
In addition, just yesterday, General John Hyten reinforced
the importance of a two-site solution in a letter to Ranking
Member Mike Turner.
I request unanimous consent to enter the letter into the
record.
Mr. Langevin [presiding]. Without objection, so ordered.
[The letter referred to can be found in the Appendix on
page 109.]
Mr. Wilson. Secretary Austin and Chairman Milley, do you
agree that limiting pit production to one site leaves us too
little redundancy? What are the benefits of a two-site solution
to the resiliency of our nuclear weapons infrastructure to
establish peace through strength?
Secretary Austin.
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, first of all, thank you
for your incredible service. Very, very impressive, and we're
grateful.
On the issue of pit production, as you know, the Department
of Energy is the lead element for that and oversees the efforts
of NNSA. We work with the Department of Energy to ensure that
we have, you know, the right approach. We want to make sure
that we have, you know, adequate resources in terms of pits and
other elements that go into supporting our triad there.
So we continue to do a review of our overall capabilities,
and as we review those capabilities, we'll determine, you know,
what the--what the appropriate amount of--appropriate number of
sites ought to be.
Mr. Wilson. And in--hey, and in accordance with the
President's budget, do you support two sites?
Secretary Austin. I support the President's budget, yes.
Mr. Wilson. And with two sites. Thank you. Excuse me.
General Milley.
General Milley. Yes, I'm aligned with General Hyten's
recommendation. Yes, we talked about it. The broader issue, of
course, is the number one priority actually in the budget is
the recapitalization of the nuclear enterprise and the
Secretary has directed a Nuclear Posture Review that's ongoing.
We'll see what the results are. But, in general, as a
general comment here, the entire nuclear enterprise needs to be
recapitalized and that includes the pit production at two
sites.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, for each of you.
And Secretary Austin, Guam is a critical Western Pacific
theater of operations, a logistical hub for our Navy and a
priority target, sadly, for the Chinese Communist Party.
The patriotic American territory of Guam is appreciated for
having the highest percentage of military service of any State
or territory. The Missile Defense Agency's [MDA's] fiscal year
2022 request includes $118.3 million to develop an architecture
for the defense of Guam. Still, the MDA does not have a
detailed plan exactly what it would be.
Given China's increasingly hostile posture and peacetime
military buildup, the largest peacetime military buildup in the
history of the world, what can we expect the status of a
detailed overview of the system and its deployment timeline?
Secretary Austin. Well, as the chairman mentioned earlier,
Guam is part of the United States of America, and the United
States of America--we will make sure that we have appropriate
adequate defense mechanisms to protect our territory here.
And, you know, the $118 million that we've allocated for
missile defense is a start as we develop integrated
capabilities. In terms of a specific timeline of when that--
when our assessment and our work will be completed, I'll take
that for the record, Congressman Wilson.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. And, finally, Israel has been
subject to 4,500 Iranian rockets from Gaza by Hamas. But the
Iron Dome has been successful. Mr. Secretary, will we be
working more closely to promote Iron Dome?
Secretary Austin. You've heard us say a number of times
that, you know, we are committed to the defense of Israel and
I, you know, met with----
The Chairman. And I do apologize. The gentleman's time has
expired. So we will move on to Mr. Larsen. And if you want to
take that one for the record, we can do that.
Mr. Larsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Austin, for the last several months, media has
reported on a number of damning substantial issues within the
special operations forces [SOF] ranks. I want to know what DOD
is doing to transparently identify, track, and respond to
reports of misconduct in SOF.
Secretary Austin. In terms of what the Department is doing
to focus on that, we have not taken any additional actions. As
you know, we have a--we have additional oversight over Special
Operations Command now and that person reports directly to me.
He's got a dual track reporting responsibility, one directly to
me, one to our Policy so that we can make sure that special
operations are integrated in Policy.
I've spoken with the commander of Special Operations
Command. He is focused on these issues and he is--he's really
digging in to make sure that he understands the nature of the
issues and taking preventative measures to ensure that those
types of things don't occur in the future.
Mr. Larsen. It's a real serious issue, and I appreciate you
taking it seriously.
And on that last point you've made, we have talked a lot
about domains. But I want to--I want you to change your brain a
little bit here, literally, because I want to talk about the
cognitive domain that SOCOM [U.S. Special Operations Command]
and SOF says they want to focus on in terms of improving the
cognitive domain of our--of our warfighters in SOF.
There's a $10.2 million request, very small request, in the
budget, but--for investment in cognitive domain, improving the
impact of SOF training and improving the outcomes so that maybe
we are getting a little more preventive.
Can you talk a little bit about what your plan is to spend
this $10.2 million? I know it's a tiny bit of the budget. It's
not as big as some parts of the budget. But it's an important
part we're tracking.
Secretary Austin. SOCOM has led our forces in terms of
developing ways to make our warriors more efficient and more
effective on the battlefield, and this is one of those things
that they've been looking at for some time.
In terms of specific plans to invest those monies into
various pieces and parts, I'll take that for the record,
because I don't have those facts at my fingertips.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
Mr. Larsen. That's fine. I think it's more about resilience
of the warfighter before they--before we put them into a
situation so when they come out they're more resilient as well.
Just can you briefly then describe a little bit how are you
working to implement Directive 5111.10? That's the ASD(SO/LIC)
[Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-
Intensity Conflict] directive that DEPSEC [Deputy Secretary]
Hicks put out. How are you working to implement that directive?
Secretary Austin. Well, as you know, our nominee to occupy
that position has yet to be confirmed but--that is Chris Maier,
and once he is confirmed, I have every confidence that he will
do a great job in making sure that he keeps me informed of his
needs in terms of service type needs and also what they're
doing operationally.
He will sit in on regular meetings with me or report
directly to me on all service issues--service type issues, and
he will also integrate his activities in with our Policy branch
who, of course, will make sure that, you know, those activities
are synchronized with the rest of the force.
But to answer your question, we are moving out on this to
realize Congress' intent here.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
General Milley, I don't want to let you go here without a
question and this one's about the--about the Arctic. There's a
broader--you know, a broader coordination that needs to take
place throughout the U.S. Government on Arctic policy,
generally, but the Defense Department has a piece of this.
Can you articulate how the Department sees the Arctic from
a national security--through a national security lens, and then
what are you doing to coordinate among the services the
disparate ideas they have for presence in that region? You've
got 27 seconds.
General Milley. I'll give you a fulsome answer in writing.
I'll take that for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
General Milley. But, briefly, we recognize the importance
and the increasingly growing importance of the Arctic. As
climate change causes the Arctic ice to melt and resources
become available, it's going to become an area of great power
competition between the United States, China, and Russia, and
perhaps other powers as well.
So I'll give you a more full written answer on disposition
of force and what we have planned ahead.
One comment, though, if I could, real quick, and I know the
chairman's going to cut me off.
The Chairman. Real quick.
General Milley. On the special operations forces, we have
the most disciplined, vetted special operations forces out
there. I'm aware of the reports. I've talked to Rich Clarke as
well as the Secretary. We're getting after that very, very
closely. But we have exceptionally disciplined and well-vetted
special operations forces.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Turner is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, as you know, we're undertaking our budgetary
hearings, and as part of that testifying before us was Acting
Navy Secretary Thomas Harker.
He and I had an exchange about a June 4th, 2021, memorandum
that he wrote directing the Navy to defund the sea-launched
cruise missile nuclear capable for budgetary year 2023. The
budget that you have before us and that you're testifying
before is 2022 and it fully funds this program.
Yesterday, I sent you a letter concerning my exchange with
the acting secretary, and I'm not going to ask you for a
decision today, but I do want to engage you about his testimony
and the importance of what I have asked of you.
The acting secretary acknowledged that he requested that
this be defunded. He testified that he did not consult with
anyone in the Pentagon and, in fact, both of you, Secretary
Austin and General Milley, have testified that you were not
consulted.
Also, Admiral Richard, STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic Command],
was not consulted and Admiral Richard testifies that this
missile is a much-needed nonstrategic regional presence to
provide assured response capability, that it provides
additional diversity in platforms and survivability, that it
provides limited U.S. response options, it is a more credible
deterrent, and it allows us to not rely on the threat of large-
scale nuclear responses.
Now, the acting secretary went on to tell us that he
acknowledged that we're currently under analysis of
alternatives with respect to this missile and, of course, the
Nuclear Posture Review is ongoing.
And he indicated that he was not qualified to have an
opinion in either of those with respect to this missile, and
yet he felt that he was qualified to cancel it.
Now, it's always concerning when we have testimony, as we
have from the both of you, concerning China's and Russia's
modernization and when we have what is, basically, a
bureaucratic intervention in what the important processes are
in determining what our capabilities are going to be in the
future as we respond to our adversaries' capabilities.
Now, the acting secretary also affirmatively acknowledged
that he understood that his memorandum was untimely and that
the President [of the] United States was about ready to sit
down with Vladimir Putin and that it undermined the President
of the United States because as he's trying to engage Vladimir
Putin in treaty negotiations for arms control, certainly
Vladimir Putin doesn't care about arms control if we're going
to unilaterally be giving up platforms. And the acting
secretary on his own, as he says, without consulting anyone,
signaled to Russia and our adversaries and our allies that what
Admiral Richard says is an important component of our overall
capabilities is not going to be pursued in 2023.
Now, I've sent you a letter asking you to rescind this
because we have the testimony directly from the acting
secretary saying he's not qualified to make this decision, that
he understands it affects the United States standing and our
arms control negotiations posture, that he understands that
Admiral Richard says that it's an important capability that we
have, going forward, in the future.
Now, I'm not going to ask you today to commit to rescinding
this. But I do want to ask you, are you concerned about this
process that an acting secretary could issue a memorandum
canceling a very important nuclear weapons program without
consulting anyone in the Pentagon?
He testified here that he had not consulted anyone. You
both testified you were not consulted. Admiral Richard, who
says it's essential for the future capabilities and references
what China and Russia is doing for modernization, says he was
not consulted.
And the acting secretary himself acknowledges that it
undermines the President of the United States. Does that
concern you?
Secretary Austin. I'll make two points, very quickly. The
first point is the nuclear triad is very important to us. I'm
fully committed to this modernization.
The second point I would make is that we have--we have said
a number of times that we're going to conduct a Nuclear Posture
Review and in that review we're going to ensure that we have
the right balance and mix of forces and capabilities.
I think that any announcements or decisions prior--about
fiscal year 2023 prior to the termination of that review or
completion of that review is premature.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I really do
appreciate it.
General Milley, I want to thank you for your service. I did
on the phone yesterday. I think your credibility is incredibly
important to both--for our allies and our adversaries. Do you
believe Ukraine deserves lethal weapons support from the United
States?
General Milley. I do, and we have provided lethal weapons
in the past. But they're lethal weapons for defensive purposes
only.
Mr. Turner. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again
to both witnesses.
And Secretary Austin, you know, I just wanted to follow up
one point, which is--and I'm not going to ask you to comment on
it, but the budget did come over later than normal.
But I think it's important to remember that the transition
team had an unprecedented level of lack of cooperation in terms
of getting into the building and sitting down and really using
November and December and early January as an opportunity to
get a head start on the budget process.
And to me, you know, just common sense tells us that that's
one of the reasons why we're sort of a little late this year.
But, again, this committee is going to work hard to make sure
that our mark proceeds and we're going to do everything we can
to get regular order.
Both of you have talked and the service chiefs in the last
couple of weeks have stressed the importance of deterring
pacing threats to our Nation, particularly China and Russia.
The fiscal year 2022 budget includes a very noticeable
strong boost and investment in the Navy's undersea force, which
General Milley alluded to briefly earlier here: attack subs,
the Columbia ballistic sub program, and R&D for the follow-on
to the Virginia program.
Can you, Mr. Secretary and General, just sort of talk about
how that undersea priority aligns with the goal to match the
pacing threat in the Indo-Pacific region as well as increased
Russian submarine activity in the North Atlantic and the
Arctic?
Secretary Austin. Yeah, first of all, we have the most
dominant naval force on the face of the planet, and a key piece
of that is, you know, what our--a key piece of that capability
is what our submarine force brings to the--to the table. It is
absolutely relevant to the future fight. It is necessary. And
so I think our investments here are well placed.
And I'll leave it at that.
General Milley. Congressman, I would say that relevant to a
future fight a couple of things to consider. Survivability;
small, small is better. Dispersal. And submarines by their
nature are extraordinarily survivable. They are very lethal and
they are one of the significant asymmetric advantages the
United States has.
We have an incredible submarine force and it is probably
the most lethal weapon on the battlefield in some future
operating environment. So continued investment in subs is well
worth it.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you. And again, I've been
on Seapower [Subcommittee] for 15 years. This year's budget
there's--it's unmatched in terms of the proposed spending
levels and I think it's worthy to, again, share that point.
The number one acquisition authority, which both Admiral
Gilday and I think even General Milley and others over the
years has said is the Columbia program, which is recapitalizing
the sea-based leg of our triad. I was actually at EB [Electric
Boat] on Monday and caught up with the program there. They are
now at 85 percent design completion as construction begins.
That is an unprecedented level of design completion in a
shipbuilding program, which is a way of debugging the program
to get the design done and make sure then you just follow the
requirements and stay within budget that's there.
In 2015, this committee enacted the National Sea-Based
Deterrence Fund, which was recognizing the bow wave of spending
that Columbia was going to bring with it, and it set up, again,
sort of special authorities for multiyear production for
materials, for different components of the program.
It has saved millions of dollars and CBO [Congressional
Budget Office] has validated that. However, I would just note,
and I think Mr. Wittman would agree on this, is that it really
has been underutilized by the Pentagon, and we, in this year's
mark, are going to continue to pursue other opportunities to
get savings and efficiencies through the National Sea-Based
Defense Fund.
I've talked to Under Secretary Hicks and Mr. Stefany about,
you know, these opportunities that are there. But, again,
there's no time to waste in terms of getting this program
complete.
I know, General Milley, you took a rain check to come up
and visit the South Yard where the production is. It's eye-
watering when you come up and, hopefully, you'll join us soon
to sort of see this very important program for our country.
General Milley. I will do that, Congressman.
Mr. Courtney. Great. And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Chairman Smith, I received a study by a retired
commander of Air Force Space Command and NORAD [North American
Aerospace Defense Command]/NORTHCOM [U.S. Northern Command] and
another lieutenant general saying that the Air Force never
fully considered keeping Space Command in its current location,
and doing so would save over a billion dollars and save 7
years.
And I'd ask unanimous consent to place this into the
record.
The Chairman. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 110.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Secretary Austin, this Monday, the Taliban seized control
of a key district of Kunduz province in the north of
Afghanistan, and it's the latest in a series of recent
battlefield victories after peace talks have stalled.
Dozens of districts have been taken over by the Taliban
since May 1st when NATO began withdrawing, and you've said that
you, quote, ``Were looking at the situation every day with a
fresh set of eyes to see if, you know, the pace we are setting
is the appropriate pace,'' unquote.
So given the accelerating pace of Taliban victories and
control of key districts since we have been withdrawing since
May 1st, how are things going?
I mean, is that an--is our withdrawal at an appropriate
pace when they're picking up all these districts around the
country?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you.
We are focused on and the task that we have been--that we
have at hand is to conduct our retrograde in a safe, orderly,
and responsible fashion. We have developed a very detailed plan
to do that and we have accomplished the task according to plan
thus far and really provided for the safety of not only our
forces but our allies as well, and we'll remain focused on
that.
Mr. Lamborn. And as--well, as a follow-up on that. None of
us want to see a bloodbath after we withdraw unless--you said
there'll be a small presence guarding diplomatic personnel. But
none of us want to see a bloodbath against women and children,
in particular, or against former U.S. supporters like
translators.
So how are we going to prevent that? I mean, how will the
over-the-horizon process work, which I'm kind of skeptical
about?
Secretary Austin. So I would just point out to you on the
over-the-horizon piece, we're doing over-the-horizon now. We
don't have very much ISR on the ground in Afghanistan. It's
coming from the Gulf countries, and our fighter support is also
coming from either our platforms at sea or from the Gulf
countries as well.
So we can do that. We have been doing it, and we're doing
it very effectively. What we'd like to do, going forward, is
shorten the legs that we're required to utilize by getting an
agreement with one of the neighboring countries to base some of
our ISR in one of those countries.
But, you know, we're doing that effectively now. So it is,
it is not only possible, it is what we're doing.
In terms of taking care of women and girls in Afghanistan,
let me also at the very top say I really appreciate the
bipartisan support that we have seen for this, and I would also
point to you that--and you've mentioned this--that our plan is
to maintain an embassy there and through the embassy we'll
continue to work programs that are focused on women and girls.
And I would defer to Secretary Blinken to really outline
that. I don't want to speak for him.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you. And we all do bipartisanly
share that--those concerns. Is it at all possible to keep
Bagram Air Force Base?
General Milley. Could I make a comment, Secretary.
So a couple quick comments here on Bagram. Bagram is not
necessary tactically or operationally for what we're going to
try to do here with Afghanistan. Consolidate on Kabul with--in
support of their government.
To back up a little bit on the momentum of the Taliban, so
to speak, there is 81 district centers that have--that are
currently, we think, are underneath Taliban control. That's out
of 419 district centers. There's no provincial capital that is
underneath Taliban control and there's 34 of those.
It is true that the Taliban are sniping at and picking off
outposts, et cetera, and they have seized some district
centers. Sixty percent of the 81 were seized last year and the
others since--in the last 2 months or so.
So yes, we're concerned. We're watching it. But there's a
300,000-plus-or-minus military force, Afghanistan army and
police force, and it is their job to defend their country.
We're going to continue to--we have a new relationship----
The Chairman. Again, I do apologize. The gentleman's time
has expired.
General Milley. I will--I owe you a better answer. I'll get
you one in writing, if that's okay.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 121.]
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Garamendi is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Austin, General, thank you very much for your
service, for your testimony today. A couple of things I'd like
to get into.
I think the U.S. is spending $770 billion, more or less;
China about $250 billion; India $73 billion; Russia $61
billion. Just proportions here to keep in mind.
The question really is how are we spending it and are we
spending it the most effective way possible.
General, you said the things--in answer to Mr. Rogers'
question you said the things that concern you most are cyber,
subs, new weapons such as hypersonic, space, and AI, artificial
intelligence.
However, all of you want to maintain the triad, which will
be a trillion-plus over the next 15 years or so, 20 years
maybe. One element of that is the GBSD [Ground Based Strategic
Deterrent], the replacement of the Minuteman III. The reality
is the Minuteman III can be life-extended.
If we were to pause the GBSD for 12 to 15 years, during
which time the Minuteman III could serve the same purpose and
serve it well, can save somewhere north of $37 billion in the
next 10 years.
If you had $37 billion, which one of those unfunded
priorities would you spend it on? Cyber? Subs? New weapons?
Hypersonic? Long-range fires? Space security? Artificial
intelligence? What would you do with $37 billion, which is
available if we made a decision to pause the GBSD?
Secretary Austin.
Secretary Austin. Yeah. So the evaluation of the GBSD is
something that we will do as a part of or in the context of the
Nuclear Posture Review, and we'll take a deliberate and earnest
look at where we are and where we need to go in the future.
I think no matter what funds you have available, and I
appreciate the question, it's always a question of kind of rank
ordering the capabilities that we need in light of the threat
that we're facing, and that would be deliberate work with the
services to make sure that, you know, we are meeting the most
pressing need.
General Milley. Congressman, thanks for the question.
I would not recommend taking that money away and putting it
elsewhere. The recapitalization of the entire triad to include
the GBSD is critical to our Nation's security, and delay of 12
to 15 years, you'll have a gap. You'll have a gap in the land-
based leg, according to the reports and the studies I've seen.
I'll get with you offline and go through it from a
technical standpoint and get the experts in, but what I've been
briefed is in order to make sure there is no gap, we need to
continue the investment in the GBSD without delay.
Mr. Garamendi. I'll take advantage of that offline/online,
formal/informal, whichever way you want to do it. But I think
the facts are not clear.
General Milley. Okay. Okay.
Mr. Garamendi. I think the facts are quite clear that we
could pause the GBSD and be secure with the Minuteman III as it
is life extended over that period of time, and there's $37
billion available there.
Could you describe the Pacific initiative? War games we
have mentioned many times here. The question I want to raise is
can we sustain the fight in the Pacific? Do we have the
necessary transport?
General Milley. So from a military standpoint can we
sustain the fight in the Pacific against China, and I think
what we're talking about is a war against China. I think a war
against China would be an enormously expensive undertaking in
terms of all measures, and I would be concerned about the
ability to sustain a long-term conflict. The idea, though, is
to deter conflict and to keep great power competition at
competition and not get it into conflict.
But if we had a war with China, sustaining a fight would be
a significant challenge. There's no question about it.
Secretary Austin. I would just add on there, sir, that we
would look to prosecute that fight in a much different fashion,
and I know that you worked your way through all of this,
distributed, resilient capabilities, five domains. And so it's
a different look.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Hartzler is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Secretary Austin, our aircraft carriers are in high demand
and I understand that you're having to make difficult decisions
about where to send them. Already this year, two carriers have
undertaken double-pump deployments. That means the service
lives on our tactical aviation aircraft are being drawn down
even more rapidly than previously planned.
The Navy currently has a strike fighter shortfall of 49
aircraft. Despite this, the budget request has proposed to
shift procurement dollars from building the new Block III Super
Hornets into development of the next-generation replacement
aircraft, which is not slated to have initial operating
capability until the 2030s.
So taking into consideration the operations tempo of our
carrier fleet demanded by our security environment, the strike
fighter shortfall, possible attrition of aircraft, F-35C costs,
and the likelihood of the next-generation air dominance
schedule could continue to slip to the right, are you concerned
about having sufficient tactical aviation fleet to deter and
respond to China in the near term?
Secretary Austin. The short answer is I believe that we'll
have, if we stay on pace and invest in the things that we want
to invest in, we'll have the right capabilities to match our
strategy, going forward, and our--and support our operating
concepts.
Again, I think that you have to make decisions to invest in
future capabilities, as we discussed this morning, and we have
worked with the services very closely and carefully to identify
what those requirements are.
Mrs. Hartzler. I think it provides too much operational
risk in the near term and we need to reexamine that, and I'm
going to be working to try to get some more F-18s in this
year's budget because I believe there's too much a shortfall
that we have right there.
But I want to change topics and just say how much I
appreciate our men and women in uniform, and I believe that
they are absolute heroes. They should be respected and
encouraged in every way, and I'm very concerned about the
recent order that you have conducted regarding looking at so-
called extremism.
And I have sent you two letters, Mr. Secretary, asking for
the definition of what the Department of Defense views as
extremism and have not heard back from you yet.
And so could you just share with me, does the Department of
Defense have a clear definition of extremism?
Secretary Austin. A couple of comments on this--on this
issue.
First of all, I think you've heard me say that--on a number
of occasions that I believe that 99.9 percent of our troops are
focused on the right things, embracing the right values each
and every day.
Small numbers of people can in this--in this area can have
outsized impact on our organization. And so we want to make
sure that we're providing the right climate, the right
environment for our troops to work and live in.
We are not--we are focused on extremist behavior, not what
people think or political ideas or religious ideas, but
extremist behavior.
Mrs. Hartzler. So do you have a definition of what
extremism is and what that behavior is?
Secretary Austin. Again, we're focused on behavior.
Mrs. Hartzler. Well, you had a stand-down, and you had a
pause over the entire military for an entire day to do training
to talk about this, and you don't have a definition yet of what
the purpose was and what extremism is?
Secretary Austin. The purpose was to help--to have a
discussion with our troops and our leaders on the issue of
extremism.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay.
Secretary Austin. And that was very productive. And, again,
we were focused on those behaviors that don't--that are not in
congruence with our values in the military.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. And you have ordered that there be
this commission and have a review, and I guess I just want a
little more information. We're going to--you're setting up and
proposing a new screening capability, ongoing continuous
vetting of our men and women in uniform, and you're going to
develop a policy to expand user activity.
So what specifically would you be screening for? So as--if
you set up this screening of our military members, what would
be--what are you screening for?
Secretary Austin. Our screening is focused on screening
those applicants that are coming into the military. We want to
make sure that we're bringing in the right--the right type of
people, quality of people.
Mrs. Hartzler. So if someone says that they're for
President Trump, would that be viewed as extremism?
Secretary Austin. As I said earlier, this is not about
politics. I want our troops to participate in our political
system.
Mrs. Hartzler. Well, I'm just saying----
Secretary Austin. That's what they're fighting to defend
and but I will also say that we will continue to be a diverse--
a diverse and inclusive organization. That's what the United
States military is all about.
Mrs. Hartzler. So I would just encourage us not to infringe
on our liberties.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired and--sorry,
time has expired.
Ms. Speier is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To both of you, thank you so much for your outreach. I want
to say to you, Secretary Austin, you--we talked some months
ago. You're a man of your word. And, excuse me, I am deeply
grateful for the statement you put out yesterday. You are
creating a profound transformation in the military, as we
address sexual assault and sexual harassment. So thank you.
I want to ask you, I am deeply concerned about the suicide
rate in the military right now. There have been 10 suicides in
Alaska already this year. There was a 30 percent increase in
suicides last year over the year before, and I would like to
recommend to you, much like you did with sexual assault and
sexual harassment, is to stand up a commission to look at what
we should be doing to address this, I think, frightening
situation. But that won't be my question.
I want to ask you about the climate surveys. We spend a lot
of time, a lot of money, on climate surveys, and what we found
out in the Fort Hood Independent Review Committee was that they
were not even looked at.
So what steps are you taking, moving forward, to make sure
not only are the commanders on the ground there looking at
these climate surveys each year, but that those above them, the
senior leadership, is looking at them as well?
Secretary Austin. First of all, let me thank you personally
and thank the committee as well for all that you have done to
remain focused on the issue of sexual assault, sexual
harassment, and the resources that you continue to provide to
make sure that we don't lose focus. We truly appreciate your
support. The survivors appreciate your commitment and the
troops and our ranks appreciate that as well.
And we will get this in the right place and it will require
a lot of hard work, a lot of commitment and dedication, and it
will require resources.
And so I would ask that you continue to support us as we
take this on.
The--could you repeat the last part of the question there?
I kind of lost----
Ms. Speier. Climate surveys.
Secretary Austin. Climate surveys. Yeah.
So one of the things that the Independent Review Commission
recommended to us is that we take a harder look at what we're
doing with climate surveys, that they be current, that they--
that the leadership pay attention to what's going on with them,
and that we refine the surveys to make sure that we're asking
the right questions in surveys.
And so we will remain sighted on this, and I would agree
with you, they only work if you use the information that's in
them.
General Milley. If I could make a comment, Congresswoman.
The climate surveys need to be reviewed by the commanders
at least two levels up. Previously, years gone by, Fort Hood is
an example, they weren't. There were reasons for that because
we thought it was best to be used only by the commander. Give
free help and feedback to the commander, and then they would
take appropriate action. That didn't work. So now what we need
to do is shift gears and make sure those climate surveys are
personally reviewed by commanders at least two levels up on all
their subordinates.
Ms. Speier. And you're going to do that at all
installations?
General Milley. Everywhere. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines,
Space Force, at all echelons.
Ms. Speier. So General, let me ask you about OPTEMPO
[operating tempo].
We had a conversation just earlier this week about it. It
appears that the OPTEMPO has really had a profound effect on
our service members. I think it's starting to impact retention,
and as I mentioned to you at the time, one of the spouses at
one of our installations had said to me that she was concerned
every night when she came home because she was afraid she was
going to see her husband hanging in the shower.
What steps are we taking to make sure that the training we
do is necessary and appropriate?
General Milley.
General Milley. The training of units is a commander's
responsibility and, again, two levels up, commanders routinely
develop their training plans, back-brief them, and get them
approved, and they are tied directly to war plans to ensure
that the training is focused on the readiness and the
capability of the force to execute those tasks for which
they're required in accordance with the various war plans.
So it's a very focused level of effort. Has been for years
and they still are. The broader question is OPTEMPO, and
OPTEMPO is directly related to the size of the force.
As the OPTEMPO came down from the peak of the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq, so did the size of the force. So the
relative OPTEMPO in any given unit, especially special
operations forces which was mentioned earlier, still remains
high. It's a big concern. It impacts all kinds of things to
include suicides. So that's the key metric is the OPTEMPO----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired. We will
get one more in, and then we're going to take our break. So Mr.
Scott is recognized, and when he is done we'll take a brief
break.
Mr. Scott is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I want you to know I support--coming out of
Afghanistan one of the things that is on I think every member
of this committee's mind is what's going to happen with special
access visas for interpreters.
And while I don't expect you to necessarily speak in this
setting about that, I do hope that there's progress in the
right direction with regard to the special access visas, and I
do hope that--that just needs--it's just got to be done.
And one other thing that I would mention is with regard to
our troops, I do think that we should look at making internet
service similar to water on bases for our troops, just make
internet service a basic utility. It does not sound like that
big of a deal.
But if we're able to save our troops $50 or $60 or $70 a
month, whatever they're having to pay for that internet access,
it makes a big difference to--especially to our younger
enlisted corps.
One other comment would be after spending time with some of
your ODA [Operational Detachment Alpha] teams in Africa, this
is not a DOD mission, but I do think it is a--would be a State
Department mission or perhaps another State Department's
mission, the French State Department, potentially. But when we
bring these troops in and we have them for 24 months, and they
come in with an eighth grade education, I do not think they
should leave with an eighth grade education.
I think that while we're training them to fight and when we
have got them 7 days a week, 24 hours a day, we need to have
somebody trying to educate those troops, that we haven't simply
trained them to fight and release them back on the street and
potentially turn them into the foes of the future, if you will.
Those are just a couple of things I wanted to mention
before I hit on a specific weapon system.
And Secretary Austin, General Brown and I have met at
Robins Air Force Base. I know that you have called for the
draw--the President has asked for the drawdown of four of the
J-STAR [Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar] aircraft from
the 116th.
I support this retirement, given the commitment at Robins
Air Force Base in the ABMS [Advanced Battle Management System]
mission. I do have concerns about the ground moving target
indicator-indication [GMTI] capability.
And are you convinced that the Air Force can provide the
GMTI capabilities with the existing fleet?
Secretary Austin. I am convinced that the Air Force is--
continues to upgrade and modernize its fleet of sensors to
ensure that we have the capability that we'll need going
forward. And I'm also, sir, very encouraged that--to know that
General Brown has worked with you in terms of what the future
is for that base and other capabilities in the fleet there.
Mr. Scott. Well, I would like to invite both of you to
Robins Air Force Base to review the ABMS mission and the good
work that's going on down there. A lot of good things--a lot of
good things are happening.
General Milley, I mean, we have all talked about China a
little bit. This spring, the SOUTHCOM [U.S. Southern Command]
commander, Admiral Faller, told our committee that our
interagency partners and the United States pointed out that
Chinese money laundering is the number one underwriting source
for transnational criminal organizations. This is in,
obviously, Central and South America.
Our AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command] commander, General
Townsend, testified that illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing by the Chinese Communist Party is the primary
contributor to a growing food crisis that will further drive
instability in West Africa.
So my question is, how do we counter this ongoing malign
activity from China around the world, and what are our partners
that share our interests and our values doing to help us combat
that malign activity?
General Milley. The issue of China, obviously, is not just
a Western Pacific issue. It's a global issue. China is a
massive economy. They're developing a first-rate military and
they are expanding their ambitions and aspirations globally,
not just regionally.
That includes South America, as Admiral Faller said, and
Africa and elsewhere. And we are working closely with our
allies and partners in all of those regions to counter any sort
of great power competition that they have in mind in each of
those regions.
So we're doing that, as we speak, with all of the countries
that are our allies and partners.
That network of allies and partners around the world is one
of the single most important things we can do as a nation is to
maintain it, keep it robust, and that will help in this
competition with respect to China.
Mr. Scott. Gentlemen, thank you for your time and your
service. I'm extremely concerned that China is becoming much
more aggressive, not just with regard to the military buildup,
the treatment of the other people----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
And with that, we will take a brief recess. My goal is to
reconvene at 11:45, and when we do, Mr. Norcross is up.
So we'll take a brief recess and we'll be back shortly.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. We will reconvene as soon as everyone can get
back to their places here, which will take just a few seconds
and we'll start back up again.
I will remind members at 2 o'clock the Secretary has a hard
stop. We'll do our best to get as many people in between now
and then. But we will stop at 2 o'clock.
All right. We will convene. And with that, I will get
someone to shut that door. Then we will call on Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman, and to Secretary Austin,
General Milley, thank you for your service. Very much
appreciate you coming by today.
A number of issues that have been illuminated over the past
year, particularly with the pandemic, is our industrial base.
Certainly, to all of those who continue to work during the
pandemic, incredibly helpful for us and our country to continue
to move.
But one thing it has done is really illuminate some of the
problems we're having with our industrial base and the supply
chain. As the chairman mentioned, we have a task force on
critical supply chain that had pointed out a number of issues,
whether it's semiconductors, rare earth, propellants,
explosives.
But one of the things that was somewhat of a surprise to
the committee was the workforce, and that goes hand in glove
with the industrial base. What is the Department doing or plan
on doing for these supply chains to get more visibility so we
don't get caught shorthanded on some of the surprises that were
put upon us during the pandemic.
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir. Let me say up front
that I absolutely agree with you that, you know, making sure
that we have sound and protected supply chains is critical.
Supply chain vulnerability winds up being a national
security vulnerability. I certainly appreciate the President's
leadership in this, as he has emphasized this over and over
again.
In this budget, you'll see that we are investing $341
million to partner with U.S. companies to make sure that we're
doing our part to boost defense industrial base activity and
onshore some of the--some of the supply chain activities that
have been offshored in the past.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you for that, because, obviously, we
have trusted partners that we care very much about. But I think
we can move from 55 percent where we are, incrementally and
predictably, so that supply chains become more secure.
And that brings me to my second question, in particular,
about the Navy's long-term aircraft inventory plan. We have no,
in this year's President's budget, the F/A-18E and F jets that
have previously been focused on.
The loss of a critical supply chain in these F-18s is very
much in question not only from what we need in terms of our
tactical force but the minimum sustaining rates. Can you talk
about the issue with the F-18, why we are dropping back on that
and the problems it might cause?
Secretary Austin. What I can say, sir, is that we continue
to invest in those capabilities and technologies that we think
will be relevant in the future and make sure that we have
sufficient lifespan in those capabilities going forward.
So--and it calls for us to make tradeoffs. And so as we
invest in one type of aircraft or capability, we'll have to
either divest of some current capability or not reinvest in
that capability.
Mr. Norcross. No, incredibly important. But it's also
keeping that industrial base alive, which we all agree with
that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. DesJarlais is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
General Milley and Secretary Austin, for your service.
I'd like to start with General Milley. We know from Admiral
Richard's testimony before the committee that the United
Kingdom has reached out and expressed concerns about the United
States adopting a no first use or sole purpose policy.
I personally heard the same from the Polish ambassador; the
French, Japanese, South Koreans have also expressed similar
concerns about the U.S. possibility of changing the declaratory
policy to no first use [NFU] or sole purpose. Have you heard
similar concerns from the allies that adopting a NFU or sole
purpose policy would be destabilizing?
General Milley. I have frequently engaged with allies and
partners of both Asia, Europe, all over the place, and that
particular issue has not risen of a particular concern with
respect to my counterparts that I've dealt with.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. In April, Admiral Richard further
testified that U.S. adoption of a no first use policy would
remove a level of ambiguity that has deterrence value and that
such a move would have a negative effect on the extended
deterrence and assurance to our allies. Would you agree with
his assessment?
General Milley. Yeah, absolutely. I think the President of
the United States should always have as many options as
possible, and that's my position.
Dr. DesJarlais. He further told us that available evidence
indicates that Russia and China will not view such a shift in
U.S. policy as credible. Do you agree with Admiral Richard on
that as well?
General Milley. I have not talked to Admiral Richard on
that specific point. I would have to get with the intel
community to determine if their assessment was what the view of
Russia and China would be on a declaration. But, again, maximum
options always available to the President is my position.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. So not to beat a dead horse. But in
short, the U.S. declaring a sole purpose or NFU policy would be
destabilizing, alienate allies, undermine our extended
deterrence guarantees, and would have no impact on Russia or
China's calculus.
So, General Milley, given all this, what's your best
military advice as to whether the U.S. should adopt an NFU or
sole purpose nuclear declaratory policy?
General Milley. My view--you're asking for my personal best
military advice--is to maintain all options available to the
President of the United States at all times. So I would not
recommend making a declaration of no first use. It is a topic
for which I think would take away an option for the President.
Always maintain options for the President.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, General Milley.
Secretary Austin, same question to you. Given the corrosive
impact that such a change in policy would have on our alliances
and extended deterrence guarantees as well as the minimal
impact on Russia and China's nuclear calculus, what is your
best military advice on changing nuclear declaration policy
or--to no first use or sole purpose?
Secretary Austin. You know, I absolutely agree with the
Chairman that our goal is to provide as many credible options
to the President as possible. And I would also say, though,
that this is a policy issue and one that, you know, the
administration will sort through, sort out, going forward as it
does its strategic reviews in the future.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And Secretary Austin, shifting
topics, I would like you to provide--you can have the rest of
my time to describe why it is so critical that Congress work to
quickly reimburse the National Guard for the over $500 million
spent on its mission here at the Capitol earlier this year and
what impact on readiness could result if these funds are not
returned in a timely manner.
Secretary Austin. So I'll just make a brief comment. The
Chairman might want to comment on this as well. I think you've
heard me say before that if we don't resource the Guard in--
what will happen is it'll begin to erode readiness. It will
disallow them to conduct their training in accordance with the
schedules that they should be on.
And so this is very, very important to us and I would
encourage you and ask for your help in providing those
resources.
General Milley. And I would add to that, Congressman, I
would ditto what the Secretary just said; $500 million in the
grand scheme of a $715 billion budget may not seem like a lot,
but to the National Guard that is a lot. So reimbursing them
for their efforts, their great efforts. And this is also a year
in which the Guard has been doing COVID, they're overseas.
There's a very high OPTEMPO in the Guard. So that $500
million is very important. We'd like to see it reimbursed for
the National Guard in order to maintain their training and
their standards.
Dr. DesJarlais. Duly noted. Thanks to you both
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gallego [presiding]. Thank you, Representative.
Secretary Austin, earlier this year, we discussed our
shared interests for strong consistent civilian oversight of
the Armed Forces. As chairman of the Intelligence and Special
Operations Subcommittee, I appreciate your commitment to ensure
civilian leadership of our special operation forces with the
restructuring of the ASD(SO/LIC) to include resourcing and
staffing the office consistent with its oversight
responsibilities.
Can you please highlight the steps you, alongside Deputy
Secretary Hicks, are taking to increase civilian oversight of
the SOF community to ensure an agile and lethal force ready for
strategic competition, particularly with regards to acquisition
and diversity?
Secretary Austin. Thank you. You may have heard me say
earlier that there's a direct reporting chain now linked to me
and, you know, that secretary will sit in on all of--all of my
key leader meetings, report to me routinely on the--on the
ongoing efforts in the Department, and we'll discuss what we
cited on those service-like requirements and needs for the
special operations community.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Secretary. More than 18 months ago,
nine combatant commanders articulated an immediate need for the
intelligence community to help combat the provocative actions
of China and Russia in the public domain.
The Director of National Intelligence establishing a malign
foreign influence response center that will lead to
coordination and integration of intelligence related to foreign
malign influence.
What changes are you directing within the Department to
help address this urgent requirement?
Secretary Austin. We have had--the Chairman and I have
had--first of all, I do believe that it is an important issue.
All of the combatant commanders have identified a need for
resourcing to address this issue.
You know, as we have talked to the combatant commanders, we
want to make sure that we're synchronizing our efforts and that
we're putting the resources in the right place. So this is the
thing that we're getting our arms around a little bit better.
But I would say up front that we will resource the
combatant commanders based upon their requests. But we want to
make sure that we're using those dollars to get best value, and
I'm confident that we'll be able to.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Secretary.
For over 20 years, the SOF community has been focused on
anti-terrorism operations in permissive environments. But the
growing threat posed by China and Russia underscore the need to
pivot our focus to the great power competition.
Can you expand on how this budget proposal addresses the
need to refocus special operations to combat near-peer
adversaries?
Secretary Austin. Well, I think, you know, you've seen the
special operations forces begin--first of all, they have
incredible capability across a spectrum of activity. Whereas we
have been focused on transnational terrorism to a greater
extent in the past, they, you know, over the last several years
have began to lean into great power competition, develop
capabilities and resources that will be a bit more relevant to
that near-peer competition.
As you look at what we have invested in, you know,
throughout the budget here in terms of the major items, you
know, research, development, and technology, you know, long-
range fires, lethal Air Force, that sort of stuff, all of that
really kind of contributes to the overall effort there, and the
special operations forces is a part of that, obviously.
But we're setting the stage to make sure that not only
special ops but every other element on the battlefield can be--
can be effective. And again, we're emphasizing that this is--
this is competition across all domains, and not just--not just
land, air, and sea.
General Milley. Can I just add something, Congressman
Gallego, if I could?
Mr. Gallego. Go ahead, General.
General Milley. Training is the key here. SOCOM is
reorienting the training of the special operations community
for higher end fighting against China and all of the core
fundamental tasks of unconventional wars, strategic
reconnaissance, and the entire list of core tasks, and it's
really got to do with training and getting them aligned with
the various war plans against the pacing threat of China.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you.
Gentlemen, in the remaining time that we have, last year
Congress appropriated $169 million to the Baltic Security
Initiative to increase military aid and cooperation with the
Baltics.
Do you have an update on how the Department is spending
this money? Chairman Milley or Secretary Austin.
General Milley. Yeah. With respect to the Baltics, we are
doing exercises. We are doing, back to special operations
forces, there's a lot of special operations things going on in
there. There's train, advise, assist with them. And we are--as
part of the European Defense Initiative, part of that is
exercising in the Baltics.
So under the purview of EUCOM [U.S. European Command], all
of that is happening. So that's where that money is going.
Secretary Austin. The President just recently met with the
three key senior leaders of the Baltics area in Brussels at
the--in the margins of the summit, the NATO summit there. So--
--
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Secretary. Thank you, General.
And I now recognize the ranking member to the ISO
[Intelligence and Special Operations] Subcommittee,
Representative Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chairman.
First of all, I want to kind of double tap what I think Mr.
DesJarlais said--Dr. DesJarlais.
It's important that we get those dollars back to the Guard
and Reserve so that they don't miss drills.
You know, we have our 155 BCT [Brigade Combat Team] out of
Mississippi that has done COVID response. We put shots in arms.
We have done--we have been the logistical backbone for our
entire State. They're at NTC [National Training Center] in a
rotation right now.
And then those guys and girls are going to come back and
we're going to tell them in August or September, we can't pay
you for drills so stay home, and we're going to lose that
readiness that we have been building.
So please help us get those dollars back to the Guard and
Reserve.
Secretary Austin. You have my commitment that we will
advocate when and wherever possible. And just to dovetail on
what you just said there, I am absolutely proud of what our
Guard has done over the last year especially, and they have
been a significant factor in our ability to begin to bend the
curve with respect to COVID. And now we're entering the
firefighting season and the hurricane season as well. They will
continue to be----
Mr. Kelly. Absolutely. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And now I want to talk a little bit about TRICARE and
having been through this process myself, we have our Guard and
Reserve which don't have TRICARE except when they're deployed
or there's a cost associated with it, which is greater.
You have certain members, Federal technicians, which are
not allowed to get TRICARE. It is very difficult going on and
off of deployments, especially as much as we're being used, and
not having continuity of health care.
You agree that the primary readiness issue for Guard and
Reserve is having health issues, whether it's teeth issues,
dental, or other. What are we doing at DOD to make sure that we
have continuity of health care for our Guard and Reserve,
whether traditional or full time?
Secretary Austin. The healthy--the health, welfare, and
safety of our force is of utmost important to me, and I thank
you for the question. And I would welcome any initiative that
enables us to provide better health care, more efficient health
care, to all the components of our service.
The issue always is resources and so, you know, as you
know, currently, we are only resourced to do a certain amount
and I agree, the members of our--all the members of our Armed
Forces are important.
And if we make a decision that we are going to expand
services, certainly, we'll need to be resourced to do so----
Mr. Kelly. Thank you. I want to get on to the next one.
ISO, the intel, our special operations, the budget in
fiscal year 2021 was cut $495 million. The proposed cut this
year--or, it was $600 million cut from fiscal year 2020 and
2021, $495 million this year.
They're having to do more with less. As we shift to China
and Russia and our near-peer adversaries, we still have to do
the work that our special operators so often do, and many times
they're the only people who can do that.
What are we doing to make sure that we have them ready to
be in places like Africa, the Middle East, and those things
with these budget cuts? We're resourcing them less, but in
reality, we're asking them to do more with less.
Do you agree, Secretary Austin?
Secretary Austin. Well, I think when we look at the entire
picture, you know, we are--we are retrograding from
Afghanistan, as we speak. And that will create some
opportunities for us to shift some resources around.
But to your point, special operations forces, there is
always high demand and there's a very low density of these
elements, and we will need to make sure that they have the
resources they need to be successful. So we'll continue to work
that.
Mr. Kelly. And Secretary--I'm sorry, Chairman Milley, I'm
sorry. I've been--I traveled recently to the Middle East and
Africa, and in the Middle East specifically, and what--as we're
coming out of Afghanistan, we still have CENTCOM [U.S. Central
Command]. So I understand we will have less resources.
Many of our allies and partners in the region like our
presence there. So can you tell me what are we doing to build
the confidence in our allies and partners in the Middle East
and Europe and Africa that we're still going to be there as a
great partner, even though we're coming out of Afghanistan?
Because we have got some work, I think, with our allies and
partners to do there.
So Chairman Milley, if you can address that, please.
General Milley. Let me give you, in the interest of time,
Congressman, let me give you an answer for the record with some
details of what we're doing.
But, in general, for the CENTCOM AOR [area of
responsibility], the Middle East is important to the United
States. It's going to be important to us in the future. We are
looking at, under the direction of Secretary Austin, an entire
Global Posture Review. We have a lot of work left to do that,
to back-brief the Secretary on that.
But exercises, forward presence, bases, all of those things
and working closely with our allies and partners in all of the
regions you just mentioned. And I owe you an answer in writing.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 120.]
Mr. Kelly. Absolutely. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you. Mr. Moulton is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moulton. Secretary Austin and Chairman Milley, thank
you for your lifetimes of service and leadership to our
country.
As we withdraw from Afghanistan, we have not seen an
operational plan to save our brave Afghan partners and allies.
Now, I recognize that the Trump administration left you with no
plans and an even earlier withdrawal date, not to mention that
Trump's policy of banning Muslim immigrants would probably have
led him to abandon our allies in Afghanistan the same way he
abandoned our allies in Syria.
Nonetheless, all of this now falls on this administration.
We have 80 days until our formal withdrawal date. It takes 800
days or more to process a Special Immigrant Visa. So it's too
late for the Special Immigrant Visa process.
Secretary Austin, why have you not started an evacuation
yet?
Secretary Austin. Well, thanks for the question. And let me
say up front that I know this is a topic that's near and dear
to a number of people in this room who have served alongside
some of the interpreters and people who have helped us in the
past, and so this is--this is important to all of us.
We are working with the Department of State who has the
lead on this along with DHS [Department of Homeland Security]
to--as one part of a whole-of-government effort to address this
issue.
We are encouraging to move as quickly as we can, and we
stand ready to provide resources to accelerate this, if at all
possible--if it's possible, and it is possible.
And in some cases, they've shortened the timeline for--from
application to completion there. There's a number of people in
the pipeline. I am confident that at some--we'll begin to
evacuate some of those people soon.
But, again, I would defer to Secretary [of State] Blinken
to really outline what the----
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Secretary, I don't need to tell you this.
But these brave Afghan partners, these Afghan and American
heroes, people who we asked to risk their lives not just for
Afghanistan but for America because we had their backs, their
future is in your hands.
And this much is certain. The Taliban will kill them if
they can, and they will rape and murder their wives and kids
first, if they can.
Chairman Milley, if the service chiefs were ordered to
evacuate our Afghan allies today, is there a plan in place to
get that started immediately?
General Milley. We have the military capability to do
whatever is directed by the President of the United States with
respect to our allies and those that have worked with us. And I
consider it a moral imperative to take care of those that have
served along our side. We are prepared to execute whatever we
are directed.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Changing subjects. Secretary Austin, last week, General
Brown highlighted the importance of suicide prevention in his
opening statement and then committed to supporting the Brandon
Act later in the hearing, a bill that I introduced last week to
provide service members a mechanism to seek mental health
support if they are contemplating suicide.
However, we have received pushback from other elements
within DOD on the Brandon Act but no alternative suggestion for
how we can tackle this epidemic.
Are you personally comfortable with how DOD is managing
suicide prevention, given that we have lost more service
members to suicide last year than we did in combat? And are you
prepared to support efforts like the Brandon Act or present a
better alternative to address this?
Secretary Austin. I think this is a very important issue
and I am prepared to do whatever it takes to improve in this
area. This is a--this is something that I have personally been
swinging at for a long time as a part of a--one of the senior
leaders of the military.
And try as we may, we have not made the progress that we
need to make. There's a stigma associated with seeking help,
seeking mental health care, and we got to do more to remove
that stigma and we got to do more to provide adequate health
care to our troops.
So the answer to your question is you have my commitment
that I will continue to work this and I will tell you right now
that our service chiefs are absolutely focused on this and will
work with, you know, the greater community writ large to get
best practices and lessons learned so that we can get better at
this.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Grateful for your leadership, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallagher is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
Chairman Milley, last week in front of this committee, both
the CNO [Chief of Naval Operations] and the Commandant, General
Berger, concurred with Admiral Davidson's assessment that we
have a growing risk of a PLA [People's Liberation Army]
invasion of Taiwan within the next 6 years, which is an
alarming timeline.
My understanding is that you sort of publicly disagreed
with that timeline. I'd be curious to get your alternative
assessment and the justification for it. But, I mean, would you
agree with just the basic idea that the PLA's capability is
growing, that the unification of Taiwan with the mainland is a
legacy issue for General Secretary Xi and that this creates
problems for our deterrent posture in INDOPACOM?
General Milley. Yeah. So what Davidson and Aquilino and
others have said is that Chinese capability to invade and seize
the island of Taiwan is being accelerated to 2027, 6 years from
now. I don't dismiss that at all.
What I said was near term--in my definition, that's 1 to 2
years--I don't see China, they have--they could--they could
make decisions whatever they want to do. But I don't see it
happening right out of the blue. There's no reason for it, and
the cost to China far exceeds the benefit.
And President Xi and his military would do the calculation,
and they know that an invasion in order to seize an island that
big with that many people and the defensive capability the
Taiwanese have would be extraordinarily complicated and costly.
And at this point in time, near term, next 12, 24 months, I
don't--I'm not seeing indicators and warnings yet. Could it
happen 6 years from now, 8 years from now, 10 years, 20? Sure.
A lot of things can happen.
The Chinese are clearly building capability. There's no
question about that. They've been doing it for quite a while
and we're monitoring it very closely. And that gets back to
this budget. We need to continue to get this budget through,
get it done on time in order for us to keep pace with the
Chinese to stay ahead of them.
We want overmatch in order to deter a great power war and
stay at great power competition.
Mr. Gallagher. Recognizing our limitations to the format
we're in right now, just given your position and the time you
spent interacting with your counterparts in the region, is your
sense and understanding that there are--that to some extent,
the intentions of Xi himself and the party in general are
unknowable and a lot of things could change in the environment?
What is your basic sense of the priority that the CCP and
the PLA put on Taiwan and to what extent, as I said before,
it's bound up in Xi's personal legacy?
General Milley. I think both are true. I think the issue of
Taiwan and the unification of Taiwan with Mainland China, I
think that is a core--I said it before in previous testimony--
C-O-R-E, a core national security interest of China. And it's
also a core national security interest of the United States to
ensure that whatever happens with respect to Taiwan happens
peacefully, and we don't have a general conflict in the region
or globally.
So we support, you know, the--with the Taiwan Relations
Act, et cetera, for a peaceful resolution of the issue between
Taiwan and China.
Mr. Gallagher. And I completely agree with the sentiment
you just expressed about, and I think it's a shared goal on
this committee, of deterring such a conflict as one of our core
priorities because it would be messy, indeed, which is why
earlier this year INDOPACOM submitted to Congress a detailed
request for exercise funds, training ranges, military
construction, munitions, defensive Guam systems. But the
Pacific Deterrence Initiative [PDI], as requested by the
Department in this budget consisted of non-INDOPACOM-specific
list of procurement items including a destroyer, some jet
fighters, a logistics ship.
What caused the difference between the two versions of PDI?
Why were so many of the top needs identified in the Section
1251 report, that's INDOPACOM's report, mostly or completely
unfunded in the budget request?
Secretary.
Secretary Austin. Yes, our intent is to realize the intent
of Congress and resource PDI in accordance with, you know,
what's been laid out. I think there is some miscommunications
in terms of how things were [inaudible]. We're working with the
committees to try to--try to clarify that now and we'll
continue to do so.
But the intent is to make sure that we follow along with
Congress' intent with the PDI.
Mr. Gallagher. And that--I mean, in my remaining 25 seconds
I'm tempted to ask Mr. McCord a question only because he's
gotten off easy, I think.
But--and I don't have enough time for my Army end strength
question for the Chairman. So instead, I will--I will yield
back my 12 seconds and hope that somebody gets Mr. McCord on
the record.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Carbajal is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. McCord--I'm kidding. I want to thank you all for being
here today. Let me start with Secretary Austin.
I want to start by asking you about the Department of
Defense audit and financial accountability. Congress robustly
funds the DOD in order to defend the Nation and detour
conflict.
We also have a responsibility to our constituents to
conduct oversight and ensure that the funds are obligated
effectively and responsibly.
How important is the ongoing audit to your work as
Secretary and how is the Department using the results of the
audit to impact the budget process?
Secretary Austin. It is not only important, it's critical
and, you know, we're--we have made progress, a lot of progress
since I was last affiliated with the Department. There's still
work to be done, and we will move out on this as expeditiously
as possible and deliberately as possible to ensure that we get
a clean audit at some point, going forward, as quickly as we
can.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Secretary Austin, in the previous administration one of my
key concerns with the Department was the lack of transparency
to Congress in decision-making processes.
For example, many here in this committee were left with
more questions than answers when the Department announced its
decision to select Redstone Arsenal in Alabama as the permanent
headquarters for USSPACECOM [U.S. Space Command].
Looking forward, I hope you will commit to this committee
that the Department will be transparent in its decision making
so Congress and the public have full confidence that decisions
are made objectively and in the best interest of our national
security.
With that, I'm closely following the upcoming basing
decision process for the Space Force's STARCOM [Space Training
and Readiness Command] headquarters, as I believe Vandenberg
Space Force Base will be an ideal location to be the future
home for the Training and Readiness Command.
I know this process will be led by the Department of the
Air Force, but I believe leadership starts at the top. And I
urge you to work with the Air Force to ensure a transparent and
fair process.
That was more so a statement than a question, but I'd love
the reaction to that.
Secretary Austin. So in the first instance, you know that
that issue is under investigation by the IG [inspector general]
and there's also a GAO [Government Accountability Office] look
ongoing as well. So I won't have any comment on that for you.
I will say that my commitment to you is that we will remain
as transparent as possible on this and other issues, going
forward, and I will require that the services do the same.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. And just to conclude on that
point, it was pretty much a bipartisan sentiment about the
transparency and the need for more information about that. So
I'm glad the investigation is ensuing.
Lastly, Secretary Austin and General Milley, this committee
has been focused on addressing extremism in the ranks. I
appreciate the tone and the direction that I have seen and
heard from the service chiefs and civilian leaders.
But, clearly, more needs to be done to take that message at
the top and ensure it is received throughout the ranks. How
does this budget make necessary investments in initiatives that
seek to address extremism and also promote diversity?
Secretary Austin. There are provisions in the budget that
resource us to continue our efforts there to make sure that we
have the right staffing and that sort of business to provide
oversight. But this is accounted for in our budget.
Mr. Carbajal. General Milley.
General Milley. I agree it's accounted for in the budget.
Let me make a broader comment on extremism. The United States
military is committed to the idea that's America, and it's
embedded within our Constitution. And we are sworn at the risk
of our life, our limb, separation from our family, to defend
that Constitution no matter what. And there is no room in
uniform for anyone who doesn't subscribe to the values of the
United States of America.
And I know we're going through work groups, defining
extremism, checking out our Department of Defense instructions,
et cetera. But from private to general, there's no room for
extremist behavior in the United States military.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, General. With that, I'll yield
back.
Mr. McCord escaped again.
The Chairman. Mr. Gaetz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, why was Lieutenant Colonel Matthew Lohmeyer
relieved of his command?
Secretary Austin. It was a decision made by his--by his
chain of command and, typically, those decisions are made based
upon either having confidence or a lack of confidence.
This issue is under investigation by the IG and so I won't
comment any further on that.
Mr. Gaetz. In my previous discussions with service members
and particularly officers, I would hear about complaints over
parts not arriving on time, long deployments, and in my more
recent discussions with those officers, the number one issue
that they raised to me, with concern, often unable to speak
publicly for fear of the type of retribution that Lieutenant
Colonel Lohmeyer faced, they say that your stand-down regarding
extremism did not help our military and hurt the military.
And I want to share with you that perspective that it
caused service members to other-ize one another. It impaired
group cohesion, and interesting to me is that I've heard those
sentiments most frequently from units that are majority
minority that this was not particularly helpful.
So I wanted to give you the opportunity to maybe share with
us more specificity regarding the definitions that seem to be a
challenge when Mrs. Hartzler was asking questions.
How should the Department of Defense think about critical
race theory?
General Milley. Could I make a comment, Secretary?
Mr. Gaetz. I'm very limited on my time, General Milley.
General Milley. Well, I just want to make a comment that
the----
Mr. Gaetz. I know, but I've asked the question to Secretary
Austin.
Secretary Austin. I don't know what the issue of critical
race theory is and what the relevance here and with the
Department. We do not teach critical race theory. We don't--we
don't embrace critical race theory, and I think--I think that's
a spurious conversation. And so we are focused on extremist
behaviors and not ideology, not people's thoughts, not people's
political orientation. Behaviors is what we're focused on.
But one final point, and thanks for your anecdotal input,
but I would say that I have gotten 10 times that amount of
input, 50 times that amount of input, on the other side that
have said, hey, we're glad to have had the ability to have a
conversation with ourselves and with our leadership. And that's
what we need to make sure----
Mr. Gaetz. Again, reclaiming my time, Mr. Secretary.
It may be that you're receiving that input in the ratios
you describe, because it was your directive. It may be that
people are concerned about criticizing your decision because
Lieutenant Colonel Lohmeyer was not relieved of his command for
his actions. He was not relieved of his command because of poor
performance regarding his duties. He was relieved of his
command precisely because of his thoughts and because of his
critique of critical race theory.
It is particularly helpful that you have said that the
Department of Defense does not embrace critical race theory and
that you think the discussion is not appropriate. I would
suggest that it is the ideology that is not appropriate, and it
is particularly concerning to me that you have hired a critical
race theorist to give you advice on personnel matters, and that
person is Bishop Garrison.
And I would particularly observe that on July 27th, 2019,
Bishop Garrison tweeted regarding former President Trump,
``He's dragging a lot of bad actors out into the sunlight,
normalizing their actions.'' And here's the relevant part. ``If
you support the President, you support that there is no room
for nuance in this. There is no more. But I'm not like that
talk.'' And then he replies to his own tweet with what seems to
be a very ethnonationalist hashtag, #Black44.
Could you enlighten us as to what advice Mr. Garrison has
given you and are you concerned that while you testify publicly
to our committee that the Department doesn't embrace critical
race theory, you have hired someone who is precisely a critical
race theorist?
Secretary Austin. This is the first I've ever heard Mr.
Garrison be described as a critical race theorist. So this is
new, and I'm sure that he would----
Mr. Gaetz. Did you--did you review his tweets before you
hired him, personally?
Secretary Austin. Pardon me?
Mr. Gaetz. Did you review his tweets before you hired him?
Secretary Austin. I did not personally review his tweets.
Mr. Gaetz. I would just ask that maybe that would be
helpful. Is there anything you can share in just these final
seconds regarding any advice he's given you?
Secretary Austin. Let me--let me just share one other thing
that you brought up, Congressman, about the input that comes to
me.
You know, I trust my leadership, from top to bottom, that
they will give me fair and balanced and unvarnished input, and
for you to say that people are telling me what they want to--
what I want to hear, I get it, but I'm smart enough----
Mr. Gaetz. That does happen.
Secretary Austin. Yeah. You know, maybe they're telling you
what you want to hear.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, I don't know that they even know what I
want to hear.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Brown is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have only 5 minutes
and two questions. So at the midway mark, I may interrupt the
response to the first question.
Mr. Secretary, 2 years after President Truman desegregated
the Armed Forces, a commission--it was the Fahy Commission--
found, and I quote, that a ``policy of equality of treatment
and opportunity will make for a better Army, Navy, and Air
Force. It is right and just. It will strengthen the Nation,''
end of quote.
Today, while 19 percent of Active Duty service members are
Black, only two four-star generals and admirals are Black, and
there's a significant underrepresentation by race and gender, I
should add, in those career fields that experience higher
promotion rates to senior ranks.
To address this problem, last year bipartisan, this
Congress, required the Secretary, and today that's you, to
establish a mentor and career counseling program. I recently
requested information from the Under Secretary for Personnel
and Readiness on the program status. I found the response
wanting.
So the question is how are you implementing the provisions
of that program, and why are diversity and inclusion
initiatives such as those important to the Department?
Secretary Austin. Just one comment up front on the
importance of diversity, equity, and inclusion.
I would point out to you, Congressman, something that you
already know and that the United States military is the most
diverse organization in this country.
It represents citizens from all walks of life, all
ethnicities, and it is truly a diverse organization. I would
absolutely agree with you that the senior leadership should
look like those people that are--those troops that are in the
ranks, and a troop ought to be able to look up and say, I can
be a senior person. I can be that man or that woman at the top
of the totem pole or top of the pecking order at some point in
time.
It has provided the, you know, some of the best
opportunities for our young citizens of any organization in
America. In terms of mentorship, your specific question, I
absolutely believe in the power of mentorship and embrace that,
and we need to do better, and you have my commitment that we
will do better.
And so we stand ready to work with you and answer any
additional questions that you have.
Mr. Brown. I appreciate that, Mr. Secretary, so we'll
follow up. But I do want to get to the second question. The
Fahy Commission talked about treatment, not just opportunities.
So I'm very concerned about the disparate racial treatment that
minority service members experience under the Uniform Code of
Military Justice.
A May 2019 GAO study that this Congress directed found that
Black service members across all services more than one and a
half times likely to be tried by court martial for the same
conduct as white service members. It's clear there is a general
failure on the part of commanders in exercising their broad
discretion to refer cases to court martial.
My questions are why are the commanders woefully failing
our Black service members who enlist at higher rates than any
other demographic group in our country, and how do we fix the
system so that there is truly equal justice under the Uniform
Code of Military Justice, which does not exist today? That's my
question. Thank you.
Secretary Austin. Congressman, thanks for flagging a
question there. This is an important issue and I think one that
requires more and detailed study. I would just say that the
point that I made earlier in terms of making sure that we have
the right representation in senior ranks is very, very
important and contributes to making this issue better or
improving this issue.
Mr. Brown. And I'm going to follow up and sort of make a
comment and pick up on that point. There is a correlation, I
believe, between the lack of diversity in senior leadership and
command positions and the disproportionately high rate of court
martial of Black and brown service members.
Racial bias exists not only in the criminal justice system,
as we have experienced and seen for decades and brought to
greater public attention after the murder of George Floyd, but
that same racial bias exists in the military justice system.
So these are two related questions. We need to focus on
diversity, but we need to immediately get after the disparate
treatment under the UCMJ [Uniform Code of Military Justice].
That we can fix now. That we can fix now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Bacon is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Chairman, and I appreciate our
Chairman and our Secretary. I appreciate your leadership and I
appreciate the journey that you've taken to get here. Also, Mr.
McCord, thanks for being here.
I do got a couple of comments for the record, just
criticisms of the administration and I want to talk about the
Air Force budget. But first, all this talk about China being a
pacing threat, a rising superpower, a navy matching ours and,
you know, an imminent timeframe.
Then you look at the actual budget. After inflation, it's a
reduction. Our words do not match our actions here, and I think
China sees it. I think the world sees it. I would have at least
expected a budget that was even with inflation and but yet
we're seeing a reduction.
Secondly, I personally oppose taking the prosecution
authority away from the commander. I was a five-time commander
myself in the Air Force. I think the change will now create two
chains of command at the unit level, undermines the principle
that we cherish, which is unity of command, and I just--I think
this is going to open up frictions and tensions within the unit
and who's actually in charge.
A third point of criticism, as we have had several months
now where the administration should have come up with an
evacuation plan for interpreters. We have 18,000, roughly, and
there is no concrete plan that I know of. It's unconscionable.
We have had time to work through this. Talking about it is not
a plan.
And so I know this is a--falls on the Secretary of State or
the State Department. But so it's criticism for the
administration versus you two, but our country owes better to
these 18,000, and they will be targeted.
So my first question, though, gets to the Air Force budget.
You know, I think it's important that our defense budgets are
accurate and transparent. But that's not really the case of the
Air Force budget.
The Air Force budget submitted by the administration is
$212 billion. But $39 billion of it, or 18 percent, doesn't
actually go to the Air Force. It gets, you know, passed through
to other organizations. When you factor it in, the Air Force
budget is really only $173 billion and the other services have
about 1 percent pass-through, by the way, versus 18 percent for
the Air Force.
I just think it's misleading. Most people in Congress and
most people are citizens, think it's about a third/third/third
for the services. So last NDAA, we tasked the Department to
come up with a better way.
Could you give us an update on your thinking on this and
what we can do? Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Austin. Yeah, I'll take this for the record
because I--we do owe you an answer in terms of, you know, the
progress that we have made or, you know, how we approach this.
But I just want to say that I would absolutely agree with
you that while we can't be fully transparent on some--on some
of these issues, we need to make sure that the Air Force budget
is represented in the appropriate way.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 120.]
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I appreciate your sentiments there.
My second question is with the electronic magnetic spectrum
operations. In the 2019 NDAA, we directed the Department to
update its strategy here and provide a detailed implementation
plan. So in 2020 the Department did come out with a strategy,
but we have not yet seen an implementation plan.
Could you give us an update on where we're at with that?
Secretary Austin. You may have heard me say before,
Congressman, that our vice chairman is leading the effort,
along with the deputy secretary, to make sure that we lay out
an implementation plan and that we supervise the implementation
of the plan.
This is very important. It becomes increasingly important
as we enter--as we look towards a competition with a great
power. We can expect much more contested airspace and much--you
know, a greater pressure on the electromagnetic spectrum.
We saw, and you know this because you've been there, we
experienced some significant issues early on in Iraq and
Afghanistan trying to manage that spectrum and make sure that
each service had the capabilities they need. It will be
increasingly difficult, going forward. But the vice chairman is
essential in this.
Mr. Bacon. And I think the vice chair is doing a great job
and I applaud the effort. I do hope, though, in the end, we
have somebody at the one-star or two-star level that owns this
in the future because, as you know, at the four-star level
they're doing a hundred different things. So I just put that in
for your consideration.
Finally, to the Chairman--I only have about 30 seconds
left--what are some tangible things we can do to strengthen
deterrence for Taiwan? Like, what kind of weapons can they--can
we sell them or provide them? Thank you.
General Milley. Again, I'll take that one for the record.
But, briefly, you're talking about air power, counter air
power, so that they can have some dominance or air superiority
over their own airspace. Ballistic missile defense would be
key. And then their ability to defend on the ground and conduct
combined arms maneuver against an invading force. Those would
be things that would be in Taiwan's interest. I'll give you a
more complete answer on that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 120.]
Mr. Bacon. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Keating is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As someone who was a district attorney for over a decade
before I came to Congress, I realize the challenges and
complexities of sexual assault cases firsthand. And, in fact, I
had separate units in the civil side, separate units within my
office specializing in prosecution of sexual assaults and with
special units for sexual assault on victims' witness advocacy.
So I was really pleased to hear the news that you shared
this morning with us regarding what's coming forth from the
commission in terms of removing these cases from the military
chain of command.
Recommendations are one thing, but hearing from both the
Secretary of Defense and the Chair of the Joint Chiefs that you
support that effort too is so important.
So a couple of quick questions in that regard. Number one,
what is--what do you mean by removing it from the military
chain of command? Number two, General Milley mentioned two
changes in the domestic violence areas, the way they're going
to be reviewed. I had a separate unit for that, too. So could
you tell us what's in store for us on those very important
things that were a priority of myself and this committee?
Secretary Austin. So for those--first of all, I would--I
would point to the issue this will require resources and it
will require making sure that we outline a path to get to where
we need to be so that we're doing this the right way. We are
focused on sexual assault, sexual harassment, and related
crimes. And you mentioned domestic violence and a couple of
other things that are directly related to that.
But we would set up a special victims prosecutor--excuse
me, a special prosecutor to assess and refer these cases
forward. And so the cases would be--would be referred and
prosecuted outside of the chain of command.
Mr. Keating. Mr. Secretary, would they be investigated
outside as well with the civil investigator working with that
prosecutor?
Secretary Austin. They would be investigated by competent
authorities and the investigator would work with a prosecutor,
yes.
Mr. Keating. Yeah, I would hope those authorities included
someone on the civil side, too, and someone that would work as
a domestic violence advocate or a sexual assault witness victim
advocate.
Now, in terms of domestic violence, it is discreet many,
many times from sexual assault. So is there anything to share
with us this morning on that issue as well?
General Milley. Yeah. So what we're saying--we're
recommending--well, we have already made our recommendation to
the Secretary--is to stay narrowly focused on the issue of
sexual assault and directly related crimes such as domestic
violence.
Mr. Keating. Sometimes they are, sometimes they're not.
General Milley. Well, sometimes they are and sometimes not.
But the data shows that there's a strong correlation. So you
bend some of these other crimes in it.
As far as all other felonies go, we're recommending not to
do that, but to stay focused on the sexual assault and
immediate related crimes. Take that out of the commander's
hands for referral and preferral of charges, investigation as
well, and put that in the hand--and why are we doing that?
Because the data shows that we haven't moved the needle to
solve that problem. It's a very significant problem for
cohesion of the force, and we have lost the trust and
confidence of the lower ranking troops in it.
So but it's very limited, though, to that set of crimes
because the UCMJ is fundamental to the good order and
discipline of the force, and the commander must have that
authority because this entire system is built in order to fight
in combat. And that's important to remember as----
Mr. Keating. I would like to suggest, too, that you look
more specifically at domestic violence as well.
General Milley. Yes, sir.
Mr. Keating. And I'm here and I'm joined by many members of
this committee to provide the resources and assist you along
those lines. I thank you for the news, but we want to see if we
can be helpful, moving forward.
Secondly, we all share the belief and, certainly, you two
share it more than any Americans, to protect families that are
giving you their most precious resources, their children, their
parents or spouses, to defend our country.
And a BU [Boston University] study just recently out showed
that 30,177 either Active Duty or veterans post-9/11 committed
suicide, lost their lives. That's over four times the number of
similarly situated people lost in war operations, lost their
lives in war operations.
And this committee, through the NDAA----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. Through the GAO study, which I
will follow up with a question. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thanks. And I would like to let members know,
if I could take a moment of personal privilege here, on the
sexual assault issue there is wide bipartisan support and
support at DOD and within the administration for the idea that
we need to take the prosecution of sexual assault crimes out of
the chain of command.
Now, that is a recent development. We have been talking
about this for 10 years in a variety of different forums. It
has been resisted in a variety of different quarters up to this
point.
But at this point, there is wide--there is still some who
oppose, but there are a lot of co-sponsors. But the details are
different, and I think that is being lost in this debate. There
are some bills that take all nonmilitary felonies out. Then
there is the proposal that has come from the commission. There
was also a bill, and I know Representative Speier has
introduced a new bill this week.
But a month or so ago there was a bill that she had
introduced that was focused just on sex crimes. Another way to
slice this is felonies and misdemeanors. If you go the all-
felony route, which was a bill that was introduced this morning
in the House and one that was introduced in the Senate, you do
miss some sex crimes that are misdemeanors, and you certainly
miss a lot of domestic violence that is also misdemeanors.
And then there is the subject that Mr. Keating brought up
and that is, well, what about the people investigating it in
the first place? Are they still under the chain of command?
We need to make this change. I think it is really important
that we take a moment to do it right, that we have a
conversation with a bunch of different people. I'm not
presuming who's right and who's wrong. But this is no longer a
question for the overwhelming majority of Members in the House
and the Senate whether or not this needs to be taken out of the
chain of command. It is now a question of how to do that, and
that is a debate and discussion that I think this committee
needs to take a leadership role in doing.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. I'd like to completely associate myself with
the chairman's remarks.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Waltz is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'd like to
introduce into the record a letter to myself from the
Superintendent of West Point, Lieutenant General Williams, that
was sent to me in response to my letter regarding the teaching
of critical race theory at West Point.
The Chairman. Is there objection? Hearing none, so ordered.
[The letter referred to can be found in the Appendix on
page 115.]
Mr. Waltz. Mr. Secretary, I found it very interesting your
exchange with Mr. Gaetz on no teachings of critical race theory
in the United States military. I want to quote to you a letter
I received from the Superintendent at West Point.
Says ``With regards to critical race theory, there is one
course that has this theory as part of the syllabus. There are
two lessons on critical race theory. There is a book on
critical race theory titled ``Critical Race Theory: An
Introduction.''
On and on and on about the teaching of critical race theory
in West Point. I just want to emphasize something. This isn't
something that we're raising. This is--this came to me from
cadets, from families, from soldiers with their alarm and their
concern at how divisive this type of teaching is that is rooted
in Marxism, that classifies people along class lines, an entire
race of people as oppressor and oppressed.
I cannot think of anything more divisive and more
destructive to unit morale. I want to be very clear. The
military needs to be open to all Americans, absolutely. That is
the strength of the United States military.
But once we're in, we bleed green and our skin color is
camouflage. We're worried about that American flag on our
shoulder. That's the only thing our enemies are worried about.
I think we can agree there.
But the other thing that they raise to me was a seminar
that over a hundred cadets attended titled ``Understanding
Whiteness and White Rage'' taught by a woman who described the
Republican Party platform as a platform of white supremacy.
This is going on at West Point, as we speak, to our future
military leaders. And, sir, I would encourage you--I would
demand that you get to the bottom of what is going on in the
force and, further, for what it means for civilian oversight of
the military when our future military leaders are being taught
that the Constitution and the fundamental civilian institutions
of this country are endemically racist, misogynist, and
colonialist and, therefore, it is their duty to resist them.
What does that mean for a future cadet who one day will be
sitting where you are? And so do you agree that--will you work
with us to--do you agree that critical race theory should or
should not be taught in our military academies?
Secretary Austin. As I said earlier--thanks, Congressman,
for the question and thanks for your continued support. Thanks
for your service.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
Secretary Austin. This is not something that the United
States military is embracing and pushing and causing people to
subscribe to, and whether or not this was some sort of critical
examination of different theories, I don't know. But----
Mr. Waltz. We need to understand our past. I want to be
very clear. But can you agree at least that understanding
whiteness and white rage presented in Ike Hall to over a
hundred cadets probably is something that we shouldn't be
teaching our future leaders of the United States Army?
Secretary Austin. As you have described it, it certainly
sounds like that's something that should not occur. Again, I
would like to know the specifics of the----
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Just switching topics to shipyards and our infrastructure,
our shipyards are old. They're small. They can't handle the
fleet of today, much less the fleet of tomorrow.
We currently have 4 public and less than 20 commercial. The
Chinese are approaching 1,000 shipyards. One dry dock that can
handle the Ford class, not enough for the Virginia class. The
Navy has its $21 billion dollar investment plan, but it's over
20 years over the next two decades.
Would you welcome additional funding as part of--as part of
our shipyard modernization? I think it's absolutely critical.
Secretary Austin. I agree that it's critical and, you know,
we not only have to have the right mix of capabilities, we have
to be able to sustain and maintain as well. And in this budget,
you'll see that we have invested some $830 million in
recapitalizing----
Mr. Waltz. I think that is woefully, woefully--Chinese are
at 1,000. We're at less than 20. And what I'm so disturbed by
is we're debating a $1.9 trillion infrastructure plan. Navy has
its shipyard infrastructure improvement plan, so they clearly
define shipyards and infrastructure. No mention. Not one. Were
you consulted by the interagency group that submitted the
infrastructure plan to be--whether it is grids, ports, and
especially shipyards, was the Defense Department consulted for
its priorities as part of the administration's plan?
Secretary Austin. Well, certainly, I support the
administration's plan and----
The Chairman. That will have to be taken for the record.
The gentleman's time has expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 120.]
The Chairman. Ms. Houlahan is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
gentlemen, for joining us today. I know my time is very
precious. But I would like to yield some of my time to General
Milley because I know that he had some comments that he wanted
to make when Representative Gaetz was talking as well as Mr.
Waltz about a similar subject of the stand-down and race
theory.
Would you like a minute or so to comment on that? Do you
remember what we were--or your line of questioning or your
thought was there?
General Milley. Sure. First of all, on the issue of
critical race theory, et cetera, a lot of us have to get much
smarter on whatever the theory is. But I do think it's
important, actually, for those of us in uniform to be open-
minded and be widely read, and the United States Military
Academy is a university. And it is important that we train and
we understand, and I want to understand white rage, and I'm
white and I want to understand it.
So what is it that caused thousands of people to assault
this building and try to overturn the Constitution of the
United States of America? What caused that? I want to find that
out.
I want to maintain an open mind here and I do want to
analyze it. It's important that we understand that because our
soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, and guardians, they come
from the American people. So it's important that the leaders
now and in the future do understand it.
I've read Mao Zedong. I've read Karl Marx. I've read Lenin.
That doesn't make me a communist. So what is wrong with
understanding, having some situational understanding about the
country for which we are here to defend?
And I personally find it offensive that we are accusing the
United States military, our general officers, our commissioned
and noncommissioned officers, of being, quote, ``woke'' or
something else because we're studying some theories that are
out there. That was started at Harvard Law School years ago and
it proposed that there were laws in the United States,
antebellum laws prior to the Civil War, that led to a power
differential with African Americans that were three-quarters of
a human being when this country was formed. And then we had a
civil war and an Emancipation Proclamation to change it and we
brought it up to the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It took another
100 years to change that.
So look, I do want to know and I respect your service, and
you and I are both Green Berets. But I want to know, and it
matters to our military and the discipline and cohesion of this
military.
And I thank you for the opportunity to make a comment on
that.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, General.
Changing the subject right now to our people, which I think
is really important, you mentioned that people are our number
one priority.
In May of this year, I introduced the Military Moms Matter
Act, which, among other initiatives, would propose extending
paid family leave to 12 weeks for service members, which would
be in line with the NDAA 2020 proposal for all Federal
employees, and that became law last year.
One of the big topics of debate in this bill is for primary
versus secondary caregivers. As the policy is currently
written, a secondary caregiver is able to use very little
leave.
We want to make sure that we understand that, and General
and Secretary, would you mind expounding on your thoughts on
secondary leave for service members? Should that be eliminated
or that designation be altered so that everybody could have
equal access to paternity and maternity leave?
Secretary Austin. Well, it's a thing that needs--deserves
further discussion and examination. But you asked for my
personal opinion and I absolutely support primary and
secondary, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, sir. In what's left of my time,
I'd like to talk about childcare, what happens after you have
the leave. I'm grateful to see that a $168 million increase was
included in the budget for family issues, including childcare,
including in-home childcare.
But I was really devastated to hear a story of a young
woman at Fort Hood, who explained to me--a single mother--that
she had to drop her child off at 5:30 in the morning, off-base
childcare, had to drive at 80 miles an hour to try to get on
line fast enough to get to PT [physical training] at 6:00 in
the morning.
And this is not okay. So my question is how can we make
sure that we provide better support mechanisms in the childcare
area for those people like her?
Secretary Austin. Well, I think, first of all, that the
pandemic has kind of amplified some of the existing concerns
with childcare and other issues. We have provisions in this
budget to address home care support and I think we need to
continue to look at this hard.
And I would say in addition to that, there are some $8.6
billion that are focused on military family support programs.
And so this is very important to us. We'll continue to work it.
But I could not agree more with you on the importance of this
issue.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. And with that, I yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, gentlemen.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Johnson is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Austin, General Milley, thank you for being here
today. Many of my colleagues have expressed concern with the
top line amount for this year's budget request and I just want
to echo those concerns.
And we recognize, of course, that you're operating under
certain constraints. But it's alarming to many of us that the
President is spending with reckless abandon in virtually every
area except our national defense, and our current era of
strategic competition makes it all the more important that the
U.S. recommit the longstanding principle of peace through
strength, especially as our key adversaries continue to take
meaningful steps to close the gap between us and them.
Secretary Austin, brings me to a question for you. In your
confirmation hearing when asked to commit to the current
schedule for nuclear modernization efforts, you told Senator
Fischer you'd like to look under the hood first and get a
better feel for what we're dealing with our nuclear forces.
I know this has been covered a bit today. Some of us are in
and out for other hearings. But just to be sure, you've been on
the job now 6 months. Can you commit now to nuclear
modernization being a top priority for DOD?
Secretary Austin. I think you may have heard me say a
number of times, sir, that modernization of our triad is
absolutely important to us. What I meant by looking under the
hood, though, is making sure that we go through a new posture
review to ensure that we have the right balance and mix of
forces.
Mr. Johnson. Well, staying on that subject, our next
generation ICBM [intercontinental ballistic missile], the
Ground Based Strategic Deterrent, was a system approved by
President Obama in 2015. It was fully funded by President
Trump. It was funded in President Biden's fiscal year 2022
budget request at $2.6 billion.
And since you were confirmed as Secretary of Defense, we
have learned that the GBSD will be almost $38 billion cheaper
than any Minuteman III life extension. It will also be a much
more capable system, able to better penetrate Russian and
Chinese defense systems.
Do you fully support President Biden's fiscal year 2020--
fiscal year 2022 budget request for the GBSD and agree it is
the future of the land leg of the triad?
Secretary Austin. I fully support the President's budget. I
would further say that, you know, GBSD is one of those things
that we'll continue to evaluate along with the posture reviews
that we have ongoing--a new posture review. So----
Mr. Johnson. And am I correct in stating that the GBSD is
on track, on schedule, on budget for the first flight test in
2023?
Secretary Austin. You are.
Mr. Johnson. Another item we were pleased to see in the
budget is the request to construct a weapons generation
facility [WGF] at Barksdale Air Force Base and that facility
allows--or that construction will allow our B-52s that are
stationed there to carry out their nuclear mission without
having to fly first from Louisiana to North Dakota in order to
be loaded with nuclear ordnance.
So, Secretary Austin or General Milley, can you comment on
the strategic flexibility the Barksdale WGF will provide in
making sure the air leg of the triad is capable of fully
executing its mission?
General Milley. Yeah, I think, again, the triad and
recapitalization of the triad is critically important. It's
been in effect, really, for, I guess, going on seven decades
since the end of World War II, and it is--you can never prove a
negative but it is, clearly, one of the fundamental reasons why
World War III didn't break out was because of the nuclear
capabilities of the United States. It is time now to
recapitalize the entire thing, all three parts of it plus the
command and control piece.
That is really critical to defend this Nation for the next
seven decades and the time is now to invest in it. It'll be a
one-time thing for a period of years until we can get the
system replaced. But it's really, really important in all legs
to include that at Barksdale with the B-52s and soon to be the
B-21s, et cetera. Really critically important to do that.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, and those efficiencies, I think,
will help in those overall goals.
The last thing I'll touch on is the noticeable reduction in
Army accounts in the budget request. I understand that's a
reflection of the Afghanistan drawdown, but as we transition
our focus to other parts of the world, I do think it's
important that we not allow Army readiness to decline. I know
you all agree with that.
We still need to execute rotations through our training
centers and to that end I appreciate the budget requesting a
new joint operation center at Fort Polk. The current JOC is
decades overdue for an upgrade and a new facility will make
sure our soldiers are equipped with the best possible training
and experience so they're at the ready if and when they're
called upon.
But just in the 40 seconds I have remaining, would one of
you comment on the importance of that, Army readiness, where we
stand on that?
General Milley. We're both deeply indebted to the Army for
where we are in life. But I would say as a former Chief Staff
of the Army, the readiness of the Army is critical. It takes a
full joint force, a synergy of our air, land, sea, space, and
cyber to prevail in combat, and wars are often started from
afar, from long-range weapon systems, but they're always ended
somewhere on the ground, and the last bullet of a war is
usually fired by a Marine or Army infantryman. So it's really
critical to maintain the readiness of the United States Army.
Mr. Johnson. Hopefully, we can host you at Fort Polk
sometime soon. I'd love to see you there.
Secretary Austin. We have been also there quite a bit, both
of us----
Mr. Johnson. Yes, indeed.
Secretary Austin [continuing]. There, Mr. Johnson, and I--
or Congressman Johnson, and I would say that it's a pretty
valuable capability.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Crow is recognized.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
associate myself with the concerns by some of my colleagues on
the other side of the dais about back pay for National Guard,
and also point out that the H.R. 3237, the Emergency Security
Supplemental, which passed the House by one vote, actually
created a back pay of $500 million to help shore up the pay for
the National Guard.
So I would encourage my colleagues to support that and to
continue to push the Senate to support that as well because if
we actually passed that bill, we would resolve that issue and
make sure that our men and women in uniform do get paid.
I do want to change to Afghanistan for a minute and just
start by saying I understand that it's not your decision to
make to conduct an evacuation of civic society leaders, SIV
[Special Immigration Visa] applicants, or anybody. That's not
for you to decide. That's not for Secretary Blinken to decide.
That's a decision that only resides at the White House. I
get that, and I appreciate the fact that you all have conducted
contingency planning to be prepared to do that, and, General
Milley, your comment earlier about the military capability that
exists and that you will conduct whatever is necessary.
My concern is about time, because where we sit right now,
that capability and the dangers and risks of doing it are not
going to be static. That risk is not lessening. Is it true,
Secretary Austin, that the Taliban continue to make territorial
gains, that provincial capitals continue to fall, and that
freedom of navigation in the Outer Ring Road continues to
deteriorate?
Secretary Austin. The Taliban have made gains--incremental
gains throughout and those gains have increased most recently.
In terms of provincial capitals, I think you heard General
Milley's assessment early on that actually none of the
provincial capitals have fallen. They have made some gains
where they surrounded some of the provincial capitals.
Mr. Crow. And part of that, General Milley, is it true that
we don't yet have an agreement with Turkey or any other ally,
NATO ally, with regard to the security of the Kabul airport?
General Milley. Written agreement, no. We're having a
meeting this week. I think we're pretty much at the final
piece. I don't want to speak for Turkey and I don't want to
preempt the outcome of a final agreement. But I feel very
comfortable that security at the Kabul airport will be
maintained and that the Turks should be a part of that.
Mr. Crow. And is it--is it true that we're turning over
control of Bagram to the Afghans?
General Milley. That is the plan. That's correct.
Mr. Crow. Okay. So understanding that situation, the
deteriorating security situation, the assessments about the
lack of navigation and the fact that these SIV applicants would
actually need to make it to Kabul or a population center to be
evacuated and they also need to do in-person vetting in Kabul
to qualify--is it fair to say that as time continues to
progress, that it becomes harder and more risky to conduct an
evacuation?
Secretary Austin. I think that's a fair statement,
Congressman.
Mr. Crow. Okay. Relatedly, I'm concerned about the ability
of the Afghan air force to conduct air operations and to
maintain an air CAP [combat air patrol] with our withdrawal.
The A-29 fleet continues to degrade; we know that. We have
submitted a request for three additional A-29s.
But maintenance--with the removal of all the maintenance
personnel, do we yet have any fidelity on where that
maintenance will occur once our contractors withdraw who are
currently conducting that maintenance?
Secretary Austin. Some of the maintenance is taking place
in the--in one of the Gulf countries, one of our partners, and
so we would fly--for the higher level of maintenance, we would
fly that--and have flown some of that gear out to that location
to be--to be serviced. And you got different levels of
maintenance, as you well know.
But the organizational maintenance, you know, the operator
level maintenance we can do and are doing some of that by
virtual mentorship as--on a day-to-day basis, and we may be
able to contract other types of capabilities, going forward.
That's still a work in progress. Ideally, we'd like to see
if I could have the ability to conduct maintenance in one of
the neighboring countries for some of the higher level
maintenance. But again, a work in progress. Not yet solidified.
Mr. Crow. Okay. I appreciate that. And with my remaining 10
seconds, I just wanted to express my appreciation, Chairman
Milley, for your leadership and your courage in how you
continue to speak out on behalf of what is a diverse--an
increasingly diverse force of men and women in uniform----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Green is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rogers, for holding the hearing, and I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today.
I deeply respect and appreciate your combined service to
this country. As the war on terror has continued, the United
States military has taken risks to maintain readiness during
budget decreases of the last last years of the Obama
administration, including installation management, research and
development for future systems. The last administration set us
on the right path helping to rebuild peace through strength.
Those 4 years of increased budgets helped but they could
not make up for nearly 20 years of war and 7 years of cuts.
Today's force is still challenged with decreasing overmatch due
to those previous cuts and the risk decisions that were made to
maintain readiness.
When we send America's sons and daughters, and I believe
each of you would agree with me on this, it should never be a
fair fight when they go to war. It looks like the real dollar
cuts in spending of $4 billion in this budget proposal we're
once again potentially sacrificing the future fight for
readiness today.
In the case of the Navy's budget, it looks like they're
pinning their risk in a 3- to 5-year range in hopes that beyond
that they can find new technologies that will create overmatch.
The question, of course, is how do we maintain overmatch
with pacing threats such as China when they're increasing their
budget 6.8 percent and we're effectively decreasing ours.
My first question gets very granular and it goes on what
Mr. Johnson was talking about, the CTCs [combat training
centers]. I noticed recently--if I'm understanding the budget
for the Army correctly, we're cutting CTC rotations by a third
in this budget. If that's correct, can you tell me why?
General Milley. I don't--yeah, I don't think that's
correct. I'll go back to the Chief of Staff of the Army.
There's 10 rotations a year to each of the CTCs. If they're
cutting them by a third, I'd be very surprised. I'll find out.
Dr. Green. Would you do me a favor and get back----
General Milley. I'll get back to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 121.]
Dr. Green. Thank you, Chairman, I really appreciate that. I
noticed on aviation we were looking at a cut of around 15.6
percent and this is across all the services for aviation. Can
you guys kind of give me a description on what we're doing to
make up for those cuts?
Is there some technology we don't know about? Is there some
future system that's going to--going to address the decrease in
readiness or capability in the future with a 15.6 percent cut
in aviation?
Secretary Austin. Well, we want to make sure we--we want to
make sure we're investing in the right capabilities and we want
to be able to network those capabilities in new and effective
ways that we have not been able to do in the past. And that
requires investing in the right kinds of technology to be able
to do that. If you take ISR, for example, and you say--and you
look at the fact that the Air Force is taking down a couple of
lines of ISR, what they're really doing is not decreasing the
number of tails.
They're taking down some lines so that they can have the
ability to upgrade some capability and network their birds
together in ways that we haven't done before. And that applies
to each of the services. We have to invest in those things that
are going to allow us to have resilient forces operate in a
distributed manner and be absolutely lethal in the next fight.
Dr. Green. I understand. I just want to make sure that
capability isn't decreasing 15.6 percent. I guess that's really
my big question. We're going to have the same capability or
better capability, even though we're cutting aviation 15
percent.
Secretary Austin. Our goal is to have better capability,
and with those investments that we make in the future we want
to make sure that the platforms that we invest in are able to
accomplish some of the things that I just described.
Dr. Green. One of the--one of the open source journals, the
Computing Research Association, reported concerning, quote,
``the Army, Navy and Air Force's University Research
Initiative. Sub accounts are cut 31.1 percent, 18.9 percent,
and 17.5 percent, respectively.'' Considering cybers--these
recent cyberattacks, is that really a wise decision?
I'm not an engineer. I'm not a computer scientist. I'm a
physician. But it seems that cuts in those particular areas,
those areas that research our ability to fight cyber, seems
misplaced, considering the recent attacks. Could you comment on
that or perhaps I can get something in writing back?
Secretary Austin. We can do both, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 121.]
Dr. Green. Okay. Thanks, Secretary.
Secretary Austin. First, I'll remind you that for RDT&E
overall, we're investing $112 billion, and specifically for
cyber it is a 10 point--almost $10.5 billion investment in
cyber and that includes cyberspace operations and a number of
other things. So we think cyber is pretty important. We are
part of a whole-of-government effort to defend our networks
here in the country. Our focus is, you know, further out
towards the source of malign activity and we----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. I
apologize.
Ms. Slotkin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, gentlemen, for being here. I know
it's a long hearing. I just--you know, I want to address this
constant conversation we have been having about the top line
because it feels like very 2005 to me. All the hearings that we
have had in front of--in the last 2 years that I've been here
have talked about not just the amount of dollars we're spending
but how we're spending them, and I think we need to be
intellectually honest as Members of Congress that we are a part
of the problem.
We make you budget on 1-year cycles instead of the whole
FYDP [Future Years Defense Program]. Every year you come to us
with about $2 billion worth of legacy programs you'd like to
cut, and we up here don't let you cut them. And then let's be
frank. If we're talking about budgets, the nearly $10 billion
that was taken out of DOD and put towards the border wall
should be factored in, for anyone who's concerned about the top
line.
So that's what we have responsibility for. But I am worried
because there is bipartisan agreement that China is gaining on
us. I'm also worried that our big lumbering bureaucratic system
is an inhibitor to us being competitive with China,
particularly on acquisition and getting the best American
technology into the Pentagon.
Mr.--Secretary Austin, can you talk about what we're going
to do to acquire faster and better technology?
Secretary Austin. Well, that's a focus for us. You know, we
are far from being as agile as we need to be in order to
capture or take advantage of the emerging technologies. And so
you've given us some authorities in the past that we have not
fully used or employed, and we need to push to, number one,
take advantage of what you've already given us.
But number two, encourage our force to be--to be more
agile. And we need to take advantage of emerging technologies
that may be available in smaller companies that have capability
that they can't get across the ``valley of death'' to, you
know, to provide capability at scale.
So the deputy secretary and I are absolutely focused on
this and she's launched some initiatives to be able to address
this.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you. Your personal attention to that, I
think, is going to be really important for the future fight.
Switching gears to the authorization of military force,
last week in a bipartisan way we called for the repeal here in
the House of the 2002 AUMF [Authorization for Use of Military
Force]. It's now being discussed and debated over in the
Senate.
But there seem to be some confusion here in the House and
maybe in the Senate as well on whether the Pentagon is
currently relying on the 2002 AUMF for any operations. Can you
confirm where you stand on the 2002 AUMF?
General Milley. Well, just right now on 2002 AUMF, that is
under review and it looks like it's going to go away. The 2001
one is the one that gives us all the authorities. That's the
one we need to hang on to is that first one that gives us the
authority to conduct operations.
Ms. Slotkin. So if we repeal the 2002, will that affect
current operations in any way?
General Milley. No. My assessment--my military assessment
is no, it won't. It won't have any negative effect on current
operations. It's the 2001 AUMF that's the critical one for us
to continue operations.
Ms. Slotkin. Thanks. Thanks for clarifying that.
And, you know, one of the things that myself and
Representative Gallagher are doing, we run a bipartisan task
force on supply chains, and the deputy secretary was really
gracious with her time and came last week.
I have become possessed with this issue because of COVID
and having to negotiate with Chinese middlemen in the middle of
the night for a 78-cent mask, and I stood yesterday in front of
my second GM [General Motors] plant in my area that has to go
to a temporary shutdown because we can't get a 14-cent
microchip. Can you tell me just your commitment that you will
take this issue seriously?
It was stunning for some of us the amount of
vulnerabilities that we have even at the Pentagon for things
like ammunition propellant and for pharmaceuticals on other
countries, particularly sole source from other countries. Can
you just commit that you'll help with some transparency on our
supply chains?
Secretary Austin. You have our commitment. You heard me
mention earlier the $341 million investment to help boost our
support of American industry and some of that includes
microelectronics and that sort of business.
So but we are absolutely focused on this. We think that
supply chain vulnerability is a national security issue, and
that was kind of laid bare for us, to your point, over the last
year.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Rogers.
Secretary Austin, General Milley, thank you for joining us
today.
I first want to maybe echo my colleague, Representative
Slotkin, on supply chain task force. I was honored to be put on
that as well and it has illuminated a lot of the challenges
that we see because of COVID or even just supply chain in
general. So I appreciate your commitment to making sure that we
continue to look at how we can shore up those supply chain
challenges.
I'd like to start by focusing on an issue that has been of
concern in my State of Oklahoma and on military bases across
the Nation: improving the quality of privatized base housing on
military installations.
Since being sworn into office, I've engaged military
housing stakeholders in my district and across the State of
Oklahoma, including at Tinker Air Force Base and Fort Sill.
While I'm cautiously optimistic that things are moving in the
right direction, there is still work to do. Ensuring safe and
high-quality housing for our Nation's service members is one of
my priorities. Despite the recent reforms, evidence from
earlier this year suggests military families are being charged
thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses by private
military housing contractors for reasonable and needed ADA
[Americans with Disabilities Act] upgrades to their on-base
housing units.
In response, I've introduced legislation with
Representative Sara Jacobs to clarify the military families
cannot be charged amounts in addition to rent for needed ADA
upgrades.
Secretary Austin, can you tell me what actions DOD is
taking to ensure that service members do not face financial
hardships in obtaining on-base accommodations for a disabled
member of their family?
Secretary Austin. Thank you for your--the work that you're
doing in this area. It is absolutely critical. There's nothing
more important than, you know, the welfare of our military
families. And as we have seen in the past, this has not--this
has not gone the way that it should have gone in terms of
contracted housing or privatized housing.
You've seen us increase the supervision in this area and
we're working with the services to really ensure that we have
the requisite oversight and emphasis to hold contractors
accountable for, you know, providing quality service to our--to
our family members. And this will remain a priority for us,
going forward. It directly affects the morale of not only our
family members but the services altogether. So you have my
commitment that we will remain sighted on this.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Secretary. Appreciate that.
It's clear to me that in my short time here in Congress
that one of the biggest threats is the current space race
threat. China has become incredibly competitive, landing a
rover on Mars, putting up geosynchronous satellites.
Do you believe this budget provides the dedicated resources
in research, technology, exploration, that we need to ensure
that we are not outpaced?
Secretary Austin. Right. Again, $112 billion for RDT&E.
That's a--that's a pretty hefty investment. But I would go one
step further and say that we have invested or we plan to invest
$20.6 billion or so for--to resource our efforts in space.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Brief announcement before I call on Ms.
Sherrill. So votes are supposed to be called at 1:30. It is my
intent to keep going through them. If--well, it's a little bit
complicated. Votes are, like, 25 minutes to a half hour.
But if there are members who wish to ask questions, if you
could go and vote, like, right at 1:30 and then come back so we
can sort of cycle through that way. I don't want to waste any
time and take advantage of all the time that we have. You can
sort of process that. So if you're--if you're coming up and you
want to go vote and come back, that'll give you an opportunity
to ask a question. Mr. Rogers and I will figure out our own
deal one way or the other.
Ms. Sherrill is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you. Thank you so much.
General Milley, I want to talk about the long-range
precision fires. As you know, Picatinny Arsenal in my district
is a key center of innovation for this modernization priority.
I know that General McConville is committed to the value
that long-range precision fires bring to force employment for
the joint force. So can you speak to the value of the multiple
dilemmas that ground-based precision fires can provide for
deterrence and force employment?
General Milley. Sure. The--first of all, all of the
services have capabilities and are developing capabilities for
long-range precision fires, and it's important when you're
facing any adversary to present them with multiple dilemmas
simultaneously so that it's very difficult for them to solve.
Land-based long-range precision fires will give us a
significant advantage relative to the pacing threat of China so
that they can be operated off of, basically, unsinkable
aircraft carriers.
So our allies and partners--if we work out through the
diplomatic arrangements to have units stationed there with
long-range precision fire capabilities, we can do significant
damage--damage against the People's Liberation Army Navy.
So we're experimenting that with the Army forces and Marine
forces in the Pacific right now, in the South China Seas, for
example, through exercises and other things. In addition to
that, we're doing some long-range precision fire developmental
testing that is being done at the various ranges and these are
quite extended ranges that will cover the South China Sea.
So the conceptual idea would be that we could handle the
Chinese surface fleet with land-based long-range precision
fires in combination with air and naval fires.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you, General. I appreciate that. Moving
on and sort of talking again about the supply chain, we have
all become critically concerned. You know, as we talk about
single source materials, as we talk about rare earth materials,
I encourage you, General Austin, to continue to look into how
that impacts some of our smaller defense manufacturers from
entering into competition when they have to trace the supply
chain.
That is something they have a lot of trouble doing and
haven't done well at. I also encourage a discussion about rare
earth materials and if there are alternatives. You know, the
research and development we might make into alternatives.
That's something that's been brought up, but I don't think
we have a good understanding of how--what we could do with
respect to alternatives to rare earth materials, especially
single source rare earth materials from our adversaries.
I'd also just like to bring up that in conversations with
former senior defense officials, currently serving service
members, and leaders in defense innovation, I've heard time and
again that the military just isn't innovating the way we need
to.
So to make better use of private sector innovation by a
more nimble acquisition system and to improve access to talent
through better STEM [science, technology, engineering, and
math] recruiting, and to ensure that the research and
development within the DOD is better supported in risk-taking
to, as many of our military members say, fail fast and then
learn--what is the best way forward to make these changes and
how can Congress best support those changes?
Secretary Austin. Well, I think you have to establish
programs that are--and mechanisms that encourage innovation,
and while you want to reward success and support small
companies in their efforts to get their products--innovative
products, you know, on board, you also want to condition the
force to be able to accept a--an element or a measure of risk
and we're not really good at that. And I think, in order to be
agile, we got to become better.
And so you'll see the deputy secretary begin to employ a
couple of initiatives that encourage that innovation, and
that--and that would help us begin to pull some things forward
and support some things, going forward, that we haven't been
able to do in the past. And, again, we'll keep pushing on this
and pulling on this until we become more agile.
I do think we need to do better in taking advantage of what
you've already given us to help us with that agility.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you, and I echo Ms. Slotkin in our
gratitude in having you involved in this process. I think it is
very important.
And then, finally, before my time is up, I simply want to
say to you, General Milley, that I deeply and sincerely
appreciate your comments to Ms. Houlahan.
Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Keating [presiding]. The chair recognizes
Representative Jackson for 5 minutes.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rogers, for holding the hearing today. I also want to thank
Secretary Austin and General Milley for being here today. Thank
you both.
Mr. Secretary, the first time we met and the first event
I've ever attended in the House Armed Services Committee here
was a discussion we held when you came before the committee in
January.
As you know, I voted in favor of the waiver required for
your appointment and I did so because I thought we should take
advantage of the opportunity to have somebody in there that
really understood the impact that policymakers have on the
troops. So thank you, and it's good to see you here again
today, sir.
General Milley, I've really appreciated your leadership and
the continuity that you're able to bring to the Department
during the most recent transition in administrations.
I know both of you very clearly understand the urgent
threats that we face. I imagine you both must share my
frustration with the budget cut that President--or with the
budget cut that President Biden has sent over.
I agree that we need to be more efficient with how we spend
our money, if possible. But now is not the time to cut our
defense spending like President Biden has proposed.
My first question, the National Defense Strategy [NDS]
clearly calls for 3-5 percent real growth in defense spending
each year. President Biden has somewhat ignored the NDS and has
put you both in a very tough spot, in my mind, by proposing
that we cut defense spending this year with a request that does
not keep pace with inflation.
I've heard alternate proposals circulated around Congress
that might come before this committee of a top line 10 percent
cut for defense spending. If the 3-5 percent number is based on
the NDS, I'm not really sure where the proposed 10 percent
number comes from.
For both of you, if the 10 percent cut is just a random
number, should we really be comparing that as an alternative
policy recommendation to what is called for in the NDS, and
would either of you consider a 10 percent cut to be a serious
policy recommendation? This might be a short answer.
Secretary Austin. When it comes to structuring the budget,
Congressman--and by the way, thank you for your service--I
think randomness is never a good idea. And so we endeavor, as
you well know, to link our resources to our strategy, strategy
to policy, policy to the--to the will of the American people.
This particular budget was based upon the interim strategic
guidance given to us by the President early on and my guidance
to the force. And so those were the things that provided us,
you know, the--really, the structure to be able to--to build
the budget on. But to answer your question, I do not think
randomness is a good idea when it comes to budget.
General Milley. And I would echo those comments. And I'm
not aware of a proposal of a 10 percent cut per se. That's not
what this budget does. This budget, essentially, is flat. I
mean, depending on how you do the calculations, some will tell
you it's $11 billion more than the 2021 enacted. Others will
tell you a few billion less if you measure it against constant
dollars. And then, of course, you've got the factor of
inflation.
The bottom line is it's all relative to a threat and I
think this budget at $715 billion it's a lot of taxpayer
dollars and I think it adequately defends the United States for
fiscal year 2022. And I would urge a rapid passing of it and
rapid enactment of it.
Dr. Jackson. Yes, sir. Thank you. I brought up the 10
percent because I think that's being circulated around here and
I assume that's going to come later on in the form of an
amendment or something. Thank you for that.
I'm concerned that this is only the beginning of the
defense budget cuts over the next few years for the reason I've
just described. Given that President Biden relies on your
expertise, I would urge you both to advise him on how
disastrous that would be, the 10 percent cut, for our national
security if that comes up.
Last week, we discussed how we can implement the goals of
the National Defense Strategy despite a budget cut. Something
that General Berger said before this committee stuck out to me.
He said, ``We have a perfect record of guessing where the
next conflict is going to happen and we got it wrong every
time.'' We know there will be another threat. That's just a
fact.
So I don't see why President Biden is forcing us into a
budget cut when we are actually losing to China right now and
have other rising threats around the globe--around the globe.
Secretary Austin, assuming we are able to keep up with the
counter and the threat from China, where do you see the next
threat coming from? Also, how harmful are the proposed budget
cuts as you prepare the military for whatever future conflict
we might have?
Secretary Austin. Yeah. Thank you, Congressman. Again,
China is the most challenging competitor that we will face and
so we have to prepare for the most challenging competitor. As
we do that, it also prepares us well for other things. We'll
see threats from Russia, Iran, North Korea, and we'll continue
to see a threat from transnational terrorism.
And I agree with General Berger that there's always
something that we weren't really sighted on necessarily but we
were prepared to address because we prepared for the most
challenging threat.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you both. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Keating. The chair recognizes Representative Golden for
5 minutes.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
Secretary Austin, in recent testimony you provided before
the Senate both Senator Collins and Senator King asked if you'd
work with them in Congress to restore the proposed cut to the
DDG 51 [guided-missile destroyer] Flight III program, and in
both cases you said the plan was to resource that ship in 2023.
General Milley, I believe you testified something similar
earlier today. I'd like to understand that more clearly. The
most recent figures the Navy has provided Congress was in
December and it anticipated the procurement of two Flight III
ships in fiscal year 2022 and two in fiscal year 2023 for a
total of four ships.
In light of this, Mr. Secretary, am I to understand that
you're committing to procure three DDG Flight III ships in
fiscal year 2023?
Secretary Austin. We'll certainly work out the balance of
our investments in the next budget, and I don't want to predict
where that's going to land. But we're going to go after that
DDG that we didn't resource in this budget in the next fiscal
year.
Mr. Golden. Thank you. You know, if you just look at all of
last year, the Navy was saying that they needed the Flight III
from capabilities perspective but also they were projecting two
ships, whether that was last winter in February, again, putting
out some figures in the fall, and then in December. It was
always two ships each time and then suddenly we received this
budget request to go down to one.
But, you know, if it's not a commitment to actually go back
up to three, then I think, you know, it's not resourcing the
ship that the two Senators and I are asking about and it would,
in fact, represent a broken contract. You did talk to Senator
Collins about wanting to have the right mix of capabilities in
place, and I agree with what Senator Collins said about
quantity having a quality of its own.
But I'd like to focus on the capabilities piece. The Navy
says that the Flight III is key to sea denial and sea control
missions. It's also expressed urgency to the committee about
getting the AMDR [Air and Missile Defense Radar] SPY-6 radar
and those capabilities that will be brought to the Navy into
the fleet.
The Navy is looking to decommission cruisers as well.
Therefore, the Flight III is slated to house and perform the
role of air defense for our carrier strike groups.
But this was going to take several years to fully field
that new capability. Last week, the committee received
testimony that the benefits of an AMDR are undeniable and it
was stressed that the Navy has to have that radar.
I'm curious, in light of the kind of change from two ships,
two ships, two ships all through 2020 to just one now and given
this testimony that we have received from the Navy about the
importance of the capability, what's the driving force behind
the reduction?
Secretary Austin. You have to make tough choices in any
budget and, again, in this budget we're investing in a DDG, two
submarines, and a frigate, which I think is a pretty
substantial investment. And again, you know, we have said
before that, you know, the 355-ship Navy is a good goal to
shoot at. You have to look at the progress over time. You also
have to consider, you know, the numbers of hulls that we're
putting in the water between now and the end of fiscal year
2022, and when you do that, you'll get a better picture of the
full capabilities.
But we--I agree that it is important to make sure that, you
know, we invest in that DDG, going forward. But, again, in any
budget, you have to make some tough choices.
And we also need to make sure we have the capacity to build
the ship that we invest in.
General Milley. Could I just add that it's important--in
terms of capability, the destroyers are the workhorse of the
Navy for sure and the surface fleet, but the most important
investment in naval capabilities are the submarines and so the
priority went to the submarines.
Mr. Golden. Yeah, certainly. I mean, it sounds like you're
talking about tradeoffs--hard tradeoffs.
General Milley. Sure. Absolutely.
Mr. Golden. So this is--this is a top line budget challenge
discussion rather than, you know, delivering what the combatant
commanders are saying that they need out in the fleet in the
next 5 years.
I know that they're excited to get that Flight III out
there. But someone could argue that the--you know, the eight
ships requested maybe, you know, three of them might not be as
critical as the destroyer. But we don't have to talk about that
right now.
I would just say it is also concerning that in some ways,
breaking a multiyear procurement like this is unprecedented and
it does undermine trust, you know, that the Navy is going to be
able to follow through on future commitments or contracts.
Concerning to the industrial base and that capability, in my
opinion. But I do see that the Navy is expressing interest in a
future multiyear procurement for fiscal years 2023 through 2027
for the Flight III, and look forward to working with you on
that.
I know we're out of time. So if you have any comment, we'll
take it for the record. Thank you, gentlemen.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 120.]
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you. Before recognizing Mr.
Carl, votes have been called, and again, votes are going,
roughly, a half hour. So if someone wants to go over and vote
now and come back, we're going to go till 2:00 here and we'll
do that.
So Mr. Carl is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rogers.
Gentlemen, thank you all so much for coming and spending
time. Secretary Austin, I want to point out something, that two
Alabama colleagues here are wearing orange and blue in support
of your Auburn Tigers, and that's tough coming--being a big
Alabama fan. I'm just going to let you know.
Real quick--real quick, the fiscal year 2022 shipbuilding
budget has been a hot topic today, obviously, during recent
hearings in the committees that we have been--we have held
here. The report the Navy submitted to Congress last week on
long-range shipbuilding highlights the importance of steady
acquisition profiles to maintain our industrial base.
However, just a few pages later in the report, the report
has 398 to 512 ships in the Navy long-range plan, and the
difference is 114 ships. Do you--do you think there might be a
little question there on how we won or lost 114 ships? That's
not my question there. But, Secretary Austin, the shipyard that
I've spent the last 10 years recruiting young people to work in
is being threatened to be shut down now because of this budget.
So with that said, the shipyard will be facing layoffs
workforce in the coming year because of this fiscal year 2022
budget, its uncertainty. Why did this administration not follow
the law and submit a true 30-year shipbuilding plan?
Secretary Austin. Again, the shipbuilding plan, you know,
will come with the fiscal year 2023 submission. But that's on
the horizon there. So, we presented a 1-year budget this year,
and the next year we'll present the budget for the FYDP or the
outlook for the FYDP.
Mr. Carl. Okay.
General Milley. And as you recall, Congressman, there was a
submission by the previous administration very late and the
current administration just hasn't had an opportunity to fully
review that. That's in the works. So there will be a 30-year
shipbuilding plan here shortly.
Mr. Carl. Shift gears here real quick, KC-46. The Air Force
has accepted delivery of the KC-46 aircraft that is not fully
operational, and still has--still having--quite having some
difficulties even being used.
First--the first operation is not--the first operational
one is not expected until 2024, 7 years after the original
date. Do you think any of this makes sense? The taxpayers are
paying for aircraft that are not--that are not fully
operational and the first is currently projected to be fully
operational 7 years after the contracted date.
So, Secretary Austin, along with all the issues that KC-46A
is facing, now it cannot even correctly hold fuel. Is it time
to recommit and look at contracting these aircraft out to other
companies?
Secretary Austin. We'll work with the Air Force to ensure
that we're providing the right amount of oversight and drill
down into choices, going forward, and an assessment suggesting
that we--that we move to an alternative plan has not yet been
presented to me. But this is something that we absolutely have
to remain focused on.
Mr. Carl. Well, we have Airbus planes that are flying in
Europe that we're refueling behind. So we know we have got--we
have got capabilities of other aircraft other than just what's
being built and delivered.
General, one quick one for you, sir. Every time they say
that China or Russia is a better military force, I see you bow
up a little bit, and I love it. Thank you. Thank you for your
service----
General Milley. Yeah.
Mr. Carl [continuing]. Your patriotism.
General Milley. Thank you. And just to be clear, and I'll
reiterate it, neither China nor Russia, militarily, nor any
other country on the face of the earth is a better military
than the United States military.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, sir.
General Milley. On the KC-46, I had an opportunity to go
out and see them. There's some glitches in the software. They
are operational. We're flying them. We're flying them and doing
tanking operations in training exercises around the world.
When we say they're not--we're not using them operationally
in combat zones. That's where we're not using them. But they
are being used in training. There are some software things yet
to be worked out, and I have confidence in the KC-46 as a
program.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, sir.
General Milley. Thank you.
Mr. Carl. And I yield my time back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mrs. Luria is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you.
And, General Milley, over the last year I've been reviewing
the Goldwater-Nichols Act to look at things both positive and
negative on the current organization within our service.
A couple questions I had. 10 U.S. Code 163 states that the
President may direct that communications between the President
or Secretary of Defense and the commanders of the unified and
specified combatant commands be transmitted through the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Has the President or Secretary of Defense given direction
to you that communications through the combatant commanders
should go through you?
General Milley. It's a routine--the word is routine
communications and it's in the UCP [Unified Command Plan]. And
yes, it is currently in effect. So routine communications,
normal communications. The chain of command, though, is clear
and it's unambiguous. The chain of command is the President,
the Secretary of Defense, and the combatant commanders, and
then the President, the Secretary of Defense and the service
secretaries for the departments.
I am an advisor and I advise on the advantages,
disadvantages, and puts and takes, costs and risks and
benefits, et cetera. But the chain of command is clear. But
routine communication typically goes through me in order for me
to do my job as an advisor.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you. And another portion 10
U.S. Code 16 says that subject to the authority, direction, and
control of the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff serves as the spokesman for the commanders of
the combatant commands, especially on operational requirements
of their commands.
Do you serve as the spokesman for the combatant commanders
on the operational requirements for their commands?
General Milley. I do, and I--and when I say I, the Joint
Staff who helps me----
Mrs. Luria. I was just looking--I'm sorry--for a yes, no--
--
General Milley. Sure, and the answer is yes.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you.
And so you recently said that there's a low probability
that China would take over Taiwan militarily in the near term,
and this seems to be in direct conflict to the statements made
earlier this year by Admiral Davidson, Admiral Aquilino, last
week by the CNO and the Commandant of the Marine Corps----
General Milley. Yeah.
Mrs. Luria [continuing]. That they believe that China could
act militarily against Taiwan in the next 6 years. If their
window is 6 years but you disagree with that, what is your
window?
General Milley. I didn't say I disagreed with them--their
assessment of 6 years. Their assessment is based off a speech
by President Xi that challenged the People's Liberation Army to
accelerate their modernization programs, to develop
capabilities to seize Taiwan, and move it from 2035 to 2027
hence 6 years. It's a capability. It's not an intent to attack
or seize.
My assessment is an operational assessment. Do they have
the intent to attack or seize in the near term defined as the
next year or two? My assessment and based on what I've seeing
right now is no. That can always change. Intent is something
that can change quickly.
Mrs. Luria. But, you know, from the statements and how many
Members of Congress has interpreted that over the series of
hearings, you know, we heard Admiral Davidson and Aquilino
clearly state that they thought there was an intent. You're
saying there's a capability. So there's a difference.
General Milley. No, I looked at their--I looked at their
testimony, their words, and very explicitly, and I can go back
and look at it again.
If Admiral Aquilino and Admiral Davidson said that China
had an intent, has made a decision and they intend to invade
and seize Taiwan, then I do disagree with that. I've seen no
evidence of that actual intent or decision making. What I'm
talking about is capability.
Mrs. Luria. Okay.
General Milley. What they were talking about is capability,
and the Chinese leadership, President Xi, challenged them to
accelerate their capability development, which is two different
things.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you. I understand that you're making a
nuance there. I'll say that Members of the House, I think,
interpreted the admirals' earlier testimony differently.
But just, you know, kind of taking that capability as
capability as well. So whether they have intent right now or
they may in the future between now and 2027 when you think they
will have that capability, just looking at this budget, which
really is a divest-to-invest strategy and I would say that, you
know, with the--without the sense of urgency that that could
happen in the next 6 years, you know, it's not really palpable
to think that we could divest to invest.
For instance, decommission more ships before we have the
replacement, thus reducing the fleet size. Retiring bombers at
a faster rate than we're replacing their inventory, and the Air
Force has just said recently in a hearing that the bare minimum
of maintaining 45. And last week we had several hearings that
expressed us about the Navy's budget, its divest-to-invest
strategy, and Mr. Gallagher, you know, referred to Admiral
Davidson's comments as the Davidson window.
So, you know, I just wanted to--and we have very little
time left--get after the question of between the combatant
commanders and yourself acting as a role as an advisor to the
President.
General Milley. Sure.
Mrs. Luria. You know, who should we be listening to. I feel
like the combatant commanders----
General Milley. Okay. So----
Mrs. Luria [continuing]. Their message is very different
than what we're getting in a message in this budget, because
the budget does not convey a sense of urgency when we see it as
a shrinking fleet rather than a growing fleet to counter the
threats that we see from China in the Pacific. And I have very
little time left so----
General Milley. There's one second left so I'll give you an
answer on the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 121.]
The Chairman. Take it for the record.
Ms. Cheney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, General Milley and Secretary Austin, for being here.
Secretary Austin, I wanted to ask you about GBSD. We have
had consistent testimony, as I'm sure you know, in front of
this committee this year and in prior years at the extent to
which GBSD will save the taxpayer money. Moving forward with
it, it is $38 billion in cost savings over life extension of
the Minuteman and, obviously, it also has significantly
increased capabilities over the Minuteman. I've listened to you
today. It sounds like there may be some question about whether
or not you agree with those assessments or whether or not a
change will be made as you look at the posture review.
Could you elaborate what factors might lead you down the
path of not going with the less expensive, more effective, and
capable GBSD system?
Secretary Austin. If I conveyed that I'd already made some
sort of decision, Congresswoman, that's absolutely not the
case. I think the right thing to do if we're going to conduct a
Nuclear Posture Review, which we are going to do that, is to
make sure that we have the right pieces in place, the right
balance, and to make sure that we continue to evaluate the GBSD
in the context of that Nuclear Posture Review.
But again, my intent was not to convey a preference or a
decision. You know, that's not where I am.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you. I appreciate that. And, again, just
looking at the cost that we have seen, the consistent testimony
and the effectiveness, it would be some concern, obviously, if
we moved towards trying to do life extension at this point.
General Milley, I wanted to ask you about Afghanistan. You
know, it does seem that we have now seen the Taliban taking 50
to 60 more districts. I know the government moves its district
centers at some point. But it does seem that we're withdrawing
from the battlefield as our enemy advances.
So could you talk about both what the actual specifics are?
We haven't really heard anything in terms of over-the-horizon
basing, and whether or not you think this is good policy to
withdraw as our enemy is advancing.
General Milley. Congresswoman, the--in terms of the
district centers in the provinces--and, as mentioned earlier
there's 419 district centers--81 of them are so are in the
hands of the Taliban. About 50 were done previously and about
30 or 40 in the last X amount of months.
In addition to that, no provinces have fallen to the
Taliban yet. There's a 300,000-plus-or-minus security force
consisting of the army and the police forces for the Afghans.
We have not done train, advise, assist in quite some time down
at the tactical level. So they have been out there shouldering
the burden of that fight for well over a year.
And in terms of what we are doing, what we are doing is a
deliberate responsible drawdown retrograde to bring out U.S.
military forces, and we're going to keep a small number of
forces there to maintain the embassy open and to keep
capabilities there and keep the money going for the NSF
[National Security Forces] and the government.
Now, what happens in the future? There's a wide variety of
possibilities. Worst case, civil war, breakdown, fracturing of
the government, fracturing of the army. That's very possible
and that would be a very bad outcome. There's also a
possibility, not high in the probability list, but a negotiated
settlement between the government and the Taliban. That's
possible. And then the alternative is an outright takeover of
the Taliban, which I also think that is unlikely but possible.
So there's a variety of outcomes here that could happen. We
are executing the orders that were given in a very professional
way, and thus far things are relatively stable on our end.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you, General Milley. I think it's
obviously just a significant concern as we do watch the Taliban
advance, and we know we have got a counterterrorism mission we
have to conduct and we don't have any basing agreement secured
for over the horizon.
But I want to just end with the continuation of this topic
that's been discussed. A couple of my colleagues suggested that
there were service members who were being somehow persecuted
because of their political beliefs or their ideological
beliefs.
And I want to, first of all, thank you for noting that the
attack on the Capitol on January 6th was an attack on the
Constitution. We do need to understand what happened. It was an
attack provoked by the Commander in Chief. He could have
immediately intervened to stop it and he didn't. I think it's
very important for us to recognize and understand who was in
the Capitol that day and why, and we have to protect the First
Amendment rights of our service people, no doubt.
But it's also critically important that we remind everybody
that the UCMJ makes it a crime to engage in sedition or mutiny
or to seek the violent overthrow of the United States
Government.
So I would urge, as you are focused on getting to the
bottom of what happened, we need to do the same here. But we
really need to focus on that piece of this as well.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Khanna [presiding]. Thank you.
I recognize Representative Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you so much for joining us. I
wanted to follow on a question from my colleague, Ms. Cheney,
about the GBSD. I know you said a final decision will only come
after the Nuclear Posture Review.
But it seems from the budget that this decision has already
been made with the claim that the price to build and operate
the new GBSD would be less than the cost to maintain the
current Minuteman III.
So it seems this conclusion is based by comparing the total
lifecycle cost of the two options through 2075 at a deployed
level of 400 ICBMs.
Is that true? If so, where did those numbers, 400 in 2075,
come as the baseline requirement? Who made that decision and is
that still going to be revisited down the road, as you said?
Secretary Austin. Well, certainly, as I indicated a couple
minutes ago, you know, I've not made any decisions on this. I
think it deserves, you know, the right amount of effort and
attention, and we'll make the best choices.
But these choices need to be informed by the--by the
posture review and make--to make sure we have the right balance
here.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you. You know, I think it's
important that we do the process necessary and not invest in a
very expensive nuclear platform as, for instance, our President
is in active negotiations to decrease our reliance on nuclear
weapons.
And my next question is, you know, I represent San Diego
and almost all of the people in uniform I speak to, they're
struggling to find childcare. I'm happy to see that the
President's budget increases base pay, but it seems like
there's just so much more we need to do. And I was a little
surprised that in this budget request it only requests funding
of a single construction of a new childcare development center,
one 200-space center at Sheppard Air Force Base in Texas. I
know you said to my colleague earlier that you were working on
investments in home care support and others. So I just wanted
to know what more you're planning on doing to address childcare
beyond this single one space that is being constructed.
Secretary Austin. Thanks for the question and for your
continued focus on what I believe is a very important issue.
We'll continue to work with the services as they work with
their installation commanders and they identify what their
needs are and make sure that those needs are reflected in
military construction plans, going forward.
But I personally believe that--and I know all the
secretaries and the chiefs believe--that this is a--this is an
important issue and one we need to continue to invest in.
So more need--more work needs to be done to the point that
you're making.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. Yes, I really want to emphasize that
I think what's in the budget is not sufficient, and I can tell
you for my constituents in San Diego, you know, of our
subsidized childcare waiting list spots, more than half of them
are military families. And so it's a really critical need and I
hope that you would continue to emphasize it and I appreciate
your comments there.
If Ms. Escobar is here, I'm happy to give the remainder of
my time to her.
Mr. Khanna. [Audio malfunction.]
Ms. Jacobs. All right. Well, then, Mr. Chair, I'll yield
back.
Mr. Khanna. The chair recognizes Representative McClain.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you for being here in front
of this committee today, and it's a pleasure to meet you in
person.
I want to speak today what--in regards to what a lot of my
colleagues have already spoken on, which is China, and I think
we all agree is China seems to be our most challenging
adversary or national threat.
We're fortunate enough to have thousands of businesses
across our country that have contracts with your Department. My
question is, do you believe it would be in the best interest of
our national security to ensure that the CCP does not have
access to our military intellectual property?
Secretary Austin. I absolutely believe that and I think we
need to--it's important to me to make sure that, number one,
the DOD networks are properly protected, but we need to
advocate or ensure that all those people--all those companies
that are supporting us in supply chains are doing the right
things to meet the standards to reduce vulnerabilities in a
supply chain.
Mrs. McClain. Extremely critical. Finally, do you fear that
when the United States conducts a foreign military sale to a
nation that also has accepted Belt and Road funding that our
military equipment might fall into the hands of the CCP?
If not, can you explain how do we ensure that this doesn't
happen and what do we do to make this better and to protect
America and to protect our intellectual property? What action
steps can we take?
Secretary Austin. Well, we--before we enter into the
agreements there, we certainly do assessments to make sure that
the people that we're selling the gear to do have the
capability to protect our property, our intellectual property,
and they agree to do what's necessary to do that.
Mrs. McClain. So to make sure I understand--I didn't mean
to interrupt--is when we engage in a sale, we put mechanisms in
place to make sure that our intellectual property is protected
and secure?
Secretary Austin. To the best of our abilities, yes. We
take appropriate and responsible actions and, of course, the
State Department is involved in deciding whether or not the
sales will be--will be consummated. I mean, they get to approve
that.
Mrs. McClain. What do you think we can--what measures, if
any, can we take to make sure that we ensure this process is
even safer to a greater--to a greater ability? I mean, you hear
or, at least, I hear, the American public hears, on a constant
basis China is stealing our intellectual property and it's
coming from a lot of our business dealings.
Secretary Austin. You know, I think we can--we need to
continue to engage our partners and allies and emphasize the
importance of this. We need to make sure that as we--as we
convey equipment that we are confident that the people that
we're conveying it to can protect the intellectual property.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, sir. I yield back.
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you.
We are at that magic hour. I know the Secretary has a hard
stop at 2:00 o'clock. So Mr. Kahele--I'm sorry, I never
pronounce that correctly. I'll learn by the end of the session,
I promise. You are recognized for 5 minutes and that you will
be the last questioner that we have before we close at 2:00.
Mr. Kahele. Mahalo, Mr. Chair, and aloha, Secretary Austin
and General Milley.
Mr. McCord, thank you for your service, all of you for your
testimony today.
I want to focus my questions on the Pacific Deterrence
Initiative, the importance of those U.S. relationships with our
allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific region, and the
changing nature of the future conflicts.
Secretary Austin, I applaud you for showcasing America's
commitment to the Indo-Pacific region by making your first
overseas visit with your trip to Japan and South Korea and
India, and a brief stop in the Hawaiian Islands. I'm sorry I
missed you.
But as we are now discussing the fiscal year 2022 defense
budget, which I appreciate the President's budget and the
investment in the PDI, I also think as China becomes more
aggressive in the region the United States needs to be more
aggressive regarding our critical investments in the PDI, and
there are things that are not in that budget, in the unfunded--
like the Guam defense system, the Homeland Radar-Hawaii, the
TACMOR [Tactical Mobile Over the Horizon Radar] in Palau--that
I think we need to take a look at, and so that we can fully
fund that PDI and fully meet the objectives that we discussed
today, which is one of those national instruments of power,
which is our military deterrence and the strength of that
deterrence in the Indo-Pacific region.
So as a member of the Pacific Islands Caucus, I want to
continue to call attention to Oceania and the Pacific Islands
region. China regularly provides military training in the
Pacific Islands region. They have been broadening their reach
throughout the Pacific. They actively cultivate those
relationships with senior defense officials.
You know, we know what the investments that they've been
doing in Guam for a number of--excuse me, in Western Samoa for
a number of decades, and as those defense officials from China
go to the different Pacific Island regions, they get full
military honors, such as in Papua New Guinea under their
defense force--chief of defense visit in 2016. Under President
Xi, senior PLA officials have held bilateral meetings with
their counterparts in Papua New Guinea and Tonga and Fiji.
And so my first question to you, sir, is given the
increasing military-to-military engagements in the Pacific
Islands region, especially Papua New Guinea, Fiji, and Tonga,
many of those small islands listed on the unfunded section
1251, will the DOD plan similar high-level engagements to
strengthen those relationships with our counterparts in those
small island nations in Oceania to deter China from extending
their reach throughout the Western Pacific and into the Eastern
Pacific?
Secretary Austin. As you pointed out, Congressman, the
Indo-Pacific is important to us and my very first trip was out
to the region. And I would just say that China is engaging a
number of different countries and with economic----
Mr. Kahele. Carrots.
Secretary Austin. Yeah. But we have something that China
doesn't have. We have allies and we have partners. And if you
consider the Australias, the Japans, you know, the Koreas of
the world, you know, there is tremendous capacity in our allies
and partners.
I think the Pacific Islands are absolutely important, and
you'll see us continue to engage various countries in the
region there and to make sure that where we can, we're
increasing our capacity and accessibility and strengthening the
relationships.
But we far and away exceed any capability that China would
have in terms of partner or ally capability, and we're going to
continue to strengthen what we have.
Mr. Kahele. What are your thoughts then on expanding those
relationships that we currently have or previously had? For an
example, in the Philippines we had robust bases at Clark. Of
course, we have a presence in Subic and Singapore. We have
Changi, you know, and we have U-Tapao in Thailand. What are
your thoughts on expanding those relationships, specifically,
the Philippines?
Secretary Austin. Absolutely the right thing to do and, you
know, I've talked with the minister of defense in the
Philippines a couple of times. Certainly, we would look to
expand our footprint and strengthen our relationship, as we go
forward. I'll continue to work on that personally. I think it's
really, really important.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I will yield
back the remainder of my time. Mahalo.
The Chairman. Well, thank you very much. And I want to
thank both of you--well, all three of you. Mr. McCord, alas,
did not get a question. I'm sure you were profoundly
disappointed.
But I do want to thank the Secretary and the Chairman. And
I think it is really important, as we have had these
discussions, you know, we focused on some areas of
disagreement. But there was overwhelming agreement on this
committee in a bipartisan way about the priorities and needs
within our Department of Defense and how to meet those.
And I hope we'll stay focused on those and not get too
obsessed with the areas where we disagree because there's a lot
of good in what you're doing at the Pentagon. A lot of work to
be done, obviously, and I think this committee and this
Congress will contribute to that with useful and productive and
helpful ideas over the course of the next several months as we
work through the defense bill and the appropriations bill.
But I, you know, want to congratulate Secretary Austin.
This is his first--not the first appearance before this
committee, the first appearance, I believe, as the Secretary
and we very much appreciate your leadership. And I think you
are absolutely the right person for the job at this moment.
Glad you are there. Look forward to continuing to work with
you.
Mr. Rogers, do you have anything for the good of the order?
Mr. Rogers. Just to say I envy Mr. McCord. I mean, this
is--this is my kind of hearing for you, buddy.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rogers. And I have the highest respect for the
Secretary and the general, and thank you for your service and
being here. And I concur with the chairman's observation about
this committee's focus on what we need, and we will continue in
a bipartisan fashion.
So thank you very much, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:02 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 23, 2021

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 23, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 23, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 23, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Secretary Austin. My staff, including the Missile Defense Agency
and the Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, is
completing the examination of options for combat- and cost-effective,
survivable, and technically executable Integrated Air and Missile
Defenses for Guam. A summary of this analysis will be provided to
Congress, to give an initial overview of the option space. These
results will inform the Department's final decision on the Integrated
Air and Missile Defense of Guam as part of the Fiscal Year 2023 budget
cycle.   [See page 18.]
Secretary Austin. The Department of Defense remains deeply
committed to working with Israel to ensure that the Iron Dome Defense
System is capable of protecting Israeli civilians. The Department
strongly supports Israel's request for additional support for its Iron
Dome Defense System and continues to consult closely with the Israeli
Ministry of Defense on the details of the request.   [See page 18.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN
Secretary Austin. U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM)
established a distinct line of effort, the Cognitive Performance
Program, within the Preservation of the Force and Family (POTFF)
program structure in FY 2020, and hopes to align the funding for this
effort in FY 2022. The $10.2 million referenced in the POTFF budget was
not a request for a budget increase, but rather reflected a realignment
of resources from two other POTFF Domains (Behavioral Health Domain
($6.1 million) and Human Performance Domain (physical) ($4.1 million)).
Although USSOCOM has had numerous cognitive performance initiatives
underway for several years, the decision to create a distinct line of
effort to address the cognitive domain within the POTFF program also
resulted in the need to realign resources in order to place greater
emphasis on brain health and cognitive performance. The goal of this
dedicated line of effort, focused on cognitive performance, is to
maximize cognitive functioning of SOF personnel by monitoring the
impacts of exposure to explosive blasts, by assessing brain functioning
and cognitive performance, and by training. USSOCOM has started several
initiatives under the POTFF Cognitive Performance Program, including
computer-based cognitive training programs, enhanced assessments,
career-long preventative monitoring efforts, multiple research projects
to better understand the impacts of blast exposures, and assessments of
technologies intended to improve cognitive functioning and to monitor
exposures to blasts. USSOCOM POTFF's cognitive enhancement efforts
provide individual and collective training to proactively build
cognitive resilience and ability.   [See page 19.]
General Milley. DOD seeks a secure and stable region where U.S.
national interests are safeguarded, the U.S. homeland is defended, and
nations work cooperatively to address challenges. We currently assess
the risk of conflict in the Arctic as minimal. However, the Arctic is a
rapidly evolving security environment in which the Joint Force must
present a credible deterrent to conflict, maintaining its flexibility
to respond promptly and effectively to contingencies in the region. DOD
recognizes that Russia and China are actively challenging the Arctic
rules-based order. Russia views itself as a great polar power and
regulates maritime operations in the Northern Sea Route in a manner
contrary to international law. Although Russia has generally followed
international law and procedure in establishing the limits of its
extended continental shelf, DOD recognizes that Russia could choose to
unilaterally establish those limits if the procedures prove unfavorable
and, in doing so, could utilize its military capabilities in an effort
to deny access to disputed Arctic waters or resources.
Meanwhile, while China is not an Arctic nation, it is attempting to
gain a role in the Arctic in ways that may undermine international
rules and norms, and there is a risk that its predatory economic
behavior globally may be repeated in the Arctic. Moreover, China is
increasing its presence through economic outreach, investments in
Arctic states' strategic sectors, and scientific activities.
The 2019 DOD Arctic Strategy guides the Department's approach to
the Arctic. The Strategy recognizes the existence of multiple competing
global priorities and emphasizes that Arctic resourcing needs to
account for other global priorities. The Strategy generally takes the
approach of focusing resources on Russia and China in other areas of
the world in order to limit strategic spillover in the Arctic,
particularly vis-a-vis the surface maritime domain. DOD strategy
advocates for improved early warning systems, other domain awareness
systems, and improved communications in the Arctic.   [See page 19.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY
General Milley. The Joint Force is leveraging various, established
bilateral and multilateral fora designed to maintain the confidence of
our Allies and Partners in the Middle East, Europe, and Africa.
DOD leads the CT effort throughout the middle east effort. In
Africa, DOD remains committed to Countering Violent Extremist
Organizations (CVEO). We continue close collaboration with our Allies
and Partners, sharing our future global force posture objectives and
intentions. In West Africa, we continue to support French-led efforts,
and consult regularly.
Finally, the Joint Force continues to build confidence among our
Allies and Partners by leveraging numerous routine bilateral and
multilateral fora to achieve mutual military objectives and desired
strategic effects.   [See page 37.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON
Secretary Austin. There are classified reasons why the budget
presentation exists in its current form. The Comptroller takes care to
avoid inadvertently exposing classified information to the public and
continues to provide the annual classified budget extract report along
with the President's Budget submission to the committees in order to
present a complete, classified picture to Congress. The Department was
unable to provide the display requested by the Congress for the FY22
Budget Request without adversely affecting counterintelligence, but is
considering several options to do so in the future.   [See page 46.]
General Milley. Congressional support of current arms sales
particular to air defense capabilities can strengthen deterrence for
Taiwan. Current arms sales that support the air defense mission are the
Stinger man-pad, sustaining their PATRIOT batteries, and the Harpoon
Coastal Defense System. Improving Taiwan Armed Forces with small,
highly maneuverable, cost-effective and highly lethal anti-aircraft and
ship weapons is also beneficial. Building Taiwan's indigenous air
defenses and asymmetric capabilities through co-development
opportunities will further strengthen Taiwan's deterrence.   [See page
47.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Secretary Austin. The interagency working group did not consult
with the Navy regarding shipyard infrastructure, however, the
Department of the Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program
(SIOP) aligns with the American Jobs Plan in building world-class
infrastructure; revitalizing manufacturing and small businesses; and
training Americans for the jobs of the future. SIOP meets the
President's infrastructure priorities; projects are scoped and ``shovel
ready'' to provide a clear return on investment to the tax payer
through immediate job creation and opportunities for economic dividends
for the next generation of skilled trades maintaining the Nation's
fleet.   [See page 51.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GOLDEN
Secretary Austin. The Navy has been using multi-year procurement
(MYP) authority with the support of Congress to procure DDG 51
destroyers in quantities that support stable production and a healthy
industrial base. MYP contracts generate substantial savings compared to
the annual procurement cost estimates, provide a long-term commitment
to the shipbuilding industrial base that stabilizes shipyard employment
levels, and incentivize industry to make capital investment that
improve productivity. The Navy plans to request authority for MYP of
DDG 51 Flight III ships for FY 2023-2027.   [See page 66.]
General Milley. PB22 procures warships and submarines with credible
combat power to deter China, invests in the industrial base to support
continued modernization, and on-time delivery of Columbia. The decision
to procure only 1 DDG in FY22 was a hard choice. These hard choices are
driven by budget constraints and reflect the Navy's assessment of where
to take investment risk balanced across industrial base performance.
Reducing to one DDG in FY22 (final year of multi-year contract) is
least impactful. While the department will face  $33M penalty, reducing
to one DDG in FY22 will allow the industrial base to recover from
production backlog and more reliably produce 2 Flight III DDGs per year
in FY23 and beyond.   [See page 66.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. LURIA
General Milley. The FY 2022 President's Budget includes retirement
of platforms and systems that cannot be affordably modernized to enable
them to have credible combat power.
Prior to any programmed divestiture, the Department considers the
system's efficacy against projected threats, sunset timeline of the
system(s), whether there are alternative ways to execute the same
missions, and the risks associated with divestment. DOD has conducted
such an assessment of those systems slated for divestment in the
President's Budget for Fiscal Year 2022.
The savings from these divestments have been re-invested in the
development and procurement of key new technologies (e.g., hypersonics)
to deter and, if necessary, defeat any adversary now and in the future.
[See page 69.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
General Milley. We are developing a counterterrorism over-the-
horizon (OTH) capability in the region that will allow us to keep our
eyes firmly on any direct threats to the United States and act quickly
and decisively if needed. To that end, we have added more capability in
the region, including intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR) assets and combat aircraft in the Gulf. President Biden has
directed the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Afghanistan by September 10
and noted the withdrawal will be complete by the end of August. The
withdrawal included the transfer of Bagram Airfield to Afghan National
Defense and Security Forces. Only HKIA is needed to support the U.S.
and allies diplomatic presence. U.S. and coalition forces do not have
the number of personnel or capability in country to necessitate
maintaining Bagram.   [See page 24.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. GREEN
Secretary Austin. The Department of Defense prioritizes science and
technology (S&T) investments that enable the Joint Force's success
today and tomorrow. The Department's FY2022 budget request includes its
largest ever Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation request at
$112.0 billion and $14.7 billion in S&T investments. These University
Research Initiative efforts represent a portion of the Department's
total research and workforce development portfolio, which includes a
number of initiatives specific to cybersecurity research and workforce
development for which the budget request maintains full funding. While
the services' subaccounts for the University Research Initiative were
cut, these savings were invested in programs deemed to be of higher
priority and better alignment to the National Defense Strategy. The
Fiscal Year 2022 Cyberspace Activities budget includes around $500
million for advanced cyber-related research and development activities,
which includes programs to substantially enhance expertise and skills
within the cyber operations, cybersecurity, and cyber S&T workforces.
[See page 58.]
General Milley. The Army is not cutting CTC rotations for Fiscal
Year 2022 (FY22). There is an increase of two programmed rotations from
FY21; 20 programmed in FY22 and 18 programmed in FY21. CTCs are aligned
with the Army's training strategy to meet readiness requirements which
allows tailored CTC rotations to meet unit training requirements. This
training strategy provides levers to allow for customizing the size and
scope of a CTC rotation commensurate with readiness requirements. The
Army Training Model relies on simultaneous Multi-Echelon training
events at Company and below, allowing for additional repetitions for
those formations to provide the time required for mastery of
fundamentals.
The FY22 rotation breakdown is:
--National Training Center--8 rotations
--Joint Multi-National Training Center--4 rotations
--Joint Readiness Training Center--8 rotations
There are 20 CTC rotations planned for FY23 and 21 for FY24.   [See
page 57.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 23, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Mr. Lamborn. Secretary Austin, Ebrahim Raisi is Iran's next
president, he has firmly stated that ballistic missiles--the delivery
system for a nuclear weapon--are off the negotiating table. Raisi says
support to proxies attacking our soldiers and our allies will continue.
Iran's proxies have accelerated attacks in Iraq and against Saudi
Arabia and Israel--how does the Pentagon justify redeploying air
defense assets that were put in place to protect our troops and our
allies against Iranian proxy attacks?
Secretary Austin. The Department of Defense redeployed certain
forces, primarily air defense assets, from the Middle East this summer.
The overextension of these assets threatened to undermine the overall
readiness of our forces globally. We continue to maintain significant
air defense assets deployed in the Middle East, with a focus on
defending against the most likely regional rocket and UAV threats. We
have also improved our array of passive defense measures. Our partners,
from Israel to the Gulf region, also have significant air defense
assets and have proven themselves increasingly adept at effectively
operating these systems. We are constantly reassessing our posture in
response to evolving global threats.
Mr. Lamborn. General Milley, Admiral Davidson has expressed his
support for a ``360-degree, persistent, air and missile defense
capability on Guam (Guam Defense System (GDS))'' and testified about
the groundwork which has been laid so far.
I agree with him on the need for the GDS, both because Guamanians
are American citizens and worthy of protection from the growing Chinese
and North Korean missile threat, but also because of the extremely
important role Guam plays in our Pacific strategy.
Can you please elaborate for us as best you can in an open setting
how a so-called ``bloody-nose'' or ``decapitation'' strike on Guam
would impact our ability to conduct operations in the western Pacific?
General Milley. Any attack would cause great concern for the Joint
Force and the civilian population of United States. INDOPACOM has
numerous contingency plans in place to respond to such an attack and
would be able to respond accordingly. We are constantly assessing the
threat and reviewing our plans and options. Studies are underway to
develop an effective approach for the missile defense of Guam in order
to expand and modernize our regional missile defense posture against
ballistic and hypersonic missile threats in the INDOPACOM theater.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Mr. Wittman. On December 3rd, 2020--just a few months ago--General
Milley said: ``We're going to have to have a much larger fleet than we
have today, if we're serious about great power competition and
deterring great power war, and if we're serious about dominant
capability over something like China or some other power that has
significant capability.''
Secretary Austin, yes or no, do you agree with General Milley's
statement?
That same day Gen Milley also said: ``I would advocate, and bias
going forward, heavy investment'' regarding sea, air and space-centric
platforms.'' He then went on to say: ``We are, and the defense of the
United States depends on air power and sea power primarily. People can
say what they want and argue what they want, but that's a reality.''
``. . . I love the Army . . . but the fundamental defense of the
United States, and the ability to project power forward [are] going to
be naval and air and space power.''
Yes or no, do you agree with General Milley's statement?
Secretary Austin. I agree that naval, air, and space power are
increasingly critical in maintaining the U.S. military edge and in
deterring conflict. The size of the future Navy fleet is an important
aspect of naval and air power. However, we need to focus on fleet
capability, not just numbers of ships, and how the Navy operates
jointly with other capabilities, including those of the Army, in the
future threat environment. That is how the Department is approaching
future war fighting challenges--from a Joint Force-wide and fleet-wide
perspective, enabled by new operating concepts and investments in other
advanced capabilities and modernized forces.
Mr. Wittman. Secretary Austin, On May 27th, I quote you as saying,
``let me assure you, from my perspective our effort is not to make the
Army be the bill payer for the Air Force or Navy.''
This was made abundantly clear by the shortsighted annual
shipbuilding report delivered to Congress. The plan calls for smaller
ships to support DDGs and CGs, fails to meet the redline on Amphibs for
the Marines, and then proceeds to inactivate 7 CGs and only fund 1 DDG.
Gen. Milley has stated on record that all the systems in the Army's
big six priorities are being well funded. A second DDG was a priority
for the Navy. The Marine Corps is on the verge of cutting end strength
to be a billpayer for Force Design 2030.
Secretary Austin, would you say that our investment is properly
biased? Has something happened since December that has changed reality
and we are no longer dependent on sea power as Gen Milley has said?
Secretary Austin. I agree with General Milley that the PRC is our
pacing challenge in strategic competition and we need to develop
advanced capabilities to remain dominant. The Fiscal Year 2022 budget
prioritizes and invests in capabilities focused on the Indo-Pacific,
and buys us the flexibility needed to go after the right capabilities
that will ensure we remain relevant in any competition. We invest $52
billion in buying a lethal Air Force, $34 billion in buying combat
effective naval forces, and $12.3 billion for combat effective ground
forces. And when you combine that with our investment in missile defeat
and defense, $6.5 billion in long range fires, and $10.5 billion in
cyber, it really does create a tremendous capability for us.
Mr. Wittman. I have strong concerns about the overuse of Requests
for Forces (RFFs) by certain Combatant Commanders.
I worry that our ability to modernize the services for a future
Great Powers competition and conflict will be undermined by the
combatant command's failure, unwillingness, or inability to make do
with their approved GFMAP allocations. As I understand it, RFFs are
mainly only to be submitted and approved if there is a significant
change in the operational environment.
Last week, in this room, CNO Gilday said: ``I think the process
needs more rigor.''
In an unclassified format: What is your threshold for approving
RFFs? What would qualify as a change in the operating environment that
is significant enough to warrant a departure from the carefully planned
GFMAP?
RFFs against the GFMAP is not a recent phenomenon. What steps are
you taking to reset the balance between near-term crises driving RFFs
and long-term readiness?
Are you communicating the expectation that the combatant commands
will only request forces for tasks that are truly mission-critical?
And finally, does the GFMAP process itself need to be restructured?
Secretary Austin. The threshold for approving RFFs cannot be
specifically defined since the decision is dependent on multiple
factors including intelligence assessments, priorities, emerging
opportunities, the operational environment and the actions of our
adversaries. Changes in the operational environment are driven by many
unpredictable factors, e.g., the COVID pandemic, which trigger requests
to the Secretary to reallocate forces around the world to support
dynamic operations and emerging opportunities. New intelligence will
also highlight changes in the operational environment that may
necessitate a change in force allocation. Risks to mission and forces
are always taken into consideration when considering allocation or
reallocation of forces. Understanding we cannot avoid all risk, we
mitigate risk where we can, relying on strength of deterrence and non-
military means to pursue U.S. objectives in other areas.
The GFM allocation process begins with the development and approval
of the Base Global Force Management Allocation Plan (GFMAP), a process
that starts more than 18 months prior to force deployments in a given
Fiscal Year. Although there are numerous touchpoints with various
intelligence providers and civilian leaders throughout development of
the Base GFMAP, DOD cannot predict with certainty what the future
operational environment will look like and require in terms of force
allocation. To account for changes in the environment, along with
routine administrative refinements, Combatant Commanders submit
Requests for Forces (RFFs) for modifications to the GFMAP. The Joint
Staff receives these RFFs, reviews them for feasibility and
supportability, and makes recommendations to the Secretary to modify
the GFMAP. The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the DOD
components review the Joint Staff's recommendations and provide their
positions and opinions. My approval of modifications to the GFMAP does
not imply that the GFMAP was wrong, but rather that conditions,
guidance, or risk have changed. Without the flexibility of RFFs, the
Department would rely on a plan for force distribution that may not
reflect the realities of the environment.
Commanders understand the impacts of every RFF and in general
already submit only mission-critical demands. Each Combatant Commander
has a wide variety of assigned responsibilities, tasks, and missions.
These tasks often change with the global environment, and each of these
changes warrants consideration of changing our Base GFMAP. As some of
these situations may be unforeseen, we must remain flexible to adjust
our plan and ensure we are meeting the Nation's security needs, both
domestically and abroad.
We have taken steps to better balance GFMAP force demands with
long-term readiness or crisis with peer competitors by providing
guidance to Services to maintain a more expansive set of ready forces
via the Directed Readiness Tables. These efforts ensure we have
available forces to respond to crisis or to execute our most demanding
operational plans.
While there is always room for improvement, I do not believe our
allocation process needs a wholesale restructure. The process functions
as designed, ensuring decisions involving risk to force versus risk to
mission are presented to inform my decisions, with the appropriate
Service Chief's or Combatant Commander's impact statements for my
review. The ongoing Global Posture Review, directed by the President in
February, is in the process of identifying opportunities to adjust DOD
posture, including overseas deployments, to achieve better alignment
with the President's Interim National Security Strategic Guidance. In
addition, the National Defense Strategy process will examine how to
align the Administration's priorities with resourcing, including
tradeoffs across modernization, readiness, and force structure. The GFM
process is flexible enough to receive this guidance and adjust both
assignment and allocation of forces appropriately.
Mr. Wittman. In an unclassified format, which Global Combatant
Command submits the most Requests for Forces outside of their GFMAP
allocation?
Secretary Austin. Historically, CENTCOM submits the most Requests
for Forces. Factors that contribute to this status are a dynamic and
rapidly changing security situation, limited assigned forces, and
strategic guidance that initially limited base order commitments to the
CENTCOM AOR, necessitating Requests for Forces when the security
situation changed.
Over the last two years, we have received more than 200 Request For
Forces per year, with CENTCOM accounting for over 30% of those
requests. Historically, 80% of the originally approved annual GFMAP
BASE ORDER allocation remains in place through that respective fiscal
year.
Mr. Wittman. In Great Powers Competition, strategy and budgeting go
hand-in-hand. Would you support briefing the congressional defense
committees on the annual Global Force Management Allocation Plan
(GFMAP)? If not, why not? Shouldn't the defense committees of congress
have a greater understanding of how the O&M funds--that are being
authorized and appropriated--are being used through an annual briefing
on the GFMAP?
Secretary Austin. Yes, I would support a briefing by the Department
to the congressional defense committees on the overall prioritization
of forces in the annual GFMAP. The GFMAP authorizes force allocations
and deployment of forces in support of a Combatant Commander's force
requirements. It provides details on how forces are applied in context
to National strategies and demonstrates the efficient employment of
forces based on those priorities.
Mr. Wittman. In an unclassified format, which Global Combatant
Command submits the most Requests for Forces outside of their GFMAP
allocation?
General Milley. Based on data for FY20 and FY21, U.S. Central
Command submitted the most Request for Forces, accounting for 40-50% of
emergent forces demand each FY. U.S. Northern Command was the next
largest contributor in each FY, accounting for 30-40% of emergent
forces demand, largely driven by Southwest Border and COVID response
requirements
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. Secretary Austin, while I understand that it is
impossible to perfectly predict future force allocation needs, I am
concerned that the Global Force Management process is not adequately
balancing OPTEMPO and providing a measure of predictability to our
service members. Please describe what actions you are taking within the
current process to ease the strain on overburdened forces?
Secretary Austin. The annual GFMAP development cycle is a more than
18 months long process driven by the tasks within the strategic
guidance documents, including the President's Interim Strategic
Security Guidance and the Department's National Defense Strategy,
National Military Strategy, and Defense Planning Guidance. During the
annual GFMAP process each Combatant Command and military Service has
multiple opportunities to explain their current and future challenges.
Each concern is captured and assessed for risk and impact. Where there
is disagreement, the Department's senior leadership is gathered and a
decision is made and captured in the annual GFMAP, to include Service
Chief concerns on impacts to the health of the force. I take those
concerns very seriously and only approve exceptions for priority
requirements that justify the deployment of the Department's most
valuable commodity--our service members.
Additionally, each Request for Forces is validated for legitimacy
to ensure the request is necessary to accomplish the tasks within the
guiding strategic documents and warrants the employment of forces and
service members. This validation process reduces unnecessary Requests
for Forces by applying specific criteria to question the authority,
policy, legality, funding, and suitability of each request. Deployment
to Dwell and Mobilization to Dwell remain indicators I use to measure
the stress on the force and remain a factor in all decisions to employ
the force.
Ms. Speier. Secretary Austin and General Milley, are there any
studies currently underway to analyze and recommend modifications to
the Global Force Management System?
Secretary Austin. The Global Posture Review, directed by the
President in February, is a process for identifying opportunities to
adjust DOD posture--including overseas deployments--to achieve better
alignment with the President's Interim National Security Strategic
Guidance and DOD's focus on the PRC as the pacing threat. In addition,
this year's National Defense Strategy review will examine how to align
the Administration's priorities with resourcing, including tradeoffs
across modernization, readiness, and force structure.
Additionally, since February 2021 the Joint Staff has been
assessing the Global Force Management Annual Allocation process for
possible improvements. The results of that study are currently being
analyzed and will be briefed to the Services and Combatant Commands.
The outcomes may result in modifications to the Global Force Management
system in the coming months and years.
Ms. Speier. General Milley, you mentioned that while overall
OPTEMPO is not trending higher, relative OPTEMPO has been increasing.
Why are end-strength requests not shifting to balance out the relative
increase?
General Milley. PB22 fund an overall Active Component military end
strength of 1.346M personnel. This is a decrease of 4.6K (-0.3%) below
the FY21 currently projected levels and is largely due to divestments
across multiple platforms/structures to finance the future fight.
The Joint Force will be smaller and leaner, but more agile,
flexible, ready to deploy, innovative and technologically advanced.
With the U.S. military withdrawal from Afghanistan, the Army and Marine
Corps will no longer need to be sized to support the large scale, long-
term stability operations required over the past two decades. Force
allocations will be structured and paced to allow forces to surge,
regenerate, and mobilize capabilities needed for any contingency.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROOKS
Mr. Brooks. The Fiscal Year 2022 budget request includes
significant funding for offensive hypersonic weapon systems being
developed by the services, including the Conventional Prompt Strike
program, the Long Range Hypersonic Weapon, and the Air-launched Rapid
Response Weapon, all of which are planned to be fielded in the near
term. What value will these systems--which will have the capability to
hit high value targets via unpredictable flight paths--have to the
combatant commanders, especially compared to other conventional missile
capabilities currently deployed?
Secretary Austin. Hypersonic weapon systems provide a combination
of speed, maneuverability and altitude that enables highly survivable,
long range, rapid defeat of time-critical, heavily-defended and high
value targets.
Our potential adversaries have rapidly developed highly capable
systems to challenge our domain dominance on the tactical battlefield.
These systems include anti-ship ballistic missiles, high-end integrated
air and missile defense systems, anti-satellite capabilities, and land-
attack cruise, ballistic and hypersonic missiles. These systems
collectively create a tactical battlefield environment that is highly
contested, presenting a significant challenge to our traditional weapon
capabilities. Moreover, the adversary has increasingly focused on
systems that dramatically compress the timelines on the tactical
battlefield. These systems include ballistic missiles, ballistic
missiles with maneuvering reentry vehicles and, increasingly,
hypersonic strike missiles. These systems provide the adversary an
ability to hold our forces at risk hundreds, and even thousands, of
miles out with flight times measured in minutes.
Our current portfolio of traditional tactical strike weapons
consists of sea-launched subsonic cruise missiles and air-launched
subsonic cruise missiles on subsonic or low supersonic aircraft
delivery platforms. These systems will take on the order of 10 times
longer to fly a long range strike mission when compared to the
adversary high speed systems. This presents unfavorable battlefield
asymmetry.
The Department's Hypersonics Modernization Strategy accelerates the
development and delivery of transformational warfighting capabilities
based on hypersonic systems. This strategy includes air, land, and sea
launched conventionally armed hypersonic strike weapons for highly-
survivable, long-range, time-critical defeat of maritime, coastal and
inland targets of critical importance on the tactical battlefield. The
Fiscal Year 2022 budget includes funding to accelerate the development
and transition of hypersonic weapons to enable fielding of operational
prototypes in quantity from land, sea and air by the mid-2020s.
Mr. Brooks. The Department has made great progress towards fielding
offensive hypersonic capabilities, but we haven't done enough with
respect to hypersonic defensive capabilities. Hypersonic threats are
here today, and we need to be able to defend against them. While this
budget request did not include projected spending levels for the next
five years at the program level, do you believe that there is
opportunity to accelerate development and ultimately fielding of
hypersonic defensive capabilities?
Secretary Austin. Our potential adversaries have aggressively
pursued, and are now fielding, a variety of hypersonic systems that
challenge our air and missile defenses with a combination of range,
speed, altitude and maneuverability. Defense against these systems will
require a comprehensive layered defeat approach that includes a layered
kinetic and non-kinetic defense in the terminal and glide phases of
flight, as well as, left of launch kinetic and non-kinetic defeat of
missile launch complexes and kill chain elements. Our current strategy
for kinetic defense includes a layered capability with terminal defense
by the mid-2020's and demonstration of a glide phase defense later in
the decade. Offensive hypersonic capabilities provide left of launch
kinetic strike capability in the mid-2020s. Concept development for the
glide phase defense capability is under way and initial studies
indicate that there is opportunity to accelerate development of glide
phase defense capability. MDA is currently evaluating concepts proposed
by industry to achieve that acceleration.
Mr. Brooks. The Fiscal Year 2022 budget request includes
significant funding for offensive hypersonic weapon systems being
developed by the services, including the Conventional Prompt Strike
program, the Long Range Hypersonic Weapon, and the Air-launched Rapid
Response Weapon, all of which are planned to be fielded in the near
term. What value will these systems--which will have the capability to
hit high value targets via unpredictable flight paths--have to the
combatant commanders, especially compared to other conventional missile
capabilities currently deployed?
General Milley. The Department's investment strategy develops and
procures multi-Service, multi-domain offensive weapons focused on the
high-end fight that enable the Joint Force to hold adversary forces at
risk at operationally relevant ranges. By enabling power projection
from standoff ranges, the risk to critical U.S. assets decreases while
the defensive burden imposed upon the enemy increases.
PB22 funding is essential to mitigate offensive fires capacity
shortcomings, enhance operational flexibility in multiple domains, and
accelerate the transition of hypersonic weapons from development to
procurement and fielding.
Offensive hypersonic weapons play an important role in deterrence.
We are investing heavily in offensive hypersonic weapon systems now
because the Joint Force requires these capabilities to hold adversary
targets at risk at operationally relevant ranges.
Mr. Brooks. The Department has made great progress towards fielding
offensive hypersonic capabilities, but we haven't done enough with
respect to hypersonic defensive capabilities. Hypersonic threats are
here today, and we need to be able to defend against them. While this
budget request did not include projected spending levels for the next
five years at the program level, do you believe that there is
opportunity to accelerate development and ultimately fielding of
hypersonic defensive capabilities?
General Milley. The DOD continually assesses technology advancement
to ascertain opportunities for accelerated development or fielding of
systems that enhance warfighter capability based on the evolving threat
environment.
The Missile Defense Agency (MDA) Hypersonic Defense effort is
funded at $247.9M in PB22. This funding advances several technology
enablers such as hypersonic threat sensor technology, architecture
analysis, threat modeling, Command and Control, Battle Management and
Communications (C2BMC) upgrades, and a Glide Phase Defeat Weapon
System. The Hypersonic Defense effort also leverages investments in
targets and the Hypersonic Ballistic Tracking Space Systems (HBTSS),
which is funded at $256.2M in PB22.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. Can you provide an accounting on how the Department is
implementing the FY2021 NDAA provisions relating to L-band spectrum,
when they will be complete, and any recommended changes to the law?
Secretary Austin. The Department of Defense (DOD) is implementing
Sections 1661 through 1664 of the FY2021 NDAA. DOD's progress to
complete these requirements varies with the level of analysis and
interagency coordination required for each provision. The mechanism to
oversee and implement these provisions is the Council on Oversight of
the DOD Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Enterprise. If there are
legislative changes to be recommended from the Council's work as these
provisions are implemented, the Department will seek to share them with
the Congress through the appropriate channels as the recommendations
are identified. Below is a short status update on each provision.
Section 1661--Prohibition on availability of funds for certain
purposes relating to the Global Positioning System.

The Council on Oversight of the DOD Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing Enterprise is assessing and managing this effort
to ensure compliance.

Current DOD efforts to migrate to M-Code with the next
generation of GPS user equipment are driven by adversary threats.
Section 1662--Limitation on awarding contracts to entities
operating commercial terrestrial communication networks that cause
harmful interference with the Global Positioning System.

The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
Sustainment will assess current and future contracts for compliance and
is serving as the DOD lead in this area.

The Council on Oversight of the DOD Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing Enterprise will provide oversight on behalf of
the Secretary.
Section 1663--Independent technical review of Federal
Communications Commission Order 20-48

A DOD Contract is in place with the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM); NASEM has chosen a study
chair and is in the process of recruiting and vetting candidates to
support the study.

The Council on Oversight of the DOD Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing Enterprise will provide oversight on behalf of
the Secretary.
Section 1664--Estimate of damages from Federal Communications
Commission Order 20-48.

DOD is assessing potential expected costs associated with
20-48. Conclusions will depend on the NASEM Study referenced above.

The Council on Oversight of the DOD Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing Enterprise will provide oversight on behalf of
the Secretary.
Mr. Brown. Secretary Austin, In your responses to the Advanced
Policy questions for your confirmation hearing, you stated, ``Space is
already an arena of great power competition'' and ``the strategic
environment continues to evolve rapidly, especially as it applies to
space.'' Recognizing this, Congress created the U.S. Space Force
(USSF), reestablished U.S. Space Command as a unified combatant
command, and created the Space Development Agency. What additional
space-based capabilities and capacities do you need to meet the demands
of great power competition in space? And as the need for space launch
services continues to grow, how will you ensure diversity within the
industry?
Secretary Austin. The Department seeks to develop capabilities that
enhance Joint Force operations across all domains, such as space
situational awareness and command and control systems. These
capabilities are critical components of a modern, resilient
architecture essential to maintaining our advantages in space and
giving the United States the technological edge over our adversaries.
With regard to launch capabilities, the Department has invested more
than $2 billion in the U.S. space launch industrial base to ensure
competition and end reliance on foreign rocket engines. This strategy
culminated successfully in August 2020 with the National Security Space
Launch Phase 2 procurement contract award. The NSSL program has
established a research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E)
strategy to invest continuously in the industrial base, expand
opportunities for industry, and provide further opportunities for
commercial space launch. Finally, the NSSL Phase 3 procurement
competition in fiscal years 2024-2025 will provide further
opportunities to diversify the industry.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY
Mr. Kelly. How does the Department determine what is of greatest
importance to service members, their families, and their broader
support network? What means do you have to capture those insights at a
national, state and local level? What level of confidence do you have
in the information the Department is using to understand those concerns
and does the Department have the means to directly engage those
individual cohorts in a responsive way?
The Military Wellness Initiative (MWi) is the only resource
available I am aware of that provides these insights and solutions. It
continues to expand and be developed in support of the readiness of our
troops and the mental and physical wellness of our veterans and their
communities.
Secretary Austin. The Department recognizes the importance of
family support and the crucial role families play in supporting Service
members deployed all over the world. The Department uses multiple
methods to collect reliable and generalizable data to ensure that
military leaders have the best information possible when making
decisions regarding military families.
The Department conducts an extensive joint-Service survey program
to assess issues of importance to Service members and their families
through the Status of Forces (Active and Reserve) Surveys administered
annually and the Active and Reserve Spouse Surveys (administered every
2 years). Data from these representative surveys provide baseline data
and trends over time to assess issues and concerns related to quality
of life, retention, satisfaction, family life, financial readiness, and
importance of and satisfaction with DOD programs and policies including
those that provide support to the member and family. The surveys
capture these responses for overall DOD and the Services as well as at
a national and regional level. The surveys use scientific sampling and
weighting and so provide accurate estimates of these target
populations.
In addition to survey data, the Department incorporates a robust
research program to assess service member and family program uptake and
understand where gaps in program coverage exist. For example, DOD
conducts large-scale program evaluations to understand user experiences
and outcomes. Administrative data from DOD and other government
agencies (e.g., Census, Social Security Administration) are also
utilized to better understand the impact military service has on
families. Finally, the Department tracks program metrics across the
portfolio of programs supporting service members and their families.
Ongoing measures of program quality, utilization, and customer
satisfaction provide the ability to adapt programs to address concerns
with access, quality and/or content. Program metrics also help the
Department identify opportunities to direct resources where they are
most needed to support military families.
Mr. Kelly. There are a precious few Army modernization programs
that are critical to military operations worldwide and domestic
missions such as natural disaster response. Notably, the M917A3 Heavy
Dump Truck does all of this and more for the Active Army, the Army
National Guard, and the Army Reserve. I'm pleased to see the Army
request some funding for the Heavy Dump Truck program in the FY 2022
request. What is the Army's plan to continue procurement of the M917A3
Heavy Dump Truck?
Secretary Austin. The M917A3 Heavy Dump Truck is being executed
under a five year contract, which was awarded in 2018. Low rate initial
production was completed in the third quarter of FY20 with a full rate
production decision in the first quarter of FY22. Full rate production
and procurement is planned to begin in FY22 with completion projected
for FY23.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER
Mr. Gallagher. Secretary Austin, in your prepared remarks, you call
for accelerating ``investments in cutting-edge capabilities that will
define the future fight,'' including long-range fires. What would be
some of the tangible consequences if Congress fails to fully fund
programs like the Marine Corps' Long Range Fires and Ground-Based Anti-
Ship Missiles, and the Army's Mobile Medium Range Missile in FY22?
Secretary Austin. The DOD invests $6.6B in Long Range Fires systems
in PB22, an increase of $1.4B over FY21. The Department's PB22 Long
Range Fires (LRF) investment strategy develops and procures multi-
Service, multi-domain offensive weapons focused on the high-end fight
that enable the Joint Force to hold adversary forces at risk at
operationally relevant ranges. By enabling power projection from
standoff ranges, the risk to critical U.S. assets decreases while the
defensive burden imposed upon the enemy increases.
PB22 funding is essential to mitigate offensive fires capacity
shortcomings, enhance operational flexibility in multiple domains, and
accelerate the transition of hypersonic weapons from development to
procurement and fielding. The impact of not funding these LRF efforts
is a delay in capability delivery to the warfighter, reducing the
Combatant Commander's options to respond to threats from multiple
domains.
Mr. Gallagher. Secretary Austin, I know we share a commitment to
ensuring the Constellation-class frigate is a success. In light of both
the proven nature of the design and the lessons of the LCS, can you
commit to minimizing any changes to the existing hull and machinery to
help ensure the program delivers on time and on budget?
Secretary Austin. Recognizing that the Constellation-Class Frigate
has requirements and some suppliers that differ from the parent design,
the Navy is committed to deliberately completing a detail design that
meets requirements with minimal change.
Mr. Gallagher. Chairman Milley, in the FY15 NDAA, Congress stood up
the National Commission on the Future of the Army, which recommended an
active duty end strength of 450,000 even after the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. Can you talk a bit about what in the threat environment has
changed so that the Army end strength in the FY22 budget is now at
485,000?
General Milley. The end strength recommendation by the 2016
National Commission on the Future of the Army represented a force
deemed ``minimally sufficient'' to accomplish the statutory and
regulatory requirements placed on the Army. Recent budget increases
have helped implement the commission's recommendations to fund the Army
at or above their recommended end strength.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Ms. Houlahan. In May of this year I introduced the Military Moms
Matter Act which, among other initiatives, proposes extending paid
family leave to 12 weeks for service members, in line with our NDAA
2020 proposal for federal employees, which became law last year. One of
the big topics of debate in this bill is the leave for ``primary'' and
``secondary'' caregivers. As the policy is currently written, the
secondary caregiver is able to use very little leave following the
birth or adoption of their child. We understand the need to maintain
force readiness, but ensuring we take care of our troops and retain our
forces is also vitally important to retention and morale, and as a
matter of fairness to ensure no service member has to choose between
being the best parent and serving their country. Secretary Austin and
General Milley--I'd like to hear your thoughts on expanding secondary
leave for service members or eliminating that designation entirely and
offering equal leave to all members. With a record number of women
entering our military, though still a fraction of our U.S. population,
can you tell me what the Department is doing to ensure proper support
mechanisms are in place, such as childcare, which will allow our
Military Women to have an equitable service experience?
Secretary Austin. As you have indicated, the Department must ensure
we take care of our Service members and their families. Ensuring they
have the time required to recover from the arduous nature of their
duties and tend to the needs of their families should be part of
service life. The birth or placement of a child is a circumstance where
providing more leave than the 30 days every Service member accrues each
year is certainly appropriate. That being said, the Department must
establish policies that strike the right balance between providing
additional leave to parents and maintaining operational readiness.
The Department recognizes the importance of providing military
families with access to quality, affordable child development programs,
and is committed to meeting the increased demand for child care. The
Department operates the country's largest employer-sponsored child care
program. It provides high standards of care in government-operated
facilities and also offers a robust placement and fee assistance
program to help military families obtain child care in the local
civilian community. Recently, the Department launched a new initiative
to help military families obtain childcare and facilitate additional
spouse employment opportunities by offering fee assistance to Service
members who obtain care from in-home child care providers.
The Department is also working hard to ensure our talent management
processes permit the opportunity for women to advance in their military
careers without impediments caused by unnecessary policies or
inflexible career paths. We are closely examining outdated or overly
restrictive policies that detract from individual career progression,
data concerning Service member quality of life, unit readiness, and the
overall retention of highly trained professionals.
Ms. Houlahan. I understand that the DOD would like to explore a
mid-career program that allows individuals to more easily move between
government and industry and I am very happy to not just hear about this
idea, but about the Department's support of it. I've been supportive of
expanding the Career Intermission Program both for active duty members
and incorporating one for DOD civilians.
Can you tell me a bit more about how you envision this program
working in a way to support the defense critical supply chain? Would it
be for certain career fields? I know we are still having a difficult
time recruiting and retaining STEM talent, so how would this program
effectively improve the current manning issues?
Secretary Austin. The Career Intermission Program (CIP) for active
duty military members is a helpful tool that allows the Department to
retain its investment in highly skilled members of the military who
would otherwise be prevented from completing an active duty career. A
similar authority that permits a flexible career path for civilian
employees could be useful in recruiting and retaining specialized
talent in the civilian workforce. I would like to note that existing
authorities under 10 U.S.C. 1599j facilitate mid-career mobility and
learning opportunities between DOD civilian personnel and industry. The
DOD will continue to ramp up its current Talent Exchange Program
enabled through this authority by increasing the pool of participants.
The program is still being refined--it is in its fourth year of
existence--but meets many of the ends for civilian personnel that the
Career intermission Program meets for active duty service members.
Ms. Houlahan. During my time in Congress, I have advocated
vigorously for investment in STEM education and programming for
children and young adults in my community to meet the needs of the
future's workforce in all sectors of employment. Secretary Austin: As
the needs of the Department of Defense adapt to demand new technical
skills for recruits, soldiers, seamen, airmen, and guardians--how does
the budget reflect meeting the needs for STEM recruitment from our high
schools and colleges?
Have you looked at increasing the pool of ROTC applicants from
Minority Serving Institutions to address a lack of diversity within the
STEM fields?
Secretary Austin. The budget request incorporates new and
continuous efforts to select a talented and diverse cohort,
contributing to improved graduation rates, low attrition, greater
lethality, and improved retention. The general DOD model is to recruit
and access a qualified field of applicants, place them on best fit
occupational career trajectories, and provide the necessary technical
training required to meet operational objectives. This process provides
a stable pipeline of highly qualified individuals to educate and train
in emerging fields. Both the Military Service Academies and our ROTC
Programs are attracting the STEM talent needed to meet the emerging
needs of the Military. However, it should also be noted we are
collaborating with Historically Black Colleges and Universities and
Minority Serving Institutions to attract diverse talent for STEM and
other critical career fields.
Ms. Houlahan. Much of my ``Armed Forces Digital Advantage Act'' was
included in the FY2020 NDAA which established a policy to recruit,
retain and promote tech talent and digital expertise in the DOD
workforce.
Secretary Austin, can you share what steps the DOD has taken to
develop a policy on tech talent management, allowing us to recruit the
right people and ensuring our talented work force stays within the
Department?
Secretary Austin. Developing a highly capable digital workforce is
critical to achieve the broader digital transformation outlined in the
DOD Digital Modernization Strategy to integrate digital technology into
the full range of DOD operations, from personnel management to
strategic planning to operations and battlefield management. In June,
the Department delivered a Digital Talent Management implementation
plan to Congress, as required by Section 230 of the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (FY2020). This plan addresses
the recruitment, hiring practices, development, and retention of a
civilian and military workforce with digital and software development
expertise.
Implementation of this plan, led by the Offices of the Under
Secretary for Acquisition and Sustainment and the Under Secretary for
Research and Engineering, will be executed within a Digital Talent
Management forum that is cross-functional with representation from the
Military Departments, the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Personnel and Readiness, the Office of the Chief Information Officer of
the DOD, and the Defense Digital Service. Additionally, the Department
has provided plans and reports in accordance with FY2020 NDAA Section
255 (Department-wide software science and technology strategy), Section
256 (Artificial Intelligence Education Strategy), and Section 862
(Software Development and Software Acquisition Training and Management
Plans).
Ms. Houlahan. Secretary Austin, you have been vocal about the need
to improve the diversity of our forces. Can you please provide an
update on your recent efforts to recruit and retain a diverse force?
Secretary Austin. As I stated in my Message to the Force, we will
lead with our values, building diversity, equity, and inclusion into
all aspects of our work and in everything we do.
To that end, we have established a DOD Equity Team (DET) to
facilitate, inform, and advance our progress on all issues relating to
diversity, equity, and inclusion. The DET is actively reviewing our
policies, programs, and processes related to talent management.
Additionally, we are evaluating recruiting strategies to reach a wider
audience, including obtaining more interest from underrepresented
communities. Developing and expanding key partnerships remains critical
to generating interest in, and informing youth of, the benefits and
importance of military service. Furthermore, we are presenting diverse
recruiting imagery and targeted messaging to showcase that the military
is a diverse, representative force and to garner increased interest
among youth from all communities across our nation.
Regarding retention efforts, I want to assure you that we are
working to retain the best and the brightest Service members and
provide all Service members an opportunity to excel, regardless of
race, gender or ethnicity. As such, one of my efforts focuses on
building transparency in our selection processes. Greater transparency
will help ensure that selection processes for promotion, nominative
assignments, command, and schooling are fair, equal, and based on
merit. In addition, the Department has removed all photographs from
promotion selection processes.
These issues require sustained leadership attention. Both Deputy
Secretary Hicks and I will continue to champion diversity, from top to
bottom, across the entire Defense enterprise.
Ms. Houlahan. Secretary Austin, back in April, I sent a letter to
you with several of my colleagues asking you to implement mandatory
training on digital literacy and cyber citizenship within the DOD. The
proposed defense budget would set aside $30.8 million to help the
Pentagon improve tools to identify and address extremism among troops,
and enhance training at all levels. It also includes $9.1 million to
take initial steps to fight extremism and insider threats.
Can you share in a bit more detail what these tools and trainings
will look like?
Secretary Austin. The Department's Countering Extremist Activity
Working Group is exploring multiple actions to enhance Insider Threat
(InT) awareness training. This Working Group is examining Common
Military Training and looking at ways to include InT awareness training
and requirements for the services in an efficient and effective manner.
The Cyber Awareness Challenge and InT trainings provided by the Defense
Counterintelligence and Security Agency's (DCSA) Center for Development
of Security Excellence are being reviewed for recommended updates to
address extremist activities/behaviors of concern. Further, the Working
Group has facilitated collaboration among Department stakeholders to
produce additional training tools to assist with identifying and
addressing extremist activities and other behaviors of concern.
The $30.8 million is within DCSA's FY 2022 President's Budget
request, and includes $9.5M for User Activity Monitoring (UAM). UAM
provides a technical capability to monitor activity on select Non-
Secure Internet Protocol Router (NIPR) devices accessing U.S.
Government information in order to detect insider threats. The NIPR UAM
capability provides the Department with the ability to detect early
indicators of concern on the unclassified IT system.
Additionally, the Budget request includes $12.5M for DCSA's Vetting
Risk Operations Center to build a capability to incorporate Publicly
Available Electronic Information (PAEI), including social media, into
background investigations in accordance with Security Executive Agent
Directive 5 (SEAD-5) and aligned to the Trusted Workforce 2.0 personnel
vetting reform initiative. This will fund screening, analysis, and
reporting of PAEI, including social media, in support of national
security eligibility determinations. The PAEI investment will deliver a
capability to support DOD requirements for enhanced personnel security
as directed in P.L. 114-113 and will aid in the execution of continuous
vetting in accordance with direction from the Security and Suitability
Executive Agents.
Ms. Houlahan. In May of this year I introduced the Military Moms
Matter Act which, among other initiatives, proposes extending paid
family leave to 12 weeks for service members, in line with our NDAA
2020 proposal for federal employees, which became law last year. One of
the big topics of debate in this bill is the leave for ``primary'' and
``secondary'' caregivers. As the policy is currently written, the
secondary caregiver is able to use very little leave following the
birth or adoption of their child. We understand the need to maintain
force readiness, but ensuring we take care of our troops and retain our
forces is also vitally important to retention and morale, and as a
matter of fairness to ensure no service member has to choose between
being the best parent and serving their country.
Secretary Austin and General Milley, I'd like to hear your thoughts
on expanding secondary leave for service members or eliminating that
designation entirely and offering equal leave to all members. With a
record number of women entering our military, though still a fraction
of our U.S. population, can you tell me what the Department is doing to
ensure proper support mechanisms are in place, such as childcare, which
will allow our Military Women to have an equitable service experience?
General Milley. Taking care of troops and their families is a key
readiness issue. We continue to expand programs that increase
availability and improve affordability of childcare. Last Fall, the
Department initiated a comprehensive review to update policies to
enable pregnant Service members to safely continue their duties, attend
training, and perform critical assignments, including appropriate
assignments in deployed environments. This continues to be an ongoing
effort to improve our policies.
Ms. Houlahan. I understand that the DOD would like to explore a
mid-career program that allows individuals to more easily move between
government and industry and I am very happy to not just hear about this
idea, but about the Department's support of it. I've been supportive of
expanding the Career Intermission Program both for active duty members
and incorporating one for DOD civilians.
Can you tell me a bit more about how you envision this program
working in a way to support the defense critical supply chain? Would it
be for certain career fields? I know we are still having a difficult
time recruiting and retaining STEM talent, so how would this program
effectively improve the current manning issues?
General Milley. I am encouraged that the Career Intermission
Program permits service members to pursue personal goals or
professional growth while providing a mechanism for a seamless return
to Active Duty. The VA extended education benefits for veteran students
seeking science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) degrees
through The Edith Nourse Rogers STEM Scholarship GI Bill STEM Extension
in 2019. The DOD SkillBridge program is a means that allows
Servicemembers to transition from government to industry. Through the
SkillBridge program industry partners benefit from gaining early access
to the extensive experience, skills, and unmatched work ethos Service
members bring to the workforce. Employers craft SkillBridge programs to
meet their specific workforce needs, matching those needs to the skills
and abilities of highly motivated Service members. The U.S. Department
of Defense pays Service member salary and benefits while the Service
member participates in SkillBridge. This opportunity may last up to the
final 180-days of service. Military installation Commanders can make
on-base facilities available to industry partners for use in their
SkillBridge programs, or members may be authorized to train at the
industry partner's location off installation at minimal to no cost.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN
Mr. Bergman. Earlier this week, Secretary of the Army Christine
Wormuth stated that the Army National Guard may not be able to fund
training for the remainder of the fiscal year if supplemental funding
is not provided to offset the cost of the Capitol security response.
The Air National Guard is also in a similar position. Secretary Austin
and General Milley, what would be the impact on readiness for Army and
Air National Guard units around the country if supplemental funding
isn't provided?
Secretary Austin. Supplemental funding has since been appropriated
by Congress.
Mr. Bergman. Earlier this week, Secretary of the Army Christine
Wormuth stated that the Army National Guard may not be able to fund
training for the remainder of the fiscal year if supplemental funding
is not provided to offset the cost of the Capitol security response.
The Air National Guard is also in a similar position. Secretary Austin
and General Milley, what would be the impact on readiness for Army and
Air National Guard units around the country if supplemental funding
isn't provided?
General Milley. Since supplemental funding has not been provided in
July, the Army National Guard will begin notifying the 54 States and
territories to cancel some August and September training events due to
budget constraints. We can realistically expect cancelled training
events will adversely impact affected ARNG and ANG units' readiness due
to cancelled training, exercises, maintenance, and logistics.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. The Chinese are at 1,000 shipyards, and we're at less
than 20. The Navy has its shipyard infrastructure improvement plans, so
they clearly defined shipyard infrastructure as a priority. There is no
mention, not one, in the President's $1.9 trillion infrastructure plan.
Were you consulted by the interagency group that submitted the
infrastructure plan? Whether it is grids, ports, and especially
shipyards, was the Defense Department consulted for it's priorities a
part of the administration's plan?
Secretary Austin. The interagency working group did not consult
with the Navy regarding shipyard infrastructure, however, the
Department of the Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program
(SIOP) aligns with the American Jobs Plan in building world-class
infrastructure; revitalizing manufacturing and small businesses; and
training Americans for the jobs of the future. SIOP meets the
President's infrastructure priorities; projects are scoped and ``shovel
ready'' to provide a clear return on investment to the tax payer
through immediate job creation and opportunities for economic dividends
for the next generation of skilled trades maintaining the Nation's
fleet.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. ESCOBAR
Ms. Escobar. Secretary Austin, in your testimony, you also
mentioned how protecting the United States requires teamwork at every
level: state, local, tribal, territorial, and federal. This necessary
collaboration often happens when resources are equability shared
throughout communities. One program in particular that echoes the
spirit of this is the Defense Community Infrastructure Program or DCIP,
which makes grants to assist State and local governments to address
deficiencies in community infrastructure supportive of military
installations.
Currently, assets that are on lands leased from the Department of
Defense are ineligible for funds, even if these assets support military
value. As you may be aware, there are numerous local government
entities, public utilities, and public cooperatives that support the
missions of military installations with infrastructure and facilities
on lands leased from DOD.
Can you speak on DOD's position as it pertains to the expansion of
eligibility to the program and removing this obstacle to ensure these
assets are eligible under DCIP?
Secretary Austin. The Department would support considering
expanding eligibility for projects located on property that may be
leased from a military department or anothercomponent of the Department
of Defense. I want to note that standard real estate improvement leases
are for a period of not less than 30 years.
Ms. Escobar. In the FY20 National Defense Authorization Act, this
committee requested the U.S. Army to review the military service record
of our World War I hero, Private Marcelina Serna, a migrant from Mexico
who volunteered for duty even though his immigrant status granted him
an exemption and the most decorated WWI soldier from Texas, for an
eligibility to be awarded the Medal of Honor. Not much progress has
been made to recognize the honorable and heroic service of Pvt. Serna.
In honor of Memorial Day, I introduced a bill to correct the bigotry
that denied a Mexican American World War I hero the nation's highest
military honor, and authorize the President to posthumously award Pvt.
Serna the Congressional Medal of Honor.
Minority heroes and women and men of color like Pvt. Serna who have
served on behalf of the military have long faced a history of
discrimination that has kept them from being honored for their
extraordinary heroism. How is the Department of Defense working with
our military services on ensuring we don't leave these heroes behind?
Secretary Austin. The Military Departments' respective World War I
(WWI) valor medal reviews directed by Section 584 of Public Law 116-92
(FY20 NDAA) are ongoing. The reviews are examining the valorous actions
of African American, Asian American, Hispanic American, Jewish
American, and Native American war Veterans who were nominated for the
Medal of Honor, or awarded a Service Cross and/or a French Croix de
Guerre with Palm (at the Army level or above) for actions during WWI to
determine if the respective Veteran's actions warrant upgrade to the
Medal of Honor. The Military Departments anticipate completing their
reviews by December 20, 2025 as required by Section 561 of Public Law
116-283 (FY21 NDAA). The Army confirmed that its respective WWI valor
medal review includes the Distinguished Service Cross awarded to
Private Marcelina Serna for this valorous actions during WWI.
Additionally, I am reviewing the Department's current and past
valor medal reviews that focused on specific minority war Veterans
(i.e., African Americans; Asian Americans; Hispanic Americans; Jewish
Americans; Native Americans; Native American Pacific Islanders) during
specific wars/conflicts to ensure each such group is provided the same
opportunity for review as their respective counterparts.
Ms. Escobar. The climate crisis is an imminent threat and as a
member of both the Armed Services Committee and the Select Committee on
the Climate Crisis, I have been raising the alarm for what it will mean
for our national security and installation readiness. That is also why
I introduced the DOD Climate Resiliency and Readiness Act along with
Senator Warren, which I look forward to reintroducing soon. I am a firm
believer that if DOD can begin to plan for climate mitigation and be
proactive on climate that there is no excuse for civilians to do the
same. That is why I am so encouraged by the Department's request of
$617 million to combat the climate crisis. The four categories you have
laid out provide a clear guide for where this funding would go. In
particular, I'd like to focus in on the $263 million put into
Strengthening Installation Mission Resilience investments. I think this
represents a great opportunity for our installations to move towards
net-zero emissions. For example, Fort Bliss is located in a region that
experiences almost 365 days of sunshine a year, which presents a great
opportunity to invest in solar panels as an alternative, and soon main,
power source for the base.
However, I am concerned that this funding may not reach
installations like Fort Bliss within the first year. Could please you
describe how DOD would be making decisions for this funding and how
installations can put themselves in the best position possible to
receive it?
Secretary Austin. Strengthening installation resilience to hazards
associated with the effects of climate change ensures that the DOD can
successfully execute critical missions. A key component of installation
resilience is energy resilience. Energy resilience is essential to
ensuring installations remain effective power projection and
sustainment platforms in the face of escalating cyber, climate, and
kinetic risks. The Department uses all existing authorities, to include
appropriated funds and third party financing, necessary to ensure
energy resilience and improve mission readiness. An example is DOD's
Energy Resilience and Conservation Program (ERCIP), a defense-wide
military construction program used to make investments necessary to
close the Department's critical energy gaps through projects submitted
by each military service. A competitive process is used to select
projects to ensure ERCIP funding is directed to the Department's high-
priority, high-value resilience projects. ERCIP projects may include
on-site renewable energy, microgrids, and energy efficiency
technologies that ensure access to reliable, resilient and cyber-secure
energy critical to DOD mission execution.
Ms. Escobar. Secretary Austin, I want to thank you and the
Department for putting together a plan for canceling and reprogramming
DOD funds that were allocated by the previous administration for a
border wall. However, as a member representing both the southern border
and a military installation in need of funds for critical
infrastructure on base, it was alarming to see just how easy it was for
the Department to take funds allocated by Congress for certain programs
and redirect them towards something as ineffective as a border wall.
My main concern is that a future administration may use the same
playbook laid out by the previous one and pillage critical programs
within DOD for wall funding. What can Congress do to ensure funding we
have appropriated actually makes it to their designated accounts? This
is something I'd like to continue the conversation on and look forward
to working with you and your staff to find a solution suitable for both
DOD and Congress.
Secretary Austin. I am committed to transparency regarding
resourcing decisions of the Department and look forward to continued
congressional support. The Department relies on existing authorities to
provide the flexibility required to manage the Department's resources
in the most efficient and effective manner possible, and we will do so
within the legal boundaries Congress provides.
Ms. Escobar. General Milley, this morning my colleagues in the
House, joined by Rep. Speier of this committee, and I, introduced the
Vanessa Guillen Military Justice Improvement and Increasing Prevention
Act to modernize the military justice system by transferring
responsibility for making prosecutorial determinations for the most
serious crimes to military attorneys with significant trial experience
and training than the existing chain of command. As you may be aware,
this the companion bill of Sen. Gillibrand's military justice bill,
which you have voiced opposition to. Sadly, your recent opposition in
communication with the Senate Armed Service Committee has caused Senate
leaders to block efforts to secure a vote on the bill. This bill is now
a bicameral, bipartisan bill with wide support, even from Members
who've served and speak to the dire issues in our military justice
system. Though more limited in comparison to our bill, the recent
recommendations of the task force that Sec. Austin set up to conduct a
90-day review of sexual harassment and assault in the military,
included a recommendation to hand decisions to prosecute sex crimes to
military lawyers.
General, do you support the recommendation of the task force to
remove the chain of command from sexual harassment and assault crimes?
General Milley. I support fundamental change in the area of sexual
assault and sexual harassment, including removal of Commanders from
preferral and referral decisions. However, we need to stay narrowly
focused on the issue of sexual assault and directly related crimes in
order to drive meaningful change. Any additional change requires
deliberate, empirically-based study and analysis to ensure proposed
changes will yield the desired results.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. LURIA
Mrs. Luria. General, at last week's budget hearing for the Air
Force, I asked General Brown--twice--if he thought we might actually
conduct a large scale land invasion in any conflict with China. He
mentioned the joint warfighting concept and said it's ``hard to predict
what would happen'' and to have ``options in the future.'' General,
China has a population of 1.4 billion people. The People's Liberation
Army has about 2.2 million active duty soldiers and about half a
million reserve soldiers. Do you envision the U.S. and its allies
mounting a large scale land invasion of the PRC? If not would it be
more advantageous to redirect some funding for the Army to the Navy and
Air Force to deter and counter, if necessary, China?
General Milley. Both the National Security Strategy and National
Defense Strategy recognize the PRC as a strategic competitor vying for
economic, diplomatic, and military advantages globally. The United
States has responded to the Chinese Communist Party's (CCP's) direct
challenge by acknowledging that the U.S. and PRC are in a strategic
competition. The United States and its allies will protect our
interests appropriately, but competition does not mean conflict. Even
as the United States competes with the PRC, we welcome cooperation
where our interests align.
Addressing your second question, the Department is currently
conducting a Global Posture Review to assess whether our current force
is allocated and positioned to meet our pacing threat and competitors.
This review includes participation from the services. Following
completion of the Global Posture Review and the National Defense
Strategy, we will be better positioned to make recommendations
regarding force posture and funding allocation to deter and defend our
interests, as well as compete with China.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MORELLE
Mr. Morelle. The nature of conflict has increasingly become a
global engagement verses regional engagements. Does department have the
domain awareness needed to be successful in global engagements? Does
the FY22 budget support those needs?
Secretary Austin. The Department has identified and is investing in
a range of key capability needs, including: improved domain awareness
systems; more robust communications capabilities; increased
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; and improved
environmental modelling. For example, the Department is continuing to
advance the development of the Joint All Domain Command and Control
capability, a construct and modernization framework for command and
control of the Joint Force, allies, and partners that will provide the
ability to connect distributed sensors, information, data, and effects
from all domains in a resilient manner.
Mr. Morelle. Secretary Austin, DOD intelligence assessments have
consistently chronicled the increasing proliferation and sophistication
of hypersonic vehicles, unmanned aerial vehicles, and sea-skimming
missiles, of all types and ranges, being developed by potential
adversaries. These threats will be difficult to defend against with
conventional weapons, including our current interceptor-based defenses,
leading to an unacceptable vulnerability to ``swarm'' attacks. In
addition, the relative cost of one interceptor to one hypersonic
vehicle is comparable, or greater, creating a situation where the
defense costs as much as or more than the offense. Short-pulse laser
(SPL) directed energy weapons (DEW) systems can produce extremely high-
peak-power on target, offering near instantaneous destruction of
targets, advantageous magazine-depth, low-cost per shot, and
significant advantages in size, weight and power (SWaP). Despite the
advantages of this game-changing technology, recent DOD budget requests
have disinvested in DEW development. For example, the request for the
Missile Defense Agency did not include funding for directed energy
research for the second straight year. Can you comment on this funding
imbalance for DEW systems and what is needed to accelerate the research
and development of SPL based systems to ensure we are able to counter
and deter the likely threats of the next several decades?
Secretary Austin. The Missile Defense Agency (MDA) recently funded
a research effort to investigate the efficacy of ultrashort pulsed
lasers against hypersonic missiles. While the basic physics were
successfully demonstrated, the military utility was not successfully
demonstrated. The Department recognizes the potential of pulse lasers
as one of several possible counters to hypersonic weapons, but realizes
that more research and development is needed in the area. The Fiscal
Year 2022 budget includes funding for a number of directed energy
programs throughout the Department and reflects the Department's top
priorities in directed energy.
Mr. Morelle. The nature of conflict has increasingly become a
global engagement verses regional engagements. Does department have the
domain awareness needed to be successful in global engagements? Does
the FY22 budget support those needs?
General Milley. Through the delivery of Joint All Domain Command &
Control (JADC2), as demonstrated in globally integrated exercises,
wargames, and experiments, the Department of Defense is continuously
improving the domain awareness needed to be successful in global
engagements. JADC2 is the warfighting capability to sense, make sense,
and act at all levels and phases of war, across all domains, and with
partners, to deliver information advantage at the speed of relevance.
The JADC2 Cross Functional Team (CFT), aligned under the Joint
Requirements Oversight Council (JROC), is responsible for accelerating
the development and delivery of JADC2 capabilities. The CFT is also
responsible for implementation of the JADC2 Strategy and making fiscal
recommendations to the JROC and DMAG concerning resourcing for JADC2
moving forward.
FY22 invests in warfighting capability to deliver information
advantage & domain awareness at the speed of relevance. Investments
into JADC2 will help build a more lethal force, strengthen allies and
attract new partners as an all-domain construct and modernization
framework for command and control of the joint force and mission
partners. PB22 invests $204M for JADC2 efforts to continue development,
integration, and test of digital infrastructure, cloud maturation, and
tactical edge networks.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. KAHELE
Mr. Kahele. Secretary Austin, a recent study commissioned by the
U.S. Space Force, the Defense Innovation Unit, and the Air Force
Research Laboratory found that, ``The United States must also develop
new market-enhancing tools to increase U.S. commercial space
activities, grow viable U.S. space companies, and finance their
growth.'' What market-enhancing tools would you like to see developed
in the area of space launch to grow the amount of viable options for
future warfighter capabilities in the space domain?
Secretary Austin. DOD procures all launch service requirements from
the U.S. commercial space sector. In addition to the National Security
Space Launch (NSSL) program, DOD has already developed a variety of
contracts to identify and on-ramp new launch providers to pair DOD
research and development satellites with innovative U.S. space launch
providers. The U.S. space launch industrial base has been strengthened
with recent launch development and procurement contracts. DOD continues
to work with industry to grow new viable options.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STRICKLAND
Ms. Strickland. One of the issues I have heard extensively about in
my district is the cost of housing. I've had many military spouses
reach out and saying how hard it is for them to find a home. The South
Sound is one of the fastest growing markets in the United States for
civilians and service members alike. Between 2010 and 2019 over 180,000
households moved into my district compared to almost 54,000 households
the decade prior. Housing affordability and increasing housing stock is
a major focus of mine in both of the committees that I serve on. The
Department assumes nationally, that E5s will spend between $84-$95 out
of pocket for housing off post. I have heard very clearly that this is
not the case. Additionally, DOD's own guidance regarding calculating
BAH says that a military member should not be put into a situation in
which a spouse is required to work. However, many spouses are required
to work not just to cover housing costs but to put food on the table.
It is clear to me that BAH is not sufficient to cover the sharp rise of
housing costs--especially in areas like JBLM. On post, there are
currently 776 households on the waiting list at JBLM and, while Lincoln
Military Housing and JBLM are working on an extensive renovation
project, there is more work that needs to be done. We need to seek
creative solutions both in addressing housing stock on post to provide
families options and off post to ensure that service members can afford
to live in our communities. Will you work with me to find creative
solutions to resolve the housing affordability crisis that is currently
affecting our service members?
Secretary Austin. Yes. Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) is an
essential component of a Service member's compensation package. The
Department strives to provide equitable housing allowances to help
members procure suitable, adequate, and available housing near their
duty stations. BAH rates are calculated based on median rental housing
costs in each of approximately 300 military housing areas. Because
members receive BAH as a nontaxable cash allowance, they have the
freedom, based on personal housing needs and desires, to obtain housing
that may cost more or less than the published BAH rates. Additionally,
BAH rates do incorporate a fixed out-of-pocket amount ($84/month for an
E-5 without dependents; $95/month for an E-5 with dependents), which
members are expected to absorb. The BAH program is designed to capture
rising rental housing costs in each military housing area, and data
collection occurs during the spring and summer months, when housing
markets are most active. As the country experiences the COVID-19
pandemic, one of the lingering nationwide effects is a housing
shortage. In some areas, members find rental housing costs have
increased to above the current BAH rates and need more time to find
adequate and available housing. The Department is aware of these
concerns and is considering options to alleviate some of the hardships
members are experiencing. I look forward to working with Congress, and
remain open and committed to discovering opportunities that create
positive, effective solutions for our Service members and their
families.
Ms. Strickland. I understand that all of the services are
performing data reviews and will have their own metrics for improving
outcomes, but can you expand on how you are tracking data across the
joint force? How does the Department plan to measure ``success''? Are
you focused on improving equity in recruiting, retention, promotion,
and discipline? Or are you looking at other factors? How are you going
to keep members accountable for improving outcomes--from the Services
from the Secretaries and Chiefs down to the enlisted service member
entering basic training?
Secretary Austin. Data, metrics, and information are critical in
evaluating all of our efforts, from warfighting to diversity, equity,
and inclusion. In improving equity, especially in retaining and
promoting a diverse military, the DOD Equity Team (DET) is actively
reviewing our existing data collection capabilities to better determine
how we can improve our metrics and evaluation tools so that we can
appropriately measure against our strategic DEI goals. Our data is
critical to our evaluations tools, creating necessary changes, ensuring
appropriate accountability, and supporting inclusive environments that
foster healthy and respectful command climates.
All these issues and factors are intertwined. Retaining a diverse
force, promoting an inclusive culture, eliminating barriers, ensuring
appropriate military justice dispositions--these all help ensure our
Service members are resilient and focused on mission readiness and
accomplishment. We cannot forget that our most valuable asset is our
people. Understanding their perspective and experiences is vital to our
shared success.
Ms. Strickland. It is all well and good to do a one-time report to
get a snapshot of the problem in recruiting, retention, promotion, and
discipline regarding service members from underrepresented groups.
However, addressing diversity, equity, and inclusion will require
regular assessment. Can you tell me how the Department will continue to
collect data? Will questions be added to the annual command climate
survey? Are the specific metrics that the Department is tracking
regarding recruiting, retention, promotion, and discipline regarding
service members from underrepresented groups?
Secretary Austin. The Department maintains a robust collection of
administrative and survey data that can be leveraged on an ongoing
basis to assess and track progress in DEI over time. As recommended by
the DOD Board on Diversity & Inclusion in 2020, the Department has
established a new centralized data enclave to facilitate the
aggregation and reporting of DEI data at the DOD level. This new
enclave will house all the key metrics and enable automated reporting
and tracking using standardized data elements.
Additionally, the centralization of data into this enclave allows
us to more easily identify gaps in DEI metrics and develop plans to
ingest and/or collect additional data, including from survey data
sources, to continuously evaluate and improve DEI efforts. We will also
continue to leverage survey data sources to provide qualitative context
to what we see in the administrative data findings related to
recruiting, retention, promotion, and discipline issues. The command
climate survey (Defense Organizational Climate Survey [DEOCS]) will
continue to play a role in understanding DEI. It was recently
redesigned to elicit information on 19 risk and protective factors that
are associated with a variety of outcomes we are tracking, such as
readiness, retention, sexual harassment, sexual assault, suicide, and
racial/ethnic harassment.
As new information needs and priorities are identified, survey
questions will be updated using best practices in measurement of key
constructs of interest. A list of the DEI metrics that will be tracked
annually is in the new Department of Defense Instruction (DODI)
1020.05, ``DOD Diversity and Inclusion Management Program,'' September
9, 2020. We also track a variety of other metrics in statutorily
required surveys, including sexual harassment, sexual assault, and
racial/ethnic harassment. Finally, with regard to recruiting metrics,
the Department continuously fields surveys with recruitment-aged youth
to stay abreast of motivators and barriers to military service by
underrepresented groups.
Ms. Strickland. The military is a pipeline program, and unlike in
the private sector, it is very rare for someone to come from the
outside and join at a relatively senior position. Can you tell me how
the Department is examining recruitment from underrepresented
communities?
Secretary Austin. The Military Services consistently evaluate their
recruiting strategies to recruit a force representative of the nation
it serves. The Military Services are working closely with their
professional marketing agencies to establish and analyze performance
metrics on the effectiveness of their marketing plans to reach
potential Service members across all communities. We have broadened our
reach by ensuring recruiting imagery reflects a diverse, representative
force and shifting to technology-focused recruiting including both
virtual recruiting and digital marketing, which has resulted in greater
interest in the military by potential Service members across the
nation. Collectively, through these ongoing efforts, the Department,
and the Military Services, are better informed and able to apply more
effective recruiting approaches and tools to reach underrepresented
communities.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. I was pleased to see the MILCON budget increase 1.7%
over FY21. However, the significant backlog of MILCON requirements
means that many projects may never receive funding due to competing
needs. I have seen first-hand the impact of deferred funding in
facility and infrastructure investments at Hill Air Force Base.
Hill currently has a grouping of 66 buildings, known as the 1200
series buildings, that aren't fit to house the 4,000 DOD personnel
found working in them. They were constructed over 80 years ago,
initially built as ammunition warehouse space during WWII. Over the
years, these buildings have been modified to house administrative
functions and are in disrepair. The nature of these buildings not only
leads to poor working conditions but has contributed to recruiting
challenges for programs at Hill, like GBSD. The DOD urgently needs to
find a way to replace these facilities. A recent economic analysis
indicated a potential savings of $400M over 20 years if these
facilities were demolished and replaced. The replacement of these
facilities through MILCON would cost nearly $750M but realistically
cannot compete with limited MILCON funding.
I am proposing a provision in this year's NDAA that would expand
the definition of installation support services in Title 10, Section
2679 that allows a local government to construct, manage, and operate a
facility on or near a military installation for a period of up to 10
years. Unfortunately, we have run into scoring implications that have
stymied this simple solution.
Mr. Secretary, can you commit to examining innovative financing
options and working with OMB to facilitate local communities' desire to
assist bases with their infrastructure and military construction needs?
Additionally, aside from CBO scoring challenges, can you foresee why
the DOD might be opposed to surrounding communities assisting with DOD
projects at a cheaper cost, on an accelerated timeline?
Secretary Austin. The DOD works with local communities on many
initiatives and is willing to consider innovative financing options to
facilitate local communities' desire to assist bases with
infrastructure. However, as your proposal demonstrates, there are
challenges that limit these options, including scoring rules for
budgetary treatment of lease-purchases and capital leases (shared by
OMB, CBO, and the House and Senate Budget Committees, as explained in
OMB Circular No. A-11 Appendix B) and a legal limitation on the
Department's commitment of payments to leaseback facilities from
enhanced-use-lease developers (see 10 U.S.C. 2667 (b)(7), $500K limit).
Mr. Moore. Can you please provide an update on congressionally
directed depot optimization plans expected from the Department?
Secretary Austin. The congressionally-directed optimization plans
are part of the overall report required by Section 359(a) of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law
116-92), which requires the Department to submit a comprehensive
strategy for improving the depot infrastructure of the Military
Departments. The objective of this strategy is to ensure that all
covered depots have the capacity and capability to support the
readiness and material availability goals of current and future weapon
systems of the Department of Defense. This strategy is currently in
development with each of the Military Departments, and we anticipate
that depot optimizations plans and the corresponding strategy will be
completed by the end of October 2021.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
Mr. Fallon. Secretary Austin and General Milley, thank you for your
service to our great country and for testifying today.
1. Secretary Austin, given the fact that any realistic future
conflict will be fought not off the coast of California but nearly a
half a world away in the South China Sea, our adversary's backyard,
wouldn't you agree that it would stand to reason that we would need to
maintain a significant advantage in manpower, material and combat
readiness and projection?
2. Are you at all concerned with China's dramatic increase in their
spending while our own is reduced? That is this policy were to continue
that we would be helping the Chinese Communist achieve their goal of
military parity or even eventual military superiority?
3. General Milley, you stated that if the great power competition
between the U.S. and the Communist Chinese were to devolve into
conflict that it would be incredibly costly and have an uncertain
outcome. And that's now with us spending significantly more. As our
military budget shrinks and China's grows, at what point does it become
impossible to project military power and in so doing, won't this
inevitably lead to the end of any realistic deterrent capability on our
behalf?
4. Secretary Austin our office asked each branch of the service to
provide us with the number of personnel who were separated in the last
year data was available for extremist activity. Two branches still,
months later, have yet to respond. Two provided data.
5. Mr. Secretary, do you have any idea what those numbers were?
Secretary Austin. #1 Response: I agree that in order to strengthen
deterrence against aggressive action, the U.S. Joint Force must
maintain a military edge over the PRC in key capability areas. In line
with the Interim National Security Strategic Guidance, the President's
fiscal year 2022 budget submission reflects an increased emphasis on
modernization, force readiness, and the development of new operational
concepts. Concurrently, the Department must seek to shift resources
away from platforms and weapons that are ill-suited to advanced
threats, and toward investments in cutting-edge technologies and
capabilities that will determine our military advantage in the future.
#2 Response: The Department recognizes that the PRC's ambitious
military modernization, sustained by consistent and sizable growth in
its defense budget, presents an increasingly concerning challenge to
the United States' military advantage in the Indo-Pacific region. I
view the PRC as our pacing challenge, and the speed of its military
advancements highlight the importance of the investments that the
Department is making to maintain a favorable balance of power,
including: more lethal and survivable capabilities, a more resilient
and distributed force posture, and strengthened allied and partner
capabilities.
# 4 and 5 Response: Determining the exact number of actions related
to extremist activity is challenging as there is no UCMJ article or
specific separation program designator (SPD) reason code in place.
Commanders have the authority to employ the full range of
administrative and disciplinary actions, including administrative
separation or appropriate criminal action, against military personnel
who engage in prohibited extremist activity. This is an issue the
Department's Extremist Activity Working Group is examining.
Mr. Fallon. Secretary Austin and General Milley, thank you for your
service to our great country and for testifying today.
1. Secretary Austin, given the fact that any realistic future
conflict will be fought not off the coast of California but nearly a
half a world away in the South China Sea, our adversary's backyard,
wouldn't you agree that it would stand to reason that we would need to
maintain a significant advantage in manpower, material and combat
readiness and projection?
2. Are you at all concerned with China's dramatic increase in their
spending while our own is reduced? That is this policy were to continue
that we would be helping the Chinese Communist achieve their goal of
military parity or even eventual military superiority?
3. General Milley, you stated that if the great power competition
between the U.S. and the Communist Chinese were to devolve into
conflict that it would be incredibly costly and have an uncertain
outcome. And that's now with us spending significantly more. As our
military budget shrinks and China's grows, at what point does it become
impossible to project military power and in so doing, won't this
inevitably lead to the end of any realistic deterrent capability on our
behalf?
4. Secretary Austin our office asked each branch of the service to
provide us with the number of personnel who were separated in the last
year data was available for extremist activity. Two branches still,
months later, have yet to respond. Two provided data.
5. Mr. Secretary, do you have any idea what those numbers were?
General Milley. I am satisfied that the current budget meets our
requirements to bolster our deterrent capabilities now to prevent a
conflict from occurring. My previous comments reflected the significant
national commitment that would be required should a conflict occur,
which is a conflict we aim to deter. To clarify, deterring China from
precipitating a crisis now, while costly, is less expensive than
failing to deter China and engaging in conflict. We should recognize
that China is a very different potential adversary than we have had in
the past; they have enormous national resources at their disposal.
However, we have many advantages at our disposal, particularly in terms
of deterrence, that our budget requests aim to sustain.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. HORSFORD
Mr. Horsford. First, Secretary Austin, I want to congratulate you
on your historic confirmation as our nation's first African American
Secretary of Defense. I respect your life's work and need to get you
out to my district soon. Last week I asked General Brown about the Air
Force's plans to end procurement of the MQ-9 Reaper. As I'm sure you
know, the MQ-9 plays a critical role in my district. Creech Air Force
Base is the hub for global ISR and unmanned hunter-killer operations in
support of combatant commanders. The airmen of Creech Air Force Base
will play an increasingly important role in protecting the homeland as
we shift to exclusively over-the-horizon operations in Afghanistan. I
expressed my concerned last week that ending procurement of the MQ-9
would leave our deployed forces to make do with already insufficient
ISR resources. The day after the Air Force budget hearing, Central
Command released their unfunded priority list. For a second year in a
row, General McKenzie's number one request was for an additional $53
million in funding for the MQ-9. He said that the planned Air Force MQ-
9 reductions, quote, ``greatly increases risk to deployed and
redeploying forces.'' He went on to say that combined with our much
smaller ground force presence in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, MQ-9
reductions would ``substantially reduce'' CENTCOM's ability to combat
ISIS, Al Qaeda, and other terrorist groups. I am concerned by this
clear disconnect between the clearly articulated needs of the combatant
commander and the Air Force's planned reductions.
Do you support General McKenzie's request for additional MQ-9
funding, and do you believe that continued MQ-9 procurement is
necessary to meet CENTCOM's near to mid-term over-the-horizon
requirements?
Secretary Austin. The Department of the Air Force is committed to
providing MQ-9 intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, and strike
capability to Combatant Commands. The Air Force will continue to offer
MQ-9 capability to CENTCOM for the foreseeable future, to include
Gorgon Stare Wide Area Motion Imagery and strike capability.
In FY22 the Air Force is requesting a reduction in combat lines.
This reduction is less than 10% of the current force presentation (4 of
60) and does not equate to reduction in aircraft inventory; while lines
(24/7 coverage) are being reduced, the Air Force is not choosing to
divest of any platforms at this time. By keeping 60 combat lines, and
not modifying the way the MQ-9 fleet is utilized, the platform will
become more vulnerable and irrelevant, even in low-end conflicts.
While the MQ-9 provides utility today, it was not designed for
operation in a future highly-contested environment. Modifying the MQ-9
force presentation is about balancing near and long-term risk.
Continued modernization efforts seek to provide future warfighters the
ability to access data and information at a moment's notice. Our
systems must be able to penetrate contested areas and survive.
Mr. Horsford. I'd like to move on now to the issue of sexual
assault and specifically how the Department plans to hold commanders
and senior leaders accountable for their performance in reducing sexual
harassment and sexual assault. Following the Fort Hood Independent
Review, the Fort Hood senior commander was reassigned and lost his
command of 1st Armored Division and Fort Bliss. I'm curious how the
Department plans to hold senior leaders and general officers
accountable in a more deliberate and systematic way. While I fully
support efforts to move sexual assault prosecutions outside of the
chain of command; there is a clear and urgent need to improve
accountability amongst senior leaders for their effectiveness in
combatting sexual harassment and assault within their formations. How
does the Department intend to collect metrics that track the
performance of senior leaders at implementing effective SHARP programs
and then hold them accountable for their performance during promotion
and command selection decisions?
Secretary Austin. A key finding of the Fort Hood Independent Review
Committee was that some Army leaders were not fully executing Army and
Department of Defense policy on sexual assault prevention and response.
As a result, the Department has focused its oversight authority on
ensuring the Military Departments and Services execute DOD policy and
programs effectively.
On my first full day as Secretary of Defense, I committed that we
must do more as a Department to counter the scourge of sexual assault
and sexual harassment in the military. As I stated then, this is a
leadership issue--and we will lead.
Since that day, we have undertaken a set of immediate actions and
the 90-day Independent Review Commission (IRC) on Sexual Assault and
Sexual Harassment has completed its work on four lines of effort,
including accountability.
We also have a redesigned command climate survey, with specific
metrics to gauge risk and predictive factors aligned with healthy and
unhealthy climates. In turn, results can at times be used as a `flag'
to identify where leaders need to focus greater attention and ask
critical questions to assess the source of issues, and how or whether
our commanders are taking appropriate actions to address command
climate issues. And we anticipate that at times this data can help us
identify what works as well as where we need to bolster resources. This
data will be used to inform quarterly command climate updates to
leadership and biennial On-Site Installation Evaluations (OSIEs) at
select installations.
It's also important to note that concerning results from a survey
are only a `flag' that merit additional investigation. There are times
when we ask a good commander to fix difficult issues. While data has
the potential to help us identify some issues that could reflect a
commander performance issue, at the very same time it is also
plausible, for example, that a good commander might be newly installed
at a unit and working in a genuinely positive manner to make much
needed improvements.
Mr. Horsford. Last week I asked General Brown about the Air Force's
plans to end procurement of the MQ-9 Reaper. As I'm sure you know, the
MQ-9 plays a critical role in my district. Creech Air Force Base is the
hub for global ISR and unmanned hunter-killer operations in support of
combatant commanders. The airmen of Creech Air Force Base will play an
increasingly important role in protecting the homeland as we shift to
exclusively over-the-horizon operations in Afghanistan. I expressed my
concerned last week that ending procurement of the MQ-9 would leave our
deployed forces to make do with already insufficient ISR resources. The
day after the Air Force budget hearing, Central Command released their
unfunded priority list. For a second year in a row, General McKenzie's
number one request was for an additional $53 million in funding for the
MQ-9. He said that the planned Air Force MQ-9 reductions, quote,
``greatly increases risk to deployed and redeploying forces.'' He went
on to say that combined with our much smaller ground force presence in
Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, MQ-9 reductions would ``substantially
reduce'' CENTCOM's ability to combat ISIS, Al Qaeda, and other
terrorist groups. I am concerned by this clear disconnect between the
clearly articulated needs of the combatant commander and the Air
Force's planned reductions.
Do you support General McKenzie's request for additional MQ-9
funding, and do you believe that continued MQ-9 procurement is
necessary to meet CENTCOM's near to mid-term over-the-horizon
requirements?
General Milley. The PB22 budget request adequately funds ISR
priorities. The DOD prioritized programs in the budget that are
survivable and resilient against a near peer threat and had to take
risks in other areas. With regard to China, we are looking to shift
from traditional manned ISR platforms to a space-based and networked
approach that is more survivable. ISR is a commodity that is in high
demand from Combatant Commanders all the time, and the requirement
often exceeds the capabilities provided. Every commander wants perfect
knowledge, and ISR provides those commanders with knowledge to make
decisions. Therefore, the DOD is continually balancing the ability to
fill current ISR demands while modernizing to address the demands of
the future. We must focus on the right mix of capabilities for the
future. The demand signal of today for ISR is not the demand signal of
tomorrow, so we need to balance today's challenges with tomorrow's.
