[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-79]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2023 STRATEGIC FORCES NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE PROGRAMS
__________

HEARING HELD
APRIl 6, 2022

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-343                     WASHINGTON : 2023

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

JIM COOPER, Tennessee, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          JOE WILSON, South Carolina
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California, Vice  MO BROOKS, Alabama
Chair                            ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
RO KHANNA, California                SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
JIMMY PANETTA, California            MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Whitney Verett, Professional Staff Member
Will Braden, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Cooper, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Tennessee, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     2

WITNESSES

Guetlein, Lt Gen Michael A., USSF, Commander, U.S. Space System
Command........................................................     6
Ludwigson, Jon, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office............     9
Plumb, Hon. John F., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy,
U.S. Department of Defense.....................................     3
Scolese, Christopher J., Director, National Reconnaissance Office     5
Wilkerson, Tonya P., Deputy Director, National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency............................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Cooper, Hon. Jim.............................................    23
Guetlein, Lt Gen Michael A...................................    39
Ludwigson, Jon...............................................    52
Plumb, Hon. John F...........................................    24
Scolese, Christopher J.......................................    32
Wilkerson, Tonya P...........................................    46

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Lamborn..................................................    73
Mr. Morelle..................................................    74

FISCAL YEAR 2023 STRATEGIC FORCES NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE PROGRAMS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 6, 2022.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jim Cooper
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COOPER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
TENNESSEE, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Cooper. The hearing will come to order. First, I would
like to apologize to my colleagues and the witnesses. I am at
the Space Symposium in Colorado. So I feel like I am
experiencing almost a weeklong space hearing.
I would like to welcome the extraordinary witnesses we have
today: Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy, Dr.
John Plumb; Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, Dr.
Christopher Scolese; Commander of Space Systems Command,
Lieutenant General Michael Guetlein; Deputy Director of the
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, Ms. Tonya Wilkerson;
GAO [U.S. Government Accountability Office] Director of
Contracting and National Security Acquisitions, Mr. Jon
Ludwigson.
We are honored to have this level of expertise with the
Department and the intelligence community testifying today on
one of the most important topics that we will cover in this
Congress and we are always glad to have our friends from GAO.
Both Dr. Plumb and Lieutenant General Guetlein are joining
us today in new positions which highlight the shift within the
Department and focus on space policy and acquisition. We look
forward to the Senate moving forward with the nomination of Mr.
Frank Calvelli to fill the role of Assistant Secretary of the
Air Force for Space Acquisition and Integration to further this
important emphasis. I hope the Senate will move quickly on
that.
Given what we have witnessed in space by our adversaries
this year, including a destructive and irresponsible anti-
satellite test conducted by Russia, and China's demonstration
of the ability to grapple another satellite and pull it out of
orbit, we cannot be too bold or aggressive in demonstrating our
intent and ability to defend our assets in space.
The President's budget is the first time we have seen a
shift toward more resilient and robust space architecture.
Further, the request by the President for development and
procurement of satellite capabilities in fiscal year 2023 is
$27.6 billion, the largest for these types of programs that we
have ever seen and a more than 25 percent increase from last
year's request. I am very encouraged by these numbers and
perhaps the fact that the Department of Defense has finally
come to see what we have been trying to highlight for the last
several years: that space is no longer a benign domain. We must
be prepared to defend our assets on orbit and maintain the
ability to use space in support of global combatant commanders.
While I do have optimism that the tide is turning in our
direction, or perhaps we should say orbits are coming closer to
what we would like to see, we are shifting toward greater
recognition of the critical role of space in our daily lives.
Every citizen in the planet should be aware of that.
I am also faced with the reality that there still seem to
be far more offices within the Pentagon that can say no to
space procurement than can say yes. And across the space
acquisition community, there is a continued reticence to
change.
We have come a long way, but there is still much work to
do. We have the opportunity to make real change by an
acquisition culture that has been mired in cost overruns,
schedule delays, and delivery capabilities that are not
adequately survivable against increasingly significant threats.
I would like to turn now to the ranking member, Mr.
Lamborn, who I just saw a day or two ago here in Colorado, for
any opening remarks that he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cooper can be found in the
Appendix on page 23.]

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM COLORADO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can appreciate your
wanting to spend as much time as you can in Colorado Springs.
It was great seeing you Monday at the Space Symposium, and I
would also like to extend a warm welcome to our panel of
witnesses here today. Thank you all for your service to our
Nation.
I have to say that Chairman Cooper is the smartest one of
us all, because he is there in Colorado Springs at the Space
Symposium, while we are all stuck here in DC.
I want to particularly welcome Dr. Plumb and Lieutenant
General Guetlein to their new positions as was mentioned a
minute ago. I am excited to finally see that these space
positions are being filled out with permanent folks. We have a
lot of work to do and our adversaries are moving quickly to
blunt the national security advantages we enjoy because of our
space systems.
The threats we see from China and Russia have only
increased since we had this hearing last year. China has
demonstrated on orbit the ability to grapple with another
satellite and drag it into another orbit. Russia has
demonstrated a ground-launched, anti-satellite weapon against
one of its own satellites, resulting in a dangerous field of
debris that the world is still dealing with. These are just the
public examples of China and Russia pushing for dominance in
space. Their efforts are especially concerning when considering
the provocative actions they are taking in other domains.
Top of mind for all of us is Russia's unprovoked invasion
of Ukraine that has resulted in the indiscriminate deaths of
thousands of civilians. These are the actions of countries that
only respond to hard power. In space that means not only
increasing resiliency of future systems, but also having a plan
to defend our space assets currently on orbit.
Let us speak plainly. China and Russia have already
weaponized space. The question left to us is what are we going
to do about it? More than 10,000 military and civilian space
professionals from around the world are gathered in Colorado
Springs this week, the epicenter of global space operations.
These experts are trying to answer that question for us and
they need our policy support.
I would love to hear from you all today how we are planning
to get to this resilient architecture. How are you all working
together to make sure that we have a whole-of-government
approach when it comes to national security space? How are we
designing deterrence for space in the hope of maintaining
peace?
I hope you are thinking about it differently than we have
in the past, including how demonstrated rapid reconstruction
and reusable space vehicles could support deterrence. But hope
is not a plan and it is time to move beyond hope.
I was pleased to see that the new National Defense Strategy
continues to highlight the importance of space as a warfighting
domain. We must move past these strategy documents though into
programs of record, get systems on orbit, and take
responsibility for the area of space we depend on so greatly.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back and I look forward to
our discussion.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn. Our first witness will
be Dr. Plumb.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN F. PLUMB, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR SPACE POLICY, OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR
POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Plumb. Thank you, Chairman Cooper. I thank you, Ranking
Member Lamborn, members of the subcommittee. Thanks for the
opportunity to testify today on national security space
programs.
As your first-ever Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy, I am responsible by law for the overall supervision of
the policy of the Department of Defense [DOD] for space
warfighting. And I am committed to continuing the close
partnership between DOD and the Congress on advancing our
national security space interests.
As the chairman said, space plays a critical role in
American security, prosperity, and our way of life. It
contributes to our national security by enabling and supporting
the entire joint force; our service members on land, at sea,
and in the air rely on space every single day to defend the
Nation.
Space capabilities provide indications and warning of
emerging threats and attacks. They deliver the position,
navigation, and timing signals that support rapid and precise
global power projection. Space systems generate intelligence on
operationally relevant timelines, and allow national decision
makers to anticipate risks and to control or deescalate crises.
Space also enables those same decision makers to command
and control forces in multiple theaters around the globe. And
space is once again capturing the imagination of a new
generation of Americans. This can inspire more students to
pursue careers in the STEM [science, technology, engineering,
and math] disciplines, paying dividends to our national economy
and national security in the future.
Secretary Austin has made clear that China is the
Department's pacing challenge and this holds true in space as
it does in other domains. The U.S. developed our space
architecture in an era when space was more or less a sanctuary.
In contrast, over the past decade, China has dramatically
increased its quantity and quality of space and counterspace
systems in order to develop and field a wartime space
architecture. This requires the United States to consider new
approaches to ensuring our own use of space including
developing more proliferated and therefore more resilient
constellations of our own.
Russia also remains a key space competitor. They are
developing, testing, and fielding counterspace weapons to
target U.S. and allied satellites. And as the ranking member
just noted, Russia conducted a destructive test of a direct-
ascent ASAT [anti-satellite] missile in November of last year.
This created more than 1,500 pieces of trackable debris,
hundreds of thousands of smaller pieces, all of which pose a
threat to safe space operations in low Earth orbit. This
behavior is unbefitting of a spacefaring nation.
In contrast, the Department of Defense is committed to
promoting standards and norms of responsible behavior to ensure
the space domain remains secure, stable, and accessible. As the
Deputy Secretary of Defense stated at the December National
Space Council meeting, the Department would like to see all
nations agree to refrain from anti-satellite weapons testing
that creates debris.
I just want to touch on the budget for a second. DOD's
fiscal year 2023 national security space budget does provide
the $27.6 billion in vital space capabilities that were
mentioned. This includes $4.7 billion to fund a transition to a
new and resilient missile warning and missile track
architecture; $1.8 billion to fund the procurement of two GPS
[Global Positioning System] 3 follow-on satellites and to
continue testing and integration of Military GPS User
Equipment; $1.6 billion to develop secure, survivable, and jam-
resistant SATCOM [satellite communications] capabilities; and
$1.6 billion to procure six national security space launches.
Just to wrap up, the threats facing the United States in
space and from space continue to grow in both quantity and
capability. The President's budget request takes that into
account. Countering those threats requires that we continue the
longstanding bipartisan cooperation between the Department of
Defense and the Congress. I personally am committed to
sustaining those efforts and I am honored to work with the
committee to do so. Thank you and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Plumb can be found in the
Appendix on page 24.]
Mr. Cooper. Thank you very much, Dr. Plumb. Now we will
hear from Dr. Scolese.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. SCOLESE, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE

Dr. Scolese. Good afternoon, Chairman Cooper, Ranking
Member Lamborn, and members of the subcommittee. It is a great
honor to represent the people of the National Reconnaissance
Office [NRO] and share the efforts to deliver critical
information to policy makers, warfighters, and a half million
users we serve every day.
For more than 60 years, the vision of the NRO has been to
see it, hear it, sense it. We have built an amazing advantage
in space, developing, acquiring, launching, and operating
satellites that collect and deliver the best intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance data on the planet. Yet I can
tell you it is an unprecedented time for the NRO.
The pace of technology is accelerating, creating
opportunities for both governments and private sector.
Satellites are being launched in record numbers. Our
competitors, especially China and Russia, are trying to
challenge our advantage in space, dedicating money, manpower,
and resources including newer, better weapons and anti-
satellite technology. Simply put, it is imperative that we
protect our assets and expand our competitive edge.
The United States has never before been more reliant on our
capabilities in space. Our national security and our modern way
of life depend on it. Our imagery has proven invaluable to
government agencies and commercial users that track everything
from natural disasters to crop production to climate change.
Of course, what is most important to our national security
and the work of the subcommittee is the support we provide to
the Department of Defense and the intelligence community. The
NRO provides accurate, timely intelligence to warfighters and
policy makers. We monitor what is happening globally, even in
hostile territories and terrain that would not be accessible by
any other way to support the analytic and policy community.
This informs strategy and prevents miscalculation.
NRO capabilities provide customers with global and regional
capacity and assured access. This helps them to maintain a
strategic advantage against near-peer competitors. It also
helps them focus on ways to counter rogue regimes and regional
and transnational threats. We are developing systems faster,
launching 17 payloads into orbit over the last 2 years. We are
leveraging commercial technologies and fielding systems in as
little as 18 months. Those systems are returning immediate
dividends, providing awareness in real-world crisis events.
With innovative and streamlined contracting approaches, we are
moving faster in our acquisition processes with both
traditional industry and new entrants into the marketplace.
To accelerate and focus our progress, earlier this year we
refreshed the NRO's strategic priorities. These updates reflect
the new challenges we face in space and the shifting strategic
environment. The five priorities that guide our mission
including growing an empowered, engaged, and inclusive work
force; innovating faster to stay ahead of our competitors;
delivering responsible and agile ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance]; bolstering resiliency; and
cultivating mission-enhancing partnerships. Additional details
on these are provided in my statement for the record.
Mr. Chairman, the NRO is at a pivotal moment. For 60 years,
America's dominance in space was largely unchallenged. That is
not the case anymore. Space has quickly turned from peaceful to
competitive and has the potential to become conflicted. The
future depends on our ability to protect our assets and stay
ahead of our competitors. In short, it depends on our ability
to innovate and continue to attract highly motivated and
capable people. Using these five priorities as our guide, I am
confident the NRO is up to the challenge to do whatever is
necessary and all that is possible. We will continue to deliver
on our NRO motto: super et altra, above and beyond. Thank you
for your continued support.
Chairman Cooper, I would especially like to express my
appreciation for your ongoing leadership in space-based
national security and for your advocacy of the NRO over the
years. I welcome the subcommittee's questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Scolese can be found in the
Appendix on page 32.]
Mr. Cooper. Thank you so much, Dr. Scolese. We will now
hear from Lieutenant General Guetlein.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN MICHAEL A. GUETLEIN, USSF, COMMANDER, U.S.
SPACE SYSTEM COMMAND

General Guetlein. Good afternoon, Chairman Cooper, Ranking
Member Lamborn, and members of the committee. On behalf of the
Secretary of the Air Force, the Honorable Frank Kendall, III,
and General John W. ``Jay'' Raymond, the Chief of Space
Operations, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
the Department of the Air Force's national security space
programs.
It is an honor to appear before you and to testify
alongside these esteemed space professionals. As Secretary
Kendall and General Raymond have stated and as highlighted by
Chairman Cooper and Ranking Member Lamborn and the witnesses
that have gone before me today, our adversaries are committed
to disrupting our strategic advantage in space during crisis
and in conflict. We cannot afford to wait. We must be prepared
and we must act now.
As the Space Force field command charged with supplying
space-enabled capabilities like position, navigation, and
timing, satellite communications, missile warning, and command
and control to the joint force, we have aggressively taken
steps to address acquisition challenges while building
resilient architectures of tomorrow and delivering the critical
capabilities of today. We are rapidly ushering in a new era of
space acquisition.
In the 8 months since our inception, we have coupled the
agility of the Rapid Capabilities Office with the flat, agile
organizational structure of the National Reconnaissance Office,
and the systems engineering rigor of the Missile Defense
Agency. By doing this, we built Space Systems Command on the
best practices from across the national space acquisition
enterprise. We've adopted an ``exploit what we have,'' ``buy
what we can,'' and ``build only what we must'' approach to
acquisitions.
By exercising unity of effort across the space enterprise
through building and leveraging partnerships with other
government agencies, industry, academia, the civil community,
and our allies, we are able to build in resiliency into the
space enterprise and build a deterrent network that transcends
national borders and bolsters American security and prosperity.
As the major acquisition arm of the Space Force, we are
partnered with the new Office of the Assistant Secretary of the
Air Force for Space Acquisition and Integration, to employ a
new acquisition paradigm that promises to cut years off the
front end of the traditional acquisition cycle. This efficiency
will only improve as the Space Force moves forward with our
digital transformation. This transformation will deliver wins
of increasing magnitude, delivering better capabilities sooner,
and will evolve the Space Force into the world's first digital
service.
While we aren't there yet, we have made several
improvements across the command and across the space enterprise
that are already bringing successes for tomorrow's fight while
delivering capabilities today. The entire Space Force, and
especially Space Systems Command, are laser focused on
countering the rising space threat and we are dedicated to
protecting our joint maritime, land, and air forces.
I want to thank the committee for their steadfast support
and their devotion to progress as evidenced by your continued
challenge to the Space Force and to the Department of the Air
Force to lead these improvements. We are deeply committed to
the success of all national security space programs and
securing our Nation's vital interests. And I look forward to
answering your questions today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Guetlein can be found in
the Appendix on page 39.]
Mr. Cooper. Thank you so much, General. We will now hear
from Ms. Wilkerson.

STATEMENT OF TONYA P. WILKERSON, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
GEOSPATIAL-INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Ms. Wilkerson. Good afternoon, Chairman Cooper, Ranking
Member Lamborn, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency [NGA] is the
Nation's primary provider of geospatial intelligence, or
GEOINT, which is the use of imagery and geospatial information
to describe and depict features, activities, and locations on
and about the Earth. We helped decision makers, warfighters,
and first responders visualize and understand what is happening
at a particular place at a particular time. Each of these
partners rely on us to show the way, literally, to get them
from point A to point B, help illuminate options, inform
decisions, and carry out actions with precision.
Indeed, GEOINT has been a central element of our Nation's
understanding of the Russia-Ukraine crisis. I have some
additional materials to discuss in the closed session, but
would note here that NGA is closely monitoring events in
Ukraine while we provide partners across the globe access to
numerous sources of intelligence, including commercial space-
based imagery.
Beyond current events, NGA and our predecessor
organizations have a long history of supporting our Nation's
space intelligence needs and activities. Earth's orbit is no
longer a benign environment and the threat to U.S. national
security interests from foreign space powers is real and
growing. Our adversaries are not standing still and neither is
NGA.
In order to expand our GEOINT advantage in all realms,
including space, NGA is focused on our people, partnerships,
and preparation for the missions of today and tomorrow. First,
people. We are increasing our investments and developing our
tradecraft and training and expert workforce across the
community to perform analysis on space issues. For instance,
NGA established a program in 2021 to teach fundamentals of
space and counterspace analysis to students across DOD, IC
[intelligence community], and allied partners.
Second, partnerships. NGA continues to expand our
partnerships with the U.S. Government, industry, and allied
partners. Within the space domain, NRO is our lead partner in
advancing space-based GEOINT capabilities including the
acquisition of pixels from new commercial sources.
In direct support of the space intelligence mission, NGA
has long maintained support teams at the National Air and Space
Intelligence Center and the Missiles and Space Intelligence
Center. More recently, we established a support team at
SPACECOM [U.S. Space Command] in 2019 and one for U.S. Space
Force in November of 2021. These embedded teams substantially
deepen the level of collaboration between the organizations.
Finally, our mission. Space is vitally important to NGA's
mission. It is the environment in which the sensors that
provide much of our GEOINT data operate. Our adversaries and
peer competitors have the means to deny us that resource, so
NGA remains committed to supporting our warfighters in space.
Additionally, NGA is the global leader in providing
geosciences data and support for positioning, navigation, and
timing. Everything that depends on knowing exactly where and
when something is on or around the Earth uses this unique form
of GEOINT. As such, NGA is focused on ensuring the integrity
and resiliency of these capabilities.
In conclusion, NGA continues to evolve our space
intelligence mission to meet current and future needs. We
remain focused on protecting U.S. national security interests
in the space domain to deter, protect, and defeat our
adversaries in space. Thank you and I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilkerson can be found in
the Appendix on page 46.]
Mr. Cooper. Thank you very much, Ms. Wilkerson.
Now we will hear from Mr. Ludwigson.

STATEMENT OF JON LUDWIGSON, DIRECTOR, CONTRACTING AND NATIONAL
SECURITY ACQUISITIONS, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Ludwigson. Chairman Cooper, Ranking Member Lamborn, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss GAO's work examining DOD's national security space
programs.
Space has long provided the ultimate high ground and the
U.S. has made broad use of it. DOD developed space systems that
provide communication, facilitate real-time global insights,
and other key capabilities. Those capabilities provided the
U.S. with decades of advantages.
However, we live in a challenging and competitive world.
Space systems operate in a difficult environment and at the
leading edge of the possible. As such, space assets do not last
forever and systems risk being overcome by technology advances.
Our potential adversaries have also taken note of our space-
based capabilities and made clear that they intend to hold our
assets at risk and use space for their own purposes. As a
result, Congress faces important questions about how to
recapitalize capabilities, add new ones, and address risks to
our space systems, all of this in the face of short timeframes,
difficult technical challenges, and limited budgets.
Over the years, GAO has reviewed DOD's development of
numerous space systems. Often, we found that the new systems
took longer and cost more than expected and sometimes fell
short of planned capabilities.
My written statement provides an update on several programs
including our September 2021 report on the Next-Generation OPIR
[Overhead Persistent Infrared] program that identified steps
aimed at accelerating the program, but found, among other
things, that the program faced significant technical and
management challenges which could make it difficult to meet its
aggressive schedule and DOD did not make the schedule risks
clear in its reporting. These kinds of aggressive schedules
mirror themes from our past work.
Also, our September 2021 report on the MUOS [Mobile User
Objective System] program found that DOD was not using the full
capabilities of the new system with satellites on orbit, the
full constellation for over 5 years, in large part due to a
lack of compatible user terminals. This left the services
relying on the oversubscribed legacy capability which faces
near-term risks of losing the satellites that support it. We
also found that the Department had not begun to plan for the
eventual replacement of MUOS. Again, the lack of alignment
between segments and late planning have been themes of our past
work.
Looking ahead, DOD faces several broad challenges and
opportunities for developing and fielding space systems and we
are examining some of them. First, DOD has made progress in the
standup of Space Force, the first new service in decades having
already moved thousands of military and civilian personnel,
created new organizations and lines of authority, among other
accomplishments. As we noted last year, the standup of the
Space Force could help address the challenges that we have
highlighted in the past, including divided leadership, but
could also present growing pains if not managed well. We remain
watchful, but encouraged with the progress.
Second, the world has borne witness to the rapid rise of a
commercial space industry. This rise creates complications, but
also provides opportunities. The dramatic increase of
satellites on orbit has increased the need to track and
understand the movements of these objects and to take steps to
mitigate risks as needed. Of particular note, the rising use of
low Earth orbit by commercial companies comes as DOD plans to
enhance its use of this orbit. However, the burgeoning
commercial industry provides more options for DOD to procure
commercial data and services to complement DOD's or in place of
DOD developing its own systems. We are examining opportunities
and challenges DOD faces on this front.
Third, our potential adversaries have demonstrated their
capability to target objects in space. Recognizing that our
space-based capabilities are at risk has prompted the
Department to develop new tools to monitor for threats and
other tools for operating in this rapidly changing threat
environment. We are examining those efforts.
Finally, balancing efforts to enhance acquisition
authorities to improve outcomes while ensuring opportunities
for effective oversight remains important. Clearly, we support
DOD's efforts to enhance its record on space acquisitions.
However, some will point to paperwork as the cause of the slow
process. I reprise my call to follow our leading practices and
preserve what I call the first principles behind the paperwork
to build strong programs and the ability to oversee them. Space
systems are surely important to DOD's mission, but going fast
cannot be the only goal. Congress must have the opportunity for
meaningful oversight. We continue to examine acquisition reform
and related proposals, as well as monitoring programs using
these approaches.
Chairman Cooper, Ranking Member Lamborn, this concludes my
statement. I would be happy to answer any questions the
subcommittee members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ludwigson can be found in
the Appendix on page 52.]
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Ludwigson. I would like to thank
all of the witnesses and I would like to ask my colleagues to
try to fit this public session in before we have votes on the
floor. I am not sure how much time we have, but if every member
could respect the short overall period of time, that would
help. I wish I could join you for the closed session.
Unfortunately, I will not be able to.
My only question for the panel would be for Ms. Wilkerson.
I know you are going to talk about this more in closed session,
but what can you say in public session about the war in Ukraine
and the spectacular use of imagery that we see on television
almost every night, whether from the government or from
private, commercial services that are displaying such things as
the atrocities in Bucha, things like that that really, even if
you see it on the screen, it is just hard to believe. But
having so many sources of verification has made this war unlike
any other.
Ms. Wilkerson.
Ms. Wilkerson. Thank you for the question, Chairman. We are
certainly focused on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. As I noted, we
are monitoring the situation very closely and we are sharing
intelligence with partner nations that are engaged in joint
missions to address the Ukraine crisis.
We are providing the breadth, and leveraging the breadth of
imagery that is available to us, not only from a national
perspective, but also from commercial.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you so much. The first questioner on the
member side will be Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have two
questions and then we can keep moving along here.
Lieutenant General Guetlein, how are we improving the
resilience of our systems and what role does disaggregation
play in strengthening our architectures?
General Guetlein. Thank you, Congressman. That is a great
question. Resiliency is actually critical to guaranteeing the
capability that is going to be there in a crisis or in a
conflict. Resiliency, however, is not a one-time buy. It is a
lifetime for the system and it comes in many, many different
flavors. Part of that is through redundancy, disaggregation,
proliferation, hybrid architectures, a mix of organic, allied,
and commercial systems. Disaggregation is absolutely critical
to going forward. We started off putting an enormous amount of
capability on one satellite because launch vehicles cost so
much. That was during a time of peace. We can no longer do
that.
So going forward, we have to disaggregate those
capabilities to make sure that they can survive and that it is
not just one target for the adversary. Over.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And for you and Dr. Plumb, a study
released last year that was commissioned by the Space Force
Defense Innovation Unit and Air Force Research Laboratory found
that China has cornered and is now dominating the global space
market. The report recommends that the United States develop
new market-enhancing tools to enhance and grow American
commercial space activities.
What policies and new capabilities do you plan to advocate
for in order to promote a more dynamic domestic space
marketplace and where are these reflected in this year's budget
request?
General Guetlein. As you talk about the commercial market,
there is an enormous amount of benefit that comes with
commercial, as well as some cautionary tales.
First of all, what we have done within the Space Force, is
we stood up the SSC [Space Systems Command] Front Door. So we
have provided a one-stop shop for all of our commercial
partners whether that be a small start-up business or all the
way to our primes so that they now have one number, one email
address, one website to go to and that we will paint the path
to opportunities, depending on what they are offering to bring
to the table.
As far as what we have invested, space domain awareness is
continuing to grow. We spent $135 million in space domain
awareness in the past 4 years. The SATCOM arena, that is our
biggest investment area and we spent $2.43 billion just over
the last 2 years investing in commercial SATCOM. A satellite
command and control is a new emerging area and we invested $22
million in there last year. The next emerging one is going to
be ISR and we are just starting to do studies to determine how
much ISR we can buy from space and we are actually going to do
a reverse industry data, ask industry what they can bring to
the table in that domain. Over.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Wait--Dr. Plumb was going to finish answering
that.
Mr. Cooper. Okay. Go ahead, Dr. Plumb.
Dr. Plumb. I just would add one other piece I think that I
am interested in at least is the ``range of the future'' and
making sure that we are not constrained by launch constraints
to make sure we can fully enable our commercial and DOD market.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you. Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Chair, I am going to defer my questions to
the classified session.
Mr. Cooper. Okay. Then Mr. Brooks.
Ms. Vastola. Sir, he has left the Webex. So next would be
Mr. DesJarlais.
Mr. Cooper. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. I think Mr. DesJarlais is before me.
Mr. Cooper. Okay. Mr. DesJarlais then.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you. I guess this would be for Dr.
Plumb, Scolese, or General Guetlein. We've heard a lot about
tactically responsive space. What timeliness constitutes
tactically responsive and how does that timeliness match the
current ability of the NSSL [National Security Space Launch]
providers to launch satellites into orbit?
General Guetlein. Thank you, Congressman. So tactically
responsive space doesn't really have a specific timeline. It is
mission focused. Currently, the Secretary of the Air Force has
seven operational imperatives or studies that he has ongoing.
One of those is the space order of battle. Under the space
order of battle, we are working to determine which type of
capabilities need to be responsive and what type of timelines,
and if they can be gap fillers or if they have to be long-
range, long-term solutions.
NSSL was not designed for tactically responsive space. It
was designed to get our national assets in orbit. Those
national assets typically take a long time to develop. They
take a lot of national treasure to build and therefore they
require a much more methodic mission assurance process that is
not conducive to tactically responsive space.
Dr. DesJarlais. Do you feel comfortable with our quick
launch capability if needed today or in the near future?
General Guetlein. Sir, there is numerous small launch
providers that are just starting to emerge. I believe within
the next 24 months we will have that ability as a nation.
Dr. DesJarlais. Where are the primary launch sites located
and how many do we have?
General Guetlein. Our primary launch sites are Vandenberg,
California, on the west coast and Cape Canaveral on the east
coast.
Dr. DesJarlais. Is there any concern that in an all-out war
scenario China or Russia could target these sites and hinder
our launch, space launch capability, especially in light of the
hypersonic glide advancements?
General Guetlein. Yes, sir. That is a concern of ours every
day. We are currently, at the request of Congress, submitting
the range of the future congressional report. That
congressional report outlines many areas of investment and
infrastructure and resiliency to ensure that our space launch
bases will be there in a time of conflict or crisis.
Dr. DesJarlais. Shifting quickly to OPIR, to what extent is
there a backup plan to provide missile warning if the first
Block 0 satellite for the Next-Generation Overhead Persistent
Infrared system cannot be launched by fiscal year 2025?
General Guetlein. Yes, sir. The current constellation of
OPIR satellites is healthy. We currently have one more to
launch, GEO-5, was just brought into operations a couple months
ago. It is doing exceptionally well. GEO-6 is currently on the
ground in storage. We can launch it at any moment as needed. So
that constellation is extremely healthy. And we just started
the missile warning, missile track, missile defense force
design which will get after resilient missile warning, missile
track, missile defense architecture for the future.
Dr. DesJarlais. Does the current budget request, if funded,
provide sufficient resources for the Block 0 program and to
meet the schedule and performance goals?
General Guetlein. Yes, sir. It does.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. I think we have a fair amount of time
before votes, probably a half hour, 45 minutes; but I will
wait. I will yield.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. DesJarlais. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Guetlein, an
inspector general report published in January audited the
Department's maintenance of space launch equipment and
facilities. It found that the ranges too often did not have
spare parts for mission-critical range item components and were
forced to search for spare parts on commercial websites such as
eBay.
As the Space Force reported in 2021, the U.S. commercial
launch industry is on the cusp of a 60 to 100 percent increase
in launch rates over the next 5 years. So we need to address
the identified range infrastructure and maintenance needs now.
How will the range of future initiative address--range of
the future initiative address the sustainment shortcomings to
meet the expected increased demand?
General Guetlein. Sir, thank you for that question.
Maintaining our ranges is a national asset and guaranteeing
assured access to space is absolutely critical for us to
maintain the space resiliency. Going forward, the current
launch ranges were built in the 1960s. That infrastructure was
built for a government-only customer. Since then, the pace of
commercial change has not matched--been matched by the amounts
nor the types of reimbursement leading to a drain on
sustainment and modification funds. Remedy is better rules and
authorities, not more U.S. Government dollars.
Under the range of the future, what we are asking for is a
change to the way we approach our architecture, our
infrastructure, our operational practices, and our spaceports,
as well as recommending a few changes to the national law that
would enable us to better invest in our ranges.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Mr. Ludwigson, one aspect GAO has
been reviewing, and this subcommittee is tracking, is how the
standup and organization of the Space Force will address
longstanding concerns that space acquisition leadership is
fragmented.
Can you highlight the progress the Space Force has made in
this past year in addressing this concern and where the Space
Force is still struggling with making progress?
Mr. Ludwigson. Thank you, sir. As you may recall, in 2016,
we raised concerns about fragmentation. This is the report that
spoke to the 60 organizations that were involved in
constituting a space acquisition, that could be involved in a
space acquisition.
The standup of the Space Force was, I think, in some ways
responsive to the concerns we raised. The consolidation that
happens as part of the standup of the Space Force addresses a
good number of our concerns. We haven't done a detailed
examination on all of the progress that has been made, but
certainly bringing together of many of the entities of those 60
was significant progress from our standpoint. But there is
still going to be communications that are necessary with NRO,
some of the services, and other entities in order to make sure
that the sort of end-to-end capability that is part of that--
the space capability, a variety of space capabilities comes to
fruition.
Mr. Carbajal. On a grade A through F, how would you grade
the progress on addressing that fragmentation?
Mr. Ludwigson. I think that we are heartened with the
progress that has been made. I think I have had some really
good conversations with----
Mr. Carbajal. No A through F. Not just heartened.
Mr. Ludwigson. I am heartened. I would say that----
Mr. Carbajal. All right, that is good.
Mr. Ludwigson. They are a B striving for an A.
Mr. Carbajal. It is good to strive, but it is also good to
know where we are at, and you are not telling me. So thank you.
Ms. Wilkerson and Dr. Scolese. We have seen the tremendous
benefit to open source satellite imaging throughout Russia's
unprovoked war in Ukraine through tracking Russian troop
movements to documenting horrific war crimes.
How are you both working with allied and partner nations to
ensure sustained access and utilization of satellite imagery
during crisis situations?
Ms. Wilkerson. Thank you for the question. So from an NGA
perspective we are implementing tasking and collection
strategies that look to ensure that we are maximizing the
number of relevant images that are collected for analysis. We
are certainly working with partner nations as well to ensure
that that information is shared across partner nations as well
as security organizations that are involved in this joint
mission.
Dr. Scolese. And I would just add that we work very closely
with NGA to make sure that with the commercial imagery
contracts that we have that we are making sure that they are
looking at the right things and providing the information that
is needed so that we can distribute it.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Carbajal. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. I will save my questions for the classified.
Mr. Cooper. Mr. DesJarlais, did you want to ask some more
questions or Mr. Langevin, I see you on the screen there.
Sorry.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for their testimony today. If I could for Dr. Plumb
and General Guetlein, so to continue to be a global leader when
it comes to new and innovative technologies, it would behoove
us to think not about acquiring planes and satellites that
happen to run software, but rather that we are acquiring
software that just so happens to run on a plane or a satellite.
So this is an argument that I have been really strong in making
that we need to put software first and hardware as a secondary
as opposed to what we do right now. And we have to prioritize
acquiring and developing new and innovative software
effectively.
So to both of you, what efforts are underway to overcome
the barriers of acquiring new and innovative software?
General Guetlein. Thank you, Congressman. So in the
software arena, we have stood up what we call Kobayashi Maru
which is our DevSecOps [development, security, and operations]
environment. It is built on the leading-edge principles that we
are learning from the other software factories like Kessel Run.
In addition to that, we are building out the Guardians to
every Guardian to learn how to be a programmer, so that we can
rapidly update and upgrade our systems along the way in near
real time without having to rely on a lengthy development
cycle.
On the fragmentation part, I would say we have been
embracing the partnerships of our international allies and our
commercial partners. We stood up the International Affairs
Office which currently has 15 different partnerships and we've
done the same thing with commercial. And under the Joint All-
Domain Command and Control [JADC2] and the Air Force's version
of ABMS [Advanced Battle Management System], it all becomes
about how to better integrate and network the capabilities that
we have and that is going to come through software first,
hardware second, and that is actually going to drive the way we
fight in the future.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. I am glad you addressed the JADC2
part of it, because that was going to be a part of my followup.
Okay, if we could go to Dr. Plumb or Mr. Ludwigson, do either
of you have anything to offer?
Dr. Plumb. Congressman, I think that the general covered it
pretty well. I'll just say related to, in fact, the hearing
from yesterday, a similar issue about acquisition and making
sure that innovative solutions are able to get into DOD
programs and I think--I actually do believe Space System
Command in particular is working really hard on that, so I
think we are in the right trend line.
Mr. Langevin. So let me ask, to Dr. Plumb or Lieutenant
General Guetlein, obviously, it is extremely critical to our
national security that our space systems and capabilities
integrate best cybersecurity practices.
So how would you characterize our cyber posture when it
comes to our space-based systems and platforms?
General, maybe start with you.
General Guetlein. Sorry. Our cyber capabilities today are
fledgling. They are just really starting to pick up. We have
invested about $11 billion in this President's budget to get
after cyber defense. Within the Space Force we have fielded a
set of new capabilities for cyber defense that are both in band
and out of band. And we stood up a brand new cyber defense team
that primarily right now is protecting and defending the SBIRS
[Space-Based Infrared System] weapon system. We are
proliferating that model across the rest of the Space Force to
get after the mission systems, but we still have a ways to go.
Dr. Plumb. If it is all right, sir, just to add, I think
space and cybersecurity are very important to my portfolio, in
particular. It's a thing I have been thinking a lot about. I
think early cybersecurity for satellites was just based on I
have a wall, a perimeter, and you can't get through. And I
think the right way to approach cybersecurity for space systems
is we need defense in depth. You basically have to assume there
may be untoward actors in your systems and how do you make sure
that you are tracking that not just in an outer shell, but all
the way through your systems.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Well, I know my time is about to
expire, so I will stop there. But it is absolutely critical
that we bake in cybersecurity measures from the inception of
our systems and platforms so that we don't have to layer it on
top later. So thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Langevin. It is my understanding
that Mr. DesJarlais will go next and it is also my
understanding that they have moved up votes, so the intent
would be after Mr. DesJarlais to adjourn the hearing and then
have the classified session start after votes have completed on
the floor.
So if that is all right with my colleagues, we will hear
from Mr. DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Chairman. For the panel,
throughout and even prior to the invasion of Ukraine, we saw
Russia successfully utilize jamming to degrade GPS capabilities
throughout the region. How has Russia been utilizing its
jamming capabilities against Ukraine and have they been
utilizing them against any U.S. assets?
Dr. Plumb. Congressman, I think we would like to punt that
to the classified session.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Fair enough. Let's see. Dr. Plumb or
General Guetlein, we have seen China's impressive ability to
blur the lines between benign space capabilities and those that
may have utility as counterspace weapons, the most recent
example being China's SJ-21 satellite that has engaged in some
maneuvers that have raised some red flags.
How do you assess these Chinese space threats and how is
the Department interacting with these capabilities?
Dr. Plumb. So I will take a first shot there, Congressman.
I will just say SJ-21 and other capabilities China has put in
space or keeps on the ground, there are some dual-use
situations there where you could say these are weapons or these
are civilian or civil service or some type of maintenance
situation. These are problematic. I think this is where one, we
need to be eyes wide open on the threat that China poses and I
know this committee and this panel is fully aware of that.
And second, it does speak to the need for some beginning
towards developing norms of behavior in space. Just related to
this, I have heard that the Russians at one time wanted to
claim that the robotic arm attached to the space shuttle was a
weapon because it could grapple a satellite. So you can see
that this is a conversation that really requires bringing folks
to the table and trying to understand and have correct behavior
so we know when it is weaponized.
Dr. DesJarlais. Mr. Scolese, we will finish with you, I
guess. In February, you issued a warning for commercial and
government satellites, urging satellite operators to ensure
that your systems are secure and that they are watching them
very closely.
Can you share with the committee what prompted you to issue
this warning and have we seen any aggressive actions toward
U.S. Government or commercial satellites since this warning?
Dr. Scolese. Sir, I am not sure I am familiar with that. I
do recall at a conference I was asked if we should be prepared,
and I said yes, it is much better to be prepared than to be
surprised. But I did not issue any official warnings.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay, sorry about that. I will be after my
staffer. What does your collaboration--your collaboration with
General Nakasone look like in assessing and combating cyber
threats or is that not you either?
Dr. Scolese. Well, we certainly work with him, obviously at
Cyber Command and NSA [National Security Agency]. He provides
us with a lot of information that all of us use in securing our
systems.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Might be a good place to stop.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. DesJarlais. Do any of my
colleagues have an urgent question they would like to bring up
in open session?
If not, then the subcommittee will recess for votes and
will resume in closed session after votes have been completed.
I would like to thank all of the witnesses and my colleagues.
It is a very important subject matter and I am glad that we are
covering it. Thank you so much. The subcommittee is recessed.
[Whereupon, at 2:54 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded to
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 6, 2022

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 6, 2022

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 6, 2022

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Mr. Lamborn. Your written testimony states ``it is imperative that
we protect our assets and our competitive edge.'' What are the combined
efforts NRO is working with USSF to fulfill this imperative, and what
are the expected timelines for having these programs operational?
Dr. Scolese. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Lamborn. How does the NRO's acquisition process and force
design align with the investment priorities expressed by the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Space Policy? What investment priorities and
policies are lacking that we need to advance space domain awareness and
defense of our assets?
Dr. Scolese. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Lamborn. How does the SSC process and the service's acquisition
and force design align with the investment priorities expressed by
ASD(Space): Missile Warning, GPS Enterprise, SATCOM, and Launch
Enterprise? What are the investment priorities and policies lacking
that we need to advance space domain awareness and defense of our
assets?
General Guetlein. Space Systems Command (SSC) employs the Space
Systems Integration Office and Program Integration Council to inform
the Department of the Air Force and Department of Defense investment
priorities with the service's acquisition and Force Design processes.
The strategy is a three-pronged approach. The first element is to
``exploit what we have.'' For example, with the FY23 President's Budget
(PB), we bolster current capabilities with targeted investments in GPS,
SATCOM, Launch, Space Domain Awareness, and data exploitation, which
provides performance improvements for the joint warfighter. The second
is ``buy/partner where we can.'' In this budget request, the Department
expands joint warfighter SATCOM capabilities by leveraging commercial
and allied opportunities to expand our existing and planned enterprise.
The final part of the approach is to ``build what we must.'' In the
FY23 PB, we begin the development and procurement of the ``Resilient by
Design'' Missile Warning/Missile Track space architectures to ensure
the nation's ability to identify and fight through any adversary
threats. We are concurrently investing in command, control, and cyber
capabilities to enable effects and respond to natural and man-made
threats in, through, and from space on operationally and tactically
relevant timelines.
Mr. Lamborn. Does the SWAC to PIC to SAC to SAE model allow for
adequate input from the joint requirements process, and how are we
ensuring that space systems are still being designed and acquired to
support joint forces and integrate into joint architectural needs? Does
the System of Systems Integrator have the knowledge and resources
available to ensure integration extends throughout the joint force?
General Guetlein. Yes, the USSF's ``Force Design to Program
Execution'' process provides input from the joint community, and the
System of Systems Integrator at SSC has the knowledge and resources
available to ensure integration extends throughout the Joint Force. The
USSF requirements development process still operates within the
oversight of the Joint Requirements Oversight Council, Department of
the Air Force, and other DoD processes. The SWAC Force Design solicits
inputs from the various stakeholders to ensure the analysis reflects
the best understanding of the joint requirements to respond to current
and emerging threats. After the Force Design is complete, the USSF
Chief Strategy and Resourcing Officer (CSRO) is responsible for
ensuring requirements are developed and vetted through the joint
process. The CSRO is also responsible for providing an interactive
feedback loop to allow adjustments as the Force Designs for capability
areas evolve. The SSC Space Systems Integration Office then focuses on
achieving unity of effort with other space acquisition agencies via the
Program Integration Council to fund and synchronize capability
development and fielding. Additionally, at SSC, the recently
established Warfighting Integration Office embeds SSC members in the
Combatant Commands, participates in wargaming, and addresses warfighter
capability gaps. Finally, the Space Acquisition Council has many
members from the Joint Community who ensure the integration of the
joint architectural needs.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. MORELLE
Mr. Morelle. Thank you for your testimony and time. We appreciate
the insight you provided on the efforts of NGA. Question. Commercial
satellites are reshaping the collection of geospatial intelligence and
have been effective in tracking the Russian Federation's invasion of
Ukraine. The commercial constellations have not only brought additional
sources of intelligence to the IC, but has also presented the events of
war to the public in way that has never been seen before. It's a new
phenomenon. Are you able to elaborate on the pros and cons/perhaps
risks associated with commercial companies participating in space like
this? Thank you in advance for your time.
Ms. Wilkerson. As you note, commercial geospatial intelligence
(GEOINT) provides additional collection opportunities for regions where
maximum coverage is essential. Commercial GEOINT also gives the U.S.
Government the ability to share imagery and key observations with a
wide range of stakeholders at the speed of need. As a result, we are
finding that commercial GEOINT provides the public with information
that was previously challenging to communicate and illustrate. One
notable benefit of independent commercial reporting is that it is much
more difficult for our adversaries to claim that the atrocities
depicted in the reporting are U.S. Government or allied propaganda.
This is not to say that commercial geospatial companies do not bring
some risk to the equation. The USG's ability to govern actions by
privately held corporations is limited. Therefore, foreign adversaries
have many options for accessing commercial imagery on the foreign
market. Furthermore, there is a potential for them to use proxies to
also gain access to U.S. imagery which may provide them with more
detailed information. Under all circumstances, the USG also necessarily
[remainder of the answer was not available at the time of printing].

[all]
