[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-53]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET REQUEST FOR

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, ENERGY,

AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 14, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-442                     WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

JOHN GARAMENDI, California, Chairman

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JACKIE SPEIER, California            JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JASON CROW, Colorado                 AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan, Vice       JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
Chair                            MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington

Jeanine Womble, Professional Staff Member
Ian Bennitt, Professional Staff Member
Sean Falvey, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     2

WITNESSES

Cramer, Paul D., Performing the Duties of the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Sustainment, Office of the Secretary of Defense.     4
Miller, Jennifer L., Acting Assistant Secretary of the Air Force,
Installations, Environment, and Energy, Department of the Air
Force..........................................................     7
Schafer, Todd L., Acting Assistant Secretary of the Navy,
Installations, Environment, and Energy, Department of the Navy.     6
Surash, J.E. ``Jack,'' Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army,
Installations, Environment and Energy, Department of the Army..     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Cramer, Paul D...............................................    41
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    39
Miller, Jennifer L...........................................    85
Schafer, Todd L..............................................    75
Surash, J.E. ``Jack''........................................    60

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Lamborn..................................................   115
Ms. Strickland...............................................   115

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Golden...................................................   122
Mr. Kahele...................................................   122
Mr. Scott....................................................   119
Mr. Wilson...................................................   119

FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET REQUEST FOR

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, ENERGY, AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, July 14, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:00 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. John Garamendi (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I call
to order this hearing of the Readiness Subcommittee of the
House Armed Services Committee.
Today's witnesses oversee a wide range of programs that are
of great interest to this committee, including military
construction, installations, installation resiliency, housing,
environmental programs, and response to emerging contaminants--
also, energy resiliency and climate change.
Earlier this year, we held a hearing focused on
installation resiliency in which we questioned the uniformed
leadership of the services' installation commands. Today, I
will pose similar questions to the Department's civilian
leadership:
What are you doing to ensure our installations are
resilient to the specific hazards that they face, be [they]
increasingly frequent storm events, droughts, wildfire,
flooding, sea-level rise, pandemics, or cybersecurity? How are
you incorporating climate-change adaptation measures to ensure
long-range resiliency of our Nation's installations and to
ensure taxpayers get their full benefit of the military
construction investments?
Are you incorporating new materials that are more resilient
in your construction? Does your installation master planning
incorporate microgrids, environmental charging infrastructure--
excuse me, that's EV [electric vehicle] charging
infrastructure, and the ability to island in the event of
natural or manmade grid disruptions?
Getting the answers to these questions correct is not just
about addressing climate change but about ensuring that our
installations can continue to perform their critical missions
without disruption.
In addition to resiliency, this subcommittee has put
considerable focus in the past few years on privatized housing
for military families. I assure you that we will continue until
all the service members have high-quality places to live, free
from environmental hazards and chronic maintenance problems.
However, privatized housing is not the only place where our
service members live. Most of our junior enlisted service
members live in barracks or dormitories. Through chronic
neglect, these buildings have been allowed to fall into
disrepair and create substandard living spaces for service
members. We know that these poor-quality living conditions
contribute to poor retention.
The Army announced a $10 billion plan to overhaul
substandard barracks by the end of fiscal year 2030, yet only
one barrack appeared on the President's budget request for Army
military construction. In 2020, the Army announced that people
were its top priority, but it seems the Army actually meant
that people were their top unfunded priority. Lip service is
simply not enough.
With that said, at least the Army has publicly acknowledged
the deficiencies in their barrack facilities. I have seen no
similar statements from the other military departments, yet I
know that similar rates of barracks and dormitories in poor
conditions and failing conditions exist within the Navy and the
Air Force.
I also look forward to hearing about the witnesses' budget
request in support of their environmental programs. In
particular, I am surprised to see that the President's budget
request for environmental restoration funds, the money used to
conduct environmental cleanup, were down considerably from
fiscal year 2021 enactment amounts. With thousands of cleanup
sites across the country, 698 of which are installations with
known or suspected releases of AFFF [aqueous film forming foam]
and potential PFASes [per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances]
contaminating the surrounding communities, I am surprised by
the lack of emphasis on environmental programs. However, with
the 2024 AFFF phase-out looming, the Department must be
increasing its efforts to address PFASes and not putting them
on the back burner.
With that said, I would like to turn to our ranking member,
Congressman Doug Lamborn of Colorado, for any remarks you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 39.]

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM COLORADO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi.
I would like to welcome our witnesses here today to discuss
their fiscal year 2022 budget request for military
construction, environmental and energy programs, as well as
base and facility accounts.
Over the past several months, this subcommittee has held
focused hearings on many of the core issues within these
accounts. It remains clear that the services are struggling to
prioritize important investments in our aging and failing
infrastructure. That is one of the reasons I am a strong
advocate for a higher top line. We cannot continue kicking the
can down the road.
I look forward to hearing from OSD [Office of the Secretary
of Defense] and the services about what they are doing to
address degraded facilities. Years of deferred maintenance have
made facilities inefficient, have negatively impacted readiness
and retention, and left us exposed to extreme weather events.
Deferred maintenance is also bad business and a waste of
taxpayer dollars. In fact, Federal disaster mitigation efforts
can save up to $6 for every $1 spent.
I am particularly concerned with our organic industrial
base and facilities and utilities that were built, in many
cases, over 50 years ago. The Navy has a particularly acute
problem in this area. The GAO [Government Accountability
Office] has assessed that all four public shipyards are in poor
or failing condition, with too few functional dry docks. The
recent Navy disclosure of the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard dry-
dock cost growth from $750 million to almost $2 billion does
not engender faith that the Navy has completely bound the
overall cost of this essential Navy repair capability.
As to ranges, we still have a myriad of problems that
appear to be unfocused. Despite the increased emphasis on our
Nation's hypersonic shortfalls, for instance, I am concerned
about the Department's ability to adequately test hypersonic
weapons. Clearly, range limitations will impede DOD's [U.S.
Department of Defense's] ability to adequately develop this
capability, yet not one word on this glaring shortfall in any
of the witnesses' testimony. And if you look at what China is
doing, they are definitely investing heavily in testing
capability for hypersonic glide vehicles.
Even in my district, at Fort Carson, there is a continuing
lack of emphasis on providing adequate ranges for the
garrisoned forces. We have to do better and ensure that our
ranges are ready.
There are many other important issues that I am confident
will be discussed today. All services must remain focused on
the privatized military housing projects. Given the recent
troubles and prolonged implementation of the Tenants' Bill of
Rights, oversight is critical.
The services' testing, cleanup, and replacement efforts
related to PFAS and AFFF is another issue with bipartisan
attention. The services must do a better job preventing
accidental releases, of which there seem to be too many, as
well as finding a suitable replacement for AFFF.
With much competition for dollars in this year's budget, I
want to emphasize the need for good investments that can
[stave] off the need for additional resources down the road.
I again want to thank today's witnesses, and I look forward
to our discussion.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
We will now turn to the witnesses, and I would like to
welcome them to this hearing. They are all gathered together at
some office building, I suspect at the office at the Department
of Defense. First time for them to get together, so we got them
all in one place at one time.
We have Mr. Paul Cramer, performing the duties of Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installation, and Environment,
Office of the Secretary of Defense. And then I will introduce
the others in order, so--well, let's go here: Mr. Jack Surash,
Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army for Energy,
Installations, and Environment, Department of the Army; Mr.
Todd Schafer, Acting Assistant Secretary of Navy for Energy,
Installations, and Environment, Department of the Navy; and Ms.
Jennifer Miller, Acting Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Energy, Installations, Environment, Department of the Air
Force.
So, with that, Mr. Cramer, if you would like to begin.

STATEMENT OF PAUL D. CRAMER, PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE

Mr. Cramer. Thank you.
Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of myself and my service
colleagues, thank you for the opportunity to present the
President's fiscal year 2020 budget request for the
Department's energy, installations, and environment programs. I
will highlight a few key areas.
Our 2022 budget request supports our efforts to address
mission requirements, ensure service members have a safe and
resilient place to live and work, and also begins to address
resilience challenges.
We are requesting $26.1 billion for military construction
and sustainment, restoration, and modernization funding to
address critical mission requirements and life, health, and
safety concerns within our current fiscal environment. This
funding will be used to replace, restore, and modernize
enduring facilities to enhance their resilience to climate
events and promotes elimination of excess and obsolete
facilities.
We are committed to protecting the quality of life of our
personnel and their families. Our primary focus here is to
ensure access to safe, quality, affordable family and
unaccompanied housing. Our budget includes $1.4 billion to
support our worldwide nonprivatized family housing inventory,
which includes more than 34,000 government-owned and 5,800
leased family housing units. This request also demonstrates our
continued commitment to modernizing unaccompanied personnel
housing, with more than $477 million requested for eight
construction projects.
With regard to privatized housing, the Department continues
to prioritize actions that improve the tenant experience and
rebuild tenant trust. Our initial phase was predominantly
focused on implementing the MHPI [Military Housing
Privatization Initiative] Tenant Bill of Rights and the NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] requirements embedded in
those rights. The Department has issued all policy guidance
necessary to implement all rights at all MHPI housing projects.
With few exceptions, all 18 tenant rights are now available.
Our budget also requests approximately $3.6 billion for
environmental programs, supporting activities ranging from
managing critical habitat and avoiding training restrictions to
addressing drinking water health advisories and making the best
use of our cleanup dollars.
Finally, the Department depends on resilient installations.
To prepare for peer competition where even the homeland is
contested, the Department is addressing a change of technology,
operational, and policy initiatives to enhance the use of
energy in warfighting.
To that end, we are requesting $4.3 billion in energy
investments, including both installation energy and operational
energy. This includes approximately $287 million for the Energy
Resilience and Conservation Investment Program, or ERCIP, a
significant increase over last year's request to reflect the
significance of risk to energy systems.
We appreciate Congress and this subcommittee's continued
support as we work together to provide the best possible
support for our soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, guardians,
and their families.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cramer can be found in the
Appendix on page 41.]
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Cramer, thank you very much.
Let's now turn to the Army and Mr. Jack Surash.

STATEMENT OF J.E. ``JACK'' SURASH, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF THE ARMY FOR INSTALLATIONS, ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT,
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

Mr. Surash. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Lamborn, members of the subcommittee. On behalf of the
soldiers, families, and civilians of United States Army, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the Army's fiscal year 2022
budget request.
The request works to address the challenges the Army faces
in privatized housing and barracks while at the same time
working to increase the climate resilience of our
infrastructure. While we face a challenging task, we are making
measurable and continuous progress in a challenging budget
environment.
We have developed and are executing complementary
strategies that inform our actions. The Army Installations
Strategy supports the Army People Strategy and the Army
Modernization Strategy and together encompass our efforts in
taking care of people, strengthening readiness and resilience,
modernizing and innovating, and promoting stewardship.
As you know, housing has been a key focus area. Our
soldiers and their families deserve high-quality, safe housing.
Our focus is on fixing the privatized housing issues brought to
light in 2018 while at the same time working with the
privatized companies to strengthen the long-term financial
health of the housing portfolio.
We are conducting 100 percent quality assurance inspections
on change of occupancy and on all life, health, and safety
maintenance work orders.
The Army fully implemented all 18 Tenant Bill of Rights at
the majority of our 44 installations. We will execute the
remaining three tenant rights at eight installations by the end
of the summer.
The privatized housing providers are spending $1.5 billion
and reinvesting another $1.3 billion on housing improvements
over the next 5 years.
In regards to barracks, the Army has invested $2.1 billion
for construction, operations and maintenance, and restoration
and modernization over the last 3 years. The Army is focused on
modernizing barracks standards that incorporate user feedback
and the latest technology. The Army will continue to work to
increase the overall quality of housing, both Army-owned and
privatized housing as well as barracks.
All of this is occurring while the Army is working to
maintain and increase the resilience of our installation
infrastructure. Energy and water resilience, or uninterrupted
access to energy and water, are essential for Army readiness
and ensuring the Total Army can deploy, fight, and win.
Among the threats we face, climate change is a direct
threat to Army readiness and our ability to accomplish the
mission. To combat this threat, the Army is proactively taking
steps to address the impacts and causes of climate change and
extreme weather at our installations and upon our operational
forces.
Army readiness begins on our installations. Through
adaptation, mitigation, and innovation, the Army will work to
secure the readiness and resilience of forces, functions, and
facilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony and
for your continued support of our soldiers, civilians, and
families.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Surash can be found in the
Appendix on page 60.]
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you, Mr. Surash.
We will now turn to Mr. Schafer, Acting Assistant Secretary
of the Navy.

STATEMENT OF TODD L. SCHAFER, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS AND ENVIRONMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
THE NAVY

Mr. Schafer. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member
Lamborn, and distinguished members of the committee. I thank
you for the opportunity to testify on the Department of the
Navy's fiscal year 2022 budget request for energy,
installations, and environmental programs.
The Department of the Navy appreciates the committee's
continued support of Navy and Marine Corps installations. These
installations directly enable the lethality and warfighting
readiness of our maritime forces.
The Department of the Navy's military construction request
for 2022 includes $2.3 billion for 29 projects that invest in
new platforms and technology as well as replace and modernize
an aging infrastructure. Eight construction projects support
the relocation of our Marine Corps forces from Okinawa to Guam.
This request also reflects our commitment to the Shipyard
Infrastructure Optimization Program and to ensure the Navy's
public shipyards are ready and able to support the maintenance
plan for current and future submarines and aircraft carriers.
To take care of our existing infrastructure, our 2022
budget request funds the sustainment of Navy and Marine Corps
facilities at 80 percent of the Department of Defense
Facilities Sustainment Model.
The Department of the Navy is also requesting nearly $1
billion to fund projects that restore and modernize existing
infrastructure, to include naval shipyards, utility
infrastructure, runways and taxiways, hangars, training
facilities, and waterfront structures.
Our 2022 budget request sustains the funding needed to
ensure military families receive safe, quality, and well-
maintained housing and fair treatment from the military housing
companies that own, operate, and maintain privatized housing.
Over the past 2 years, all levels of leadership across the
Department of the Navy have been laser-focused on improving the
privatization housing experience for sailors, Marines, and
their families. Although work remains, we are beginning to see
improvement in the operation, maintenance, and customer service
provided by our privatized housing partners.
Navy and Marine Corps installations face threats from
natural disasters and climate change, as well as risk to
energy, water supplies, and industrial cyber control systems.
Our 2022 budget request continues the Department of the Navy's
commitment to installation resiliency and treats it as a
crosscutting consideration integrated into all of our
installation planning. We also include it in our environmental
conservation and restoration, our facility design and
construction, and in all of our decisionmaking processes.
Finally, we appreciate this committee's continued attention
and the urgent need to modernize the Navy's premier aviation
training range, the Fallon Range Training Complex in Nevada.
The Department of the Navy remains committed to working closely
with Tribal governments; environmental organizations; the
State, county, and local community; and the Department of
Interior to develop a solution that meets the desires of all
stakeholders while providing our warfighters a range complex
that meets their critical training and readiness needs.
As directed by the fiscal year 2021 National Defense
Authorization Act, the Department of the Navy has collaborated
with the Secretary of Interior to establish the Fallon Range
Training Complex Intergovernmental Executive Committee to
obtain views of stakeholders on Fallon Range Training Complex
modernization and information related to management of natural
and cultural resources on the range.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this opening
statement. We look forward to the continued support and
attention of this subcommittee, and I am ready to address your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schafer can be found in the
Appendix on page 75.]
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you, Mr. Schafer.
We now turn to Ms. Miller, Assistant Secretary of the Air
Force, Energy, Installations, Environment.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER L. MILLER, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE AIR FORCE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS AND ENVIRONMENT,
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE

Ms. Miller. Chairman Garamendi and Ranking Member Lamborn
and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
I am here with you to review the status of our installation
and energy priorities to ensure the Department of the Air Force
continues to provide installations as power-projection
platforms in support of the National Defense Strategy.
The fiscal year 2022 President's budget request supports
the Interim National Security Strategic Guidance and lays out a
plan to modernize our military capabilities. The military
construction budget prioritizes nuclear enterprise
modernization and combatant command infrastructure in Europe
and the Pacific. The budget also funds high return on
investment in operational energy initiatives and provides for
the quality of life of our airmen, guardians, and their
families through investments in housing, dorms, child
development centers, and community support facilities.
Secretary Austin identified tackling climate as one of the
top efforts in support of the ``defending the Nation''
priority. Changing climate and severe weather events are a
continual threat to our installations.
Over the past several years, the Department has seen
firsthand the impacts climate and severe weather can have on
our installations. As a result, we are smartly moving forward
with the rebuild efforts at Tyndall Air Force Base following
Hurricane Michael in 2018 and Offutt Air Force Base following
the flooding in 2019.
Additionally, the Department enhanced installation
resilience, or the ability to continue military operations in
the face of challenges, to bounce back from adversity across
numerous fronts.
Climate and energy resiliency considerations are being
incorporated into installation development plans. Last year, we
published a ``Severe Weather and Climate Hazard Screening and
Risk Assessment Playbook.'' This gives installation-level
planners a consistent and systematic framework to screen for
severe weather and climate hazards and assess current and
future risks.
We remain firmly committed to a robust environmental
conservation program, responsible environmental restoration,
and protecting human health.
Regarding PFAS, the Department developed a framework to
identify and remediate impacted areas. While there are no
national primary drinking water regulations for PFAS, the EPA
[U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] established lifetime
drinking water health advisories for two--PFOS [perfluorooctane
sulfonic acid] and PFOA [perfluorooctanoic acid].
Our strategy focuses first and foremost on ensuring that no
one, on or off our installations, is drinking water with a
Department-related PFAS or PFOA above that health advisory.
And, second, I am using those CERCLA [Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of
1980] authorities to investigate, define, remediate groundwater
and soil impacted by the Department activities.
The Department also communicates and collaborates with
local communities, State and Federal agencies, and elected
officials at all levels.
Regarding privatized housing, the Department, with the
support of Congress, took substantive action to address
concerns and make meaningful changes to our privatized housing
program. Nearly all the housing companies have agreed to
implement the additional 18 tenant rights.
Some privatized housing highlights we have implemented in
the last year include increasing program and project oversight,
as well as 60 new resident advocates that directly support
military families.
We will keep focus on improved oversight, long-term project
health, and sustainment of housing inventory to provide
military families access to safe, quality, and affordable
housing communities.
Finally, the Department continues to develop an agile and
optimized approach to powering our aircraft and providing
airmen with the fuel when and where they need it. We are
improving enterprise-wide fuel-use data collection and
conducting analysis to identify areas where existing missions
can be performed more effectively with fewer resources.
Through partnerships with aviation and commercial
industries, we identify innovative solutions to modernizing
legacy aircraft and weapon systems while maintaining our
lethality.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Lamborn, that completes my
remarks. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller can be found in the
Appendix on page 85.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Ms. Miller.
We are now going to questions. We want to try to maintain
the 5-minute clock as we go through this, although the chairman
has some leeway, as does the ranking member. The rest of you,
it is 5 minutes or out. So we will carry on here. I am going to
do mine very quickly.
Earlier, I had a discussion, Mr. Cramer, about the
Department of Defense and what you are doing to carry out the
President's executive order with regard to climate change.
Could you speak to us about what the Department, the
Secretary of Defense office, and then the various departments
are doing to carry out that instruction at the Department, that
all Federal agencies aggressively address the climate-change
challenge?
Mr. Cramer.
Mr. Cramer. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, before I start, I want to, you know, take the
opportunity now to thank the great team of professionals that
we have assembled within the Department of Defense in very
short order.
So the President's executive order came out, one of his
first ones, in the early part of January. So we rapidly
organized a team of professionals to address the executive
order, led at the Department of Defense level by DASD [Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense] Richard Kidd and Dr. Kate
White, who is an expert in climate. This is kind of their
pinnacle of success, if you will. They have been, you know,
training their whole career to get at this.
And where we are at within the Department is all telling.
And so I don't need to go into too much details about the
effects of climate, because I think we all realize that. But
the Executive Order 14008, ``Tackling the Climate Crisis at
Home and Abroad,'' in our response to that we put together the
DOD Climate Adaptation Plan, which is in final draft, going up
to the Secretary for signature. It is an all-of-the-Department
plan, and we are all going to sign that.
In response to the EO, we have been asked not to publish
that officially until all the rest of the executive branch
plans get done. And that will be no later than 1 September. Or,
if we get direction, we will release it early. But I am able to
go through some of the highlights within our Climate Adaptation
Plan [CAP].
And the primary purpose of our CAP is to integrate climate-
change adaptation and climate resilience across our programs,
management of real property, our public lands and waters, and
financial services.
The Department is responding to climate in two ways:
adaptation to enhance resilience--these are actions and
adjustments in natural or DOD systems in anticipation of or
response to a changing environment in a way that effectively
uses beneficial opportunities to reduce negative effects of
climate--and our mitigation efforts that are being used to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The basis of our plan is wrapped around five lines of
effort, and I will briefly go through each one of those.
Line of effort number one is climate-informed
decisionmaking. What that is is climate considerations must
continue progress towards becoming an integral element of DOD's
enterprise resource allocations and operational decisionmaking
process.
Line of effort number two: train, test, and equip a
climate-ready workforce. This LOE will help shape the
Department's efforts across activities related to developing,
acquiring, fielding, and sustaining equipment and services.
Line of effort number three: resilient built and natural
infrastructure. Built and natural infrastructure are both
necessary for successful mission preparedness and readiness.
Built infrastructure serves as the staging platform for the
Department's national defense and humanitarian missions.
Natural infrastructure supports military combat readiness by
providing realistic operational testing to combat environments
and conditions.
Line of effort number four: supply-chain resilience and
innovation. A climate-resilient supply chain is one in which
the Department has ensured that key suppliers and industries
can still operate while impacted by climate change, with
uninterrupted access to key supplies, materials, chemicals, and
services.
Line of effort number five: enhance adaptation and
resilience through collaboration. The Department will build
unity of effort in mission across DOD components to exploit
lessons learned and economies of scale and integrate that into
existing DOD missions, not as a subset from that.
And I will turn it over to my colleagues, if they want to
amplify anything.
Mr. Garamendi. Let's stay with this. We will go with the
amplification from each of the departments, and then we will
turn to Mr. Lamborn.
Shall we go in reverse order? Let's go with Air Force one.
That is not an airplane; that is you, Ms. Miller.
Ms. Miller. Well, Congressman, thank you.
So we have started working on our climate goals in support
of the executive order and the climate action plan. And, as
part of doing that, as Mr. Cramer briefed, we have two main
lines.
The difference particularly with the Air Force, I think, is
some of the initiatives that we are able to implement in the
operational energy arena, because that is over 80 percent of
our consumption comes from operational energy. So we are
looking at a lot of things there, some of them big items.
But one of the things that we have been able to get funded
this year is some of the relatively small items, whether it is
the angling of our windshield wipers on our aircraft, to little
winglets, to things that we have been able to modify the
aircraft, often stealing good ideas from industry. All of these
things that we have been able to implement for less than $40
million this year have a return on investment within the FYDP
and have some real opportunities for big savings, although
little investments.
Some of the other areas that we are looking at with
mitigation for our installations include things like, you know,
reducing the footprint, increased demolition; trying to look
at, with new telework policies, is there a way to reduce the
requirements when we are building new; in our acquisition
policies, being able to leverage the existing infrastructure
and consider that as part of our acquisition; and then some of
the things that we can do with a climate-literate workforce,
including climate in all of our considerations.
On the adaptation piece, the installation energy plan, so
we are well on our way to that. And by the end of next year, we
will have 75 percent of our major energy-consuming
installations complete. We will work those into our
installation development plans.
And then some real good work that has been done with the
pull-the-plug exercises. We have actually three more on the
books. We have had great success so far and support from our
leadership in doing that to try to determine where we have some
installation energy vulnerabilities and water vulnerabilities,
that then lead to where we invest our resources and prioritize
our resources to get after those vulnerabilities.
I know I have probably already taken too much time, sir.
Happy to answer any additional questions on those, or I can
turn it over to my service counterparts.
Mr. Garamendi. Let's go to the Navy.
Mr. Schafer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Climate resiliency, environmental issues, these are very
important to us. As we are following the lead from the
Department of Defense, we, too, are working on our climate-
change issues. It is a national security concern for us.
And, as we are working through this, we think about sea-
level rise for a lot of our installations that are on coastal
areas. When we are working to build a resilience plan, we work
with local, county, and State governments to ensure that we are
good partners with the community.
We are also looking at the effects of climate change on
things such as energy, water, and also the cyber piece of this,
what it can do for our control systems.
My colleague from the Air Force mentioned that they have
run some black-start exercises where we actually disconnect the
base from the electric grid. We have done that out at Marine
Corps Air Station Miramar. We have actually done that twice,
where we have turned the commercial power off there. And by the
use of a microgrid and 11 megawatts on-site energy capability,
we were able to support the 100-plus critical mission
facilities for 14-plus days.
So we are certainly taking advantage of providing energy
security for things that may happen from a climate environment.
And another example is that, in August of 2020, during the
heatwave out in California, we actually used our microgrid to
prevent rolling brownouts in the California area there at
Miramar.
So, clearly, climate is a big deal for us. We are
prioritizing it into all the actions we do. And we are doing
that to build climate resiliency into all of our
infrastructure. So that includes our master planning, our
development, our design and construction. And it also is in all
of our decisionmaking processes, just as the Secretary of
Defense has directed, that we need to consider climate issues
in all of our processes and decisionmaking.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much.
And we will end with the Army and then turn to Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Surash. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, along the lines of what you just heard, what the Army
is doing is, of course, working very closely with the Office of
the Secretary of Defense and our sister services with respect
to all things climate change.
What we have chosen to do in the Army is, starting in late
February, we have put together a Climate Change Working Group.
This is an across-the-Army effort. Because we really see
climate change having a big effect on the operating forces of
the Army, training, deployment, employment of operating forces
and the need for such, as well as very obvious implications on
our installation side.
So the [inaudible] is we will have a climate-change
strategy that the Secretary of the Army will release probably
within 60 days or so. And then we will have a very detailed
climate-change action plan that will lay out a multiyear effort
that covers everything with respect to the operating forces and
installations that the Army is going to attempt to do, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, very good. Thank you very much. You
can be assured that we will be following up at the 60 days, so
that will fit into our schedules also.
In any case, this is extremely important in every way. We
last year called it conservation, energy conservation, and the
like. We will follow up with more detail from you and from us.
Mr. Lamborn, if you would care to proceed.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask Mr. Cramer about hypersonic ranges.
Our Nation is late in developing adequate hypersonic
weapons but is starting to expand our industrial base to
support a near-term hypersonic capability. But we do have a
glaring shortfall in range capabilities, and because of this
deficit, industrial base partners may have to field more
antiquated approaches, because range limitations prohibit
testing the latest technology.
Do you share this concern, and do you have any solutions
going forward, Mr. Cramer?
Mr. Cramer. Congressman, I do share that concern. We have
had some conversations within the Department on how we are
going to achieve the maximum range of the hypersonic systems.
I do not have any solutions I will talk to here, but I
would be glad to have folks get on your calendar and come down
and sit down and kind of go through, you know, what those
possible solutions would look like.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Let's do that. Because I don't want to
continue losing ground to China and Russia on this important
issue.
Mr. Surash, the Pinon Canyon Range near Fort Carson has a
multitude of existing limitations, including utility easements
and airspace limitations. Does the Army have a plan to address
these limitations? And can you explain any corrections that you
are anticipating?
Mr. Surash. Sir, I am aware that we are working on this. I
don't have the details at my fingertips, but I will be happy to
follow up with you on that, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Miller, with the transfer of installations from the Air
Force to the new Space Force, there will be a corresponding
shift in how these installations support the space mission. For
example, flying and fighting and winning in the space domain
obviously requires less focus on airfields and more on critical
infrastructure for launch and for controlling assets once they
are operating in space.
So my question is, to what extent has the Space Force
developed standards and measures for assessing the readiness of
its critical infrastructure systems?
Ms. Miller. So, Congressman, thanks for that question.
We are actually going to be supporting within the
Department of the Air Force the space installations from a
secretariat. And many of the functions that our A4 logistics/
engineering staff performs now will be continued to be
performed by the secretariat, and many of those functions by
the Air Staff. So a lot of the prioritization, the support, the
assessments will be done in the same way. It will be fairly
transparent.
Now, the difference will be, as we transfer the FSRM
[facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization] and
then in a couple years the MILCON [military construction]
authority over to the Space Force, then those will be
prioritized within the service, but then ultimately brought
together at the secretariat for the assistance on the budget
prioritization. So the readiness assessment ought to be fairly
similar, and I haven't see proposals for a transfer on that.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you for that update.
And are the Space Force missions being reported for
readiness on the Defense Readiness Reporting System? Maybe I
didn't catch that, but for the system itself, what is the
status there?
Ms. Miller. So, for readiness, I can speak to installation
investments, sir, but I would have to reach out to our probably
J3 or our readiness experts, either an S3 or A3, on that. So we
can take that for the record, on how they are reporting space
readiness.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 115.]
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. Yeah, please let us know on
that one.
And then, finally, what plans does the Space Force have for
identifying, prioritizing, and resourcing installation military
construction requirements that do align with its new mission?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir. So, right now, the MILCON process
still runs through the same, so the Department of the Air Force
is managing the MILCON for the Space Force and the Air Force
until 2024.
At that time, assuming that the capabilities exist within
the Space Force to prioritize their MILCON, then they would
transition. I presume that they would use much of the similar
methodology that we use within the Department of the Air Force,
but, at that time, in 2024, the Space Force will have entire
control of both the MILCON and the FSRM accounts.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
Thank----
Ms. Miller. So we----
Mr. Lamborn [continuing]. You all for being here.
Ms. Miller. Oh. Sorry, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Oh, I was just--if you have something else to
say, please finish. Otherwise, I was going to transition back.
Ms. Miller. Yeah. So we will still consolidate for both the
Space Force and the Air Force within the Department of the Air
Force for the policy guidance, the budgetary oversight, et
cetera. So there still will be the consolidating and review
function by the secretariat for both departments.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. And thank you all for being
here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
The gavel order is--well, let me find it here--Mr.
Courtney, Mr. Wilson. And then we will have more beyond that. I
will make an announcement as soon as I get the order.
So, Mr. Courtney, you are up.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
You know, we had a subcommittee hearing not too long ago
about the chronic, sort of, delays in terms of turning around
ship repairs and submarine repairs, particularly the attack
submarines, which the public yards have really struggled in
terms of finding capacity to get those platforms turned around
and back out in deployment.
You know, Mr. Schafer, you mention on page 2 of your
testimony the Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Plan, the
SIOP, which was established in 2018. Looking at the actual
numbers which were in the budget for, you know, real
construction, the Navy requested $250 million for a dry dock at
Portsmouth and $156 million for dry-dock improvements at the
Ford-class aircraft carrier at Norfolk, and that is it.
And, I mean, looking at the SIOP plan, which was about $21
billion of work, it seems like we are just really moving at a
snail's pace. At the same time, you know, many of us in our
committee has been pushing to expand the size of the Navy's
fleet. We still have a lot of aging ships out there.
Is this enough for us to really achieve the goal of SIOP,
which, you know, even the CNO [Chief of Naval Operations] has
been coming before us and talking about the, you know, critical
piece of the spectrum in term of the Navy's ability to get
ships and submarines out there. This seems, really, like a
meager request for the scale of the need that is out there for
SIOP.
Mr. Schafer. Rep. Courtney, you certainly hit on a very
important program for the Department of the Navy and our
ability to generate ready forces. Our SIOP plan is a long-term
plan, as you probably know, that is going to go over multiple
years and be multiple billions of dollars at the end. We are in
the process of completing a 5-year plan to share with you all
on this committee and others on Capitol Hill.
We certainly have to keep in mind that we have got to--
we've kind of got to--I am going to use an Air Force example--
we've kind of got to build a plane as we fly it, because we
can't take down all our dry docks at once. We have to continue
to do maintenance.
So that is part of what may make our submission look like
it's a little meager to get going, but this is all a complex
problem. And our Naval Sea Systems Command, who does our
maintenance on our ships, has laid all this out and worked with
our operating forces to ensure that we've got a SIOP program
that will still allow us to meet the demands of the combatant
commanders for force employment going forward, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, I mean, the good news is, I
think you have a lot of support on this subcommittee for SIOP.
I mean, I think, you know, it took a while for people to sort
of recognize, you know, how critical this is, but now I think
the interest is sky-high.
And, you know, as soon as we can get that multiyear, sort
of, view of what the plan is, I think, frankly, it will
increase people's comfort level. So we certainly anxiously
await that analysis.
Thank you for your answer.
And, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
I have repeatedly asked for the--not the 20-year plan, but
what are you going to do in the next 5 years? I am not going to
badger you further today, but, guaranteed, I will badger you
again tomorrow and the day after that until I get that 5-year
plan. What are you going to do in the next 5 years? How much
money do you need? Where is it going to be spent? What will be
the effect of it?
So I will just let it go at that.
Now, Mr. Wilson, it is your turn.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to assure our witnesses--thank you today--that
there is not badgering from the chairman; he is just making
inquiries. Okay? And so----
Mr. Garamendi. No, no. This is badgering.
Mr. Wilson. No, no, no, no, no. Hey, hey, hey. This is
inquiry.
But, Secretary Miller, the fiscal year 2019 NDAA requires
the Department of Energy to study the deployment of
microreactors, small modular reactors, at DOE facilities for
energy security.
And, earlier this year, there was issued an executive order
requiring the Department of Defense to make a report on
microreactors, small modular reactors, and their implementation
at domestic military installations.
What is the status of looking into enhanced energy
resilience using these small modular reactors?
Ms. Miller. Congressman, we have a great interest in it. I
was actually able to go up about a year ago to Eielson and
physically tour the coal plant there and look at and talk to
the folks about their excitement with the pilot program out
there.
So we are just getting underway on the pilot program, but
we are excited to see what capabilities that provides us for
our CONUS [continental United States] installations and then
the potential to have those be mobile for other locations.
Mr. Wilson. And, to me, the energy stability and
dependability would just be fantastic for island installations,
including an entire island, the territory of Guam. But, over
and over, I wish you well in looking into that.
And for any one of you, I would like to receive back--you
don't have to do it right now. I am keenly interested in having
from any one of you a prognostication of rising sea levels.
What level of rise do you anticipate? What years of
anticipation? Is there a variance by location on east coast,
west coast?
Additionally, I am interested in a prognostication of
rising temperatures. Again, what is the anticipated rise and
what year?
And then also the prognostication--since I represent South
Carolina, we are keenly interested in hurricanes. What is your
prognostication of Atlantic hurricanes? How many and which
year?
And for the three different issues of rising sea level,
temperature, and hurricanes, I would really appreciate that in
a narrative but also a graph format. And if you would please
provide that to me. I would like to see what is being done.
And then, Secretary Surash, I am grateful to represent Fort
Jackson, which serves as the public face of our Army for more
than 45,000 basic trainees and their families every year.
Despite the efforts to have the reception barracks complex
completed, it is still not being included in the budget. What
is the anticipation of what can be done for the reception
barracks?
Mr. Surash. Congressman, thank you for that question.
Sir, I am showing that our request has $34 million for
phase two of the reception barracks at Fort Jackson, sir.
Mr. Wilson. Well, hey, I appreciate that very, very much.
That is going to be very positive.
Additionally, we have, sadly, effective cuts in the fiscal
year 2022 budget. And for Secretary Surash, what is the long-
term impact on Army families of delayed investments in the base
housing and childcare centers?
Mr. Surash. So, sir, we've got a real focus on housing and
childcare centers. I think we are moving along fairly smartly.
With respect to child development centers, we were not able
to include any child development centers in the military
construction portion of the bill. Over the next 10 years, we
are looking to invest in about 21 additional child development
centers, and I think that is going to provide about 4,500
spaces; and, through the restoration and modernization program,
about 10,500, again, over the next 10 years, sir.
Mr. Wilson. Well, hey, thank you again for your efforts.
And back again on the different graphs as to rising sea
level, temperature, hurricanes, if you could get that to Drew
Kennedy in my office, I would really appreciate it--1436
Longworth House Office Building. That would be very helpful. I
would love to see those graphs as soon as possible so that we
can get prepared.
Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Mr. Wilson. Your
inquiries were well put.
Now, the gavel order going forward--let's see here. We have
Jason Crow, Mark Green, and Kai Kahele, in that order.
Jason, you are up.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all to the witnesses for joining us today.
In the March 26 hearing entitled ``Lessons Learned from
Winter Storm Uri,'' I asked about the MIRA Act, my Military
Installation Resiliency Assuredness Act, which was included in
the fiscal year 2020 NDAA and requires all major military
installations to integrate into their master plan assessments
of resiliency, climate effects, and extreme weather.
To our knowledge, none of those assessments have been
conducted by any major military installations during their
planning process updates.
At the hearing, I asked General Gabram when he expects the
master plan updates relative to the MIRA Act to be provided to
Congress. General Gabram told me that he would take it for the
record and get back to me on that. We have not received any
information from the Army or any service, so that taking for
the record did not actually occur as promised.
So, starting with the Army, when are we going to get that
information? And can we expect it from every other service as
well?
Mr. Surash. Sir, we are very aware of--I believe it was an
amendment that you personally sponsored, sir, and what it
requires. I can assure you, we have rolled those requirements
into the master planning process within the Army. I know we are
working on this. I will you get you what our plan is looking
like over the next couple years, sir.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, and I appreciate that. I guess it is
good to know that you are aware of it and you have rolled it
into the process. What we were looking for was an update as to
how many, if any, of those master plan updates have occurred.
If the answer is zero, that is fine. I think we just want an
answer. If it is one, if it is three, we just want some sense
as to where are we in effectuating that requirement.
Any of the other services have updates in that regard?
Ms. Miller. Sir, so I can tell you, what we did in the Air
Force is we did issue, last year, our guidance on that. And so
it was done through ``Severe Weather and Climate Hazard
Screening and Risk Assessment Playbook,'' which may sound
fairly simple to issue the guidance, but it was a 40-page
analysis that really provided good information for the
installation planners on how we wanted them to assess. And it
included the 16 risks, from hurricanes to fires, that we needed
each installation to assess against and what criteria, mostly
using our A3 weather office, would be the, kind of,
authoritative source upon which they could rely.
We did that initial screening for over 80 of our
installations. And then what we have done with that now is
start putting that into our installation development plans. So,
within the next 5 years, now that everyone has done the initial
assessment, that will roll into our installation development
plans.
As we have that information, though, it allows us to
modify, as an example, the Tyndall rebuild and the Offutt
floodplain rise, to modify based on the risk assessment, not
only of what type of risk it would be, but then we also assess
each as a yellow, green, red for the 0-25-year and then also
the 25-50-year look.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. That is very helpful. I appreciate
that response.
Mr. Schafer. And, sir, from the Department of the Navy, we
have actually completed one of those at Indian Island. We are
in the process of continuing to train our Navy Facilities
Command engineers and others on how to do that. And those too
will roll into our installation master plans over the next 5
years as they are updated.
Mr. Crow. Thank you.
Well, in the remaining minute here, I have a question about
the DCAT, the Defense Climate Assessment Tool. I wanted views
from the services, all of you, on how that process is going. I
understand upwards of 1,300 of those have been used service-
wide.
I would love any thoughts on how it is working and whether
any changes need to be made to make it a more effective, more
efficient tool for all of you. Whoever wants to take that.
Mr. Cramer. So let me start, and then I will transition
over to the military departments.
Yeah, this, actually--I am glad you brought it up,
Congressman. So the DOD Climate Assessment Tool actually helps
answer Congressman Wilson's question, too, about sea-level
rise.
So the DCAT is just a higher level assessment tool of the
most vulnerable things for an installation. Obviously, on a
coast, it could be sea-level rise. If you are in interior, much
like Colorado, really, your issues are more like drought,
desertification, those kinds of things.
And the DCAT looks at it at a higher level, and it could go
all the way down to a facilities-level look, which then informs
those master plans, those installation energy plans as you go
forward.
So we view, in the DOD, the DCAT model in high regard,
because it does provide that upper-level assessment based on
the [inaudible] that we [inaudible]. And then we project out
two iterations, one 2050 and then one 2085, and then you can
then plan accordingly as you move into that.
What comes out of the DCAT, then, would be those
installation energy plans, those master plans.
And then I will turn it over to my colleagues.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. And I would love to hear more, but I
am out of time.
So, respectful of my other colleagues, I will yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all of you.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Crow. We may come back to
this issue. There may be other folks who want to ask the same
question.
Mr. Green, you are nodding your head as though it is your
turn, and it is. Go wherever you would like to with the
questions.
Dr. Green. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am
confident that that will be brought back up. I am going to
focus on something different in this first round.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you and ranking member for having
the witnesses here today. And I want to thank our witnesses for
being here. Thanks, too, for your service to the country.
As we seek to ensure that our military is prepared to face
the challenges of the coming decades and this new sort of
major-competitor paradigm that we are in, one of my primary
concerns is that we are taking care of those warriors' needs
when they are back at home station. It is a fundamental
obligation with very far-reaching effects on retention and,
thus, readiness.
Unlike almost all of our competitors, America's military is
an All-Volunteer Force. No one I served with or Jason served
with or others on the committee here served with anyone who was
forced to be there. They were all volunteers. And it imposes a
challenge on our leadership, both in the military and in
Congress.
Our men and women in uniform are disciplined, they are
hardworking, and that makes them excellent recruits for the
private sector. If we want to maintain or retain talented,
experienced service members, we have to take care of them. And
one key aspect is making sure that base housing meets those
needs, those individual needs.
Base housing at my base, Fort Campbell, which is in my
district, has some significant issues. Many facilities are over
50 years old. They are in poor condition--mold, mildew. I have
visited many of them. Other damage has accumulated over the
years. There are outdated barracks there that no longer suit
the demands of the units that they house.
And, in particular, the barracks for the 1st Brigade of the
101st Airborne Division--a very proud unit with a proud history
at Fort Campbell. They are living in dilapidated, mold-filled--
they are continuously moving the soldiers out, getting the mold
out, putting them back in, but the way that those structures
are built and its age, it just comes back.
I get pictures of those barracks texted to me every month,
and it is upsetting. Our troops deserve better. And I will
actually be at Fort Campbell tomorrow looking at it again. And
it is in my view that that set of barracks for the 1st Brigade
has got to be a priority.
And, Mr. Surash, I would like to ask you, first, in
general, to address restoration and modernization of the
barracks and then, specifically, if you are aware of what is
going on at Fort Campbell and the 1st Brigade and there is any
plan to fix that.
Mr. Surash. All right, sir. Thank you very much for that.
So, as I mentioned in my statement, we are very focused on
taking care of people and, among those things, our barracks.
So, in fiscal year 2019 through 2021, overall in the Army, we
invested $2.1 billion in barracks projects. A portion of that
was military construction, and the larger portion was actually
restoration and modernization.
What is contained in the 2022 budget request, sir, is a
total of $723 million. And that is broken out between, I think
it is five barracks projects that are military construction in
scope, that is $262 million, and then we have a number of
restoration and modernization projects, over $460 million of
projects.
So, in the 4-year period 2019 through 2022, that is a total
investment of $2.8 billion.
Now, we know we need more. So the Chief of Staff of the
Army is required to submit an unfunded list, and he chose to
include 13 additional barracks, valued at over half a billion
dollars, in his unfunded request along with the 2022 budget,
sir.
Dr. Green. Anything specific to the 1st Brigade of the
10lst?
Mr. Surash. Congressman, on that, I do not know the
details. But I will look into that and get back to you, sir.
Dr. Green. Yeah. Please.
You know, one of the things--and, you know, we do our best
to be bipartisan on this committee, but, you know, I am looking
at the spending elsewhere in this administration, a 16 percent
increase in non-DOD spending. My colleagues on the other side
of the aisle and in the other side of the building are talking
about now another $3.4 trillion on, you know, infrastructure
stuff and climate stuff.
It doesn't seem like there are any barriers to spending
money. And yet, overall, we've got a $4 billion real-dollar
decrease in the Defense Department and we have soldiers living
in barracks that are, you know, mildewed.
And I want some assurances that this is going to be a
priority in this administration over the next several years.
Somebody, please tell me that this is going to be addressed.
I mean, $460 million in projects and I think you said a
couple billion over a few years is a drop in the bucket for the
need. And in light of all of the other money that is being
spent by this administration, I would like to see these
soldiers taken care of.
Mr. Surash. Congressman, I can speak on behalf of the Army.
We are very focused on this. We would plan to invest
approximately $10 billion over the next 10 years.
And we are also at the initial stages of looking at, are
there any policy changes that we can make that would maybe
reduce that requirement, that would involve possibly some
soldiers being able to live off-installation? Our installations
are very different. You know, that might work in some
installations. I don't believe it----
Dr. Green. Sure. And unit missions will probably drive
that, too. I get that. I like that out-of-the-box thinking.
I just--I need you guys clamoring to your boss, saying,
``We got to take care of these guys.'' If we are going to spend
16 percent increase elsewhere, let's at least take care of
these warriors who are going to fight to defend us. And that is
really on your shoulders, to go to your boss and make those
demands.
Mr. Chairman, I yield. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Mr. Green.
The recapture of the MILCON money that was sent to the
border for border walls, that money is back in the Department
of Defense now, at least a good portion of it. The question of
how it is going to be used in the Department of Defense I don't
believe has been answered in the current budget. We are going
to look at that in detail, since a lot of that or most of that
money was MILCON money. It may very well be that this----
Dr. Green. That would be good.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. Issue of housing on base could
be a use of that money. We will see. We are looking at it in
detail. Mr. Green, you are interested. We will follow through--
--
Dr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. And see where it may be going.
It seems to me, if MILCON is MILCON and housing is MILCON and
barracks are MILCON, maybe. Okay? We will work on that.
Dr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Ah, let's see. Kai Kahele, you are on.
Mr. Kahele. Aloha, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much, and for
our testifiers today.
I am going to jump over to Hawaii's Second Congressional
District and touch on UXOs [unexploded ordnance] and FUDS,
formerly used defense sites. In particular, one, the Waikoloa
Maneuver Area, covers approximately 220,000 acres on the
northwest side of the island of Hawaii. This was an area used
for extensive training and artillery practice during World War
II.
A portion of these lands fall under the Military Munitions
Response Program. And, although munitions continue to be
discovered and cleared today, while those numbers fluctuate,
about 29,000 acres have still not been cleared to date--or have
been cleared to date. Excuse me.
The process from initial review to an actual cleanup award
takes a very long time. There is additional frustration when a
surface cleanup results in significant findings of UXO to
warrant a subsurface cleanup, at least in areas where
development or projects are planned. Extreme weather, including
heavy rains and flooding, allows more UXOs to easily rise to
the surface. After a surface sweep, however, surface and
subsurface cleanups are currently conducted as a separate
process. This makes little sense when UXO teams are already on
site and can easily initiate a subsurface cleanup concurrently.
So my question is for Mr. Surash and the Army.
Can you shed some light on why surface and subsurface
cleanups of UXOs are not allowed to be undertaken concurrently?
And would it make sense to allow concurrent surface and
subsurface cleanups as a time-critical removal action,
especially if it is in the interest of public safety and if the
lands are being used for redevelopment for a future project?
Mr. Garamendi. Did we lose the Department of Defense here?
They have gone blank on my screen.
Mr. Kahele. Yep. I don't have them, Chair.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. I am going to get the gavel order. We
are going to stop your clock at 3 minutes.
Mr. Kahele. Okay.
Mr. Garamendi. And we will see if we can get the Department
of Defense back on.
The gavel order going forward--hang on a second--will be
Blake Moore, Strickland, and Luria. Wait a minute. I got this
wrong. Moore, Luria, Speier.
And that is corrected too. I am getting corrections one
after the other. So hang on, folks. We will get it right.
Okay. It is Blake Moore, Strickland, Luria, and Speier.
Okay? Apparently, that is when all of you got on the screen.
Normally this problem is a problem that is unique to me,
and that is, I depend upon AT&T fixed wireless. If you have any
other option, take it. And I will continue to badmouth AT&T
fixed wireless until something is done about it, bringing us
back to the infrastructure bill and rural broadband.
Are you guys listening to my plea?
Apparently not.
Okay. We are going to stand by for a few moments. Grab your
coffee or--Elaine doesn't have any questions? What is that
about? Come on, Elaine.
Okay. All right. We will see what is going on here.
Dr. Green. I have to say, I can't believe Elaine isn't--no
comments, Elaine? I actually sit with anticipation to hear you
grill the Navy people. I love it.
Mrs. Luria. I had an opportunity to speak to them at length
this morning before the hearing, so I will cede that time to
others. I got my questions answered.
Dr. Green. Cheers.
Mr. Garamendi. Oh, come on, share with us, Elaine. You
don't get these private audiences without sharing the
enthusiasm that Mr. Green has for your questions.
I don't know if you are still recording all of this or not,
but they can mute the recordings, and we will have a good
discussion here.
The Department of Defense has left the meeting. Yes, that
is true. But my guess is they may be coming back on.
Kai, I think you were talking about unexploded ordnances?
Mr. Kahele. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. My personal experience with this goes back
to the 1990s, when we were trying to clean up another place in
Hawaii----
Mr. Kahele. Yep.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. And also at--let's see--and the
Monterey Bay and a few other places. I was at the Department of
Interior. And most of that land reverted back to the
Department, and the military left the Department with a big
burden. Fortunately, there was a good law that came along and
said, no, no, you guys get to continue to be responsible.
So we will see what happens here, Kai.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. No worries.
Mr. Garamendi. We shall see.
Dr. Green. We should take this moment--Chairman, we should
take this moment to let you know that the Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marine Congressmen have all got a bet, and we all have
to wear the winner of the Commander-in-Chief's Trophy's tie or
scarf or brooch at the State of the Union this year.
Mr. Garamendi. When do we find out what the attire is?
Ms. Miller. Congressman, are you able to hear us through
the microphone?
Mr. Garamendi. Yeah, we got you back. We are just kind of
talking about things that are important, like the Commander's
Trophy.
Kai, you are on. Do you want to finish up on your munitions
issue?
Mr. Kahele. Yeah, you bet. So my question--I don't know
where I cut off----
Ms. Miller. Wait. We have no audio. I don't know if you can
hear us. We have no audio here, but we can see your video. So
they are still trying to connect us.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, then, please stand by. We do have your
video. We've got your video. You don't have our audio. We've
got video and audio from the Department.
Okay.
Ms. Miller. Ah, there we go. We can hear you, sir.
Mr. Cramer. Can you hear us?
Mr. Garamendi. Very good then.
We were talking--Kai Kahele had the floor, and he was
talking about unexploded ordnances on the island of Hawaii.
Kai, would you like to go forward? You've got 3 full
minutes.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Great. Yeah, I don't know where I left
off, but my question was for the Army and Mr. Surash. And I was
asking a question about shedding light on why surface and
subsurface cleanup of UXOs are not allowed to be undertaken
concurrently, and would it make more sense to allow those
surface and subsurface cleanups to be concurrently as time-
critical removal actions, especially in the interest of public
safety and if the lands are being utilized for redevelopment.
Mr. Surash. Congressman, can you hear me okay?
Mr. Kahele. Yes, sir.
Mr. Surash. Yes, sir. I totally agree with your statement.
And I was able to check on this, and, sir, it is my
understanding that, starting about 2 years ago, we actually
moved to a process that allows concurrent surface and
subsurface cleanup, you know, at the Waikoloa, you know, site
that you mentioned.
So I just want to assure you that we are prioritizing the
work with respect to the priorities of the landowners and the
planned redevelopment plans to our very best, sir.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Great.
Let me jump over to the Air Force.
Ms. Miller, for Bellows Air Force Base over in Waimanalo,
there's been--the Waimanalo Bay Recreation Area is there. A big
issue in the community is UXO fencing that have gone up. You
know, fencing is cheaper than the cleanup, but this, you know,
cuts off the community from traditional fishing grounds and
things of that nature.
And so I don't know how much you know about this. I don't
expect you to know too much about it. But I would love to get
your commitment to work together with myself and the community
members on finding a path for UXO cleanup at Bellows Air Force
Station and, you know, maybe get some updates from you on the
issue.
Ms. Miller. Yes, Congressman. I was actually out there on
Fourth of July and saw the beautiful area. I spent my family
vacation out there on Bellows and know exactly the area you are
talking about.
So I asked my team to look into this a little bit. I know
we just, I think 2 months ago, had the Restoration Advisory
Board that--we have looked at four COAs [courses of action].
And the initial COA that we proposed was to fence it off
because of the cost associated with that. I understand the
community's concerns, and I know we have received public input
and are now taking comments, working with the State.
So we will continue to do that. That is only a couple
months old, understanding that the Air Force's chosen COA
doesn't really support the needs of the community. So tracking
that, and we will continue to work that. And I will follow up
with your office as soon as we have an update on whether or not
we can pursue another COA.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Great. I have 22 seconds left, so let me
jump to the Navy.
Mr. Schafer, UXO is starting to be discovered off the
waters of Lanai. I know there was unexploded ordnance off of
Molokini. Do you have any status updates on this UXOs risk
assessment on the island of Lanai and also working together
with myself and the local community on it?
Mr. Schafer. Sir, I do not. I will have to take that for
the record and get back to you.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Kahele. Okay. All right. And thank you so much.
And thank you, Chair. Sorry about the technical
difficulties.
Mr. Garamendi. Yeah, we are not blaming you on it. It is
not your problem, Kai.
Mr. Kahele. All right.
Mr. Cramer. It was ours.
Mr. Garamendi. There you go.
The order going forward: Moore, Strickland, Speier. Luria
has left.
So Blake Moore.
Mr. Moore. It's not my fault either. But if it's going to
somebody's, it's gonna be Kai's. So, we'll go with that.
Mr. Garamendi. It's always the chairman's fault.
Mr. Moore. Yeah. Thank you, everyone. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you for being here.
I was pleased to see the robust increase in the fiscal year
2022 MILCON budget. However, significant backlog of MILCON
requirements means that many projects may never receive funding
due to competing needs. It is a reality that I think all of us
on this hearing can recognize and we will all face it.
I have seen firsthand the impact of deferred funding in
facility and infrastructure investments at Hill Air Force Base
in my district of Utah 1. Hill currently has a grouping of 66
buildings, known as the 1200-series buildings, that aren't fit
to house the 4,000 DOD personnel found working in them. They
were constructed over 80 years ago, initially built as
ammunition warehouse space during World War II. Over the years,
these buildings have been modified to house administrative
functions and are in complete disrepair.
These buildings not only lead to poor working conditions
but have contributed to recruiting challenges for programs at
Hill, like GBSD [Ground Based Strategic Deterrent] and other
really high-profile, awesome projects that Hill gets to work
on, but this has been a thorn in their side. This is something
that was brought up to me during the campaign, even. I was
aware of this well before I even was in this role.
This 1200 series is a significant issue. The DOD urgently
needs to find a way to replace these facilities. A recent
economic analysis indicated a potential savings of $400 million
over 20 years if these facilities were demolished and replaced.
The replacement of these facilities through MILCON would cost
nearly $750 but realistically cannot compete with limited
MILCON funding.
That is where I bring in the reality and where I am
sincerely hoping--and I will continue to push on this
particular topic of, there are solutions, and they are based in
our local economies and our local stakeholders wanting to
engage.
I am proposing a provision in this year's NDAA that would
expand the definition of ``installation support services'' in
title 10, section 2679, that allows local government to
construct, manage, and operate a facility on or near a military
installation for a period of up to 10 years.
Unfortunately, we have run into a scoring implication that
has stymied this simple solution. This scoring issue is in the
Congressional Budget Office. It considers such lease
agreements--I won't get into the details of it, but it is a
scoring implication, when there is broader embrace from the
local governments to help out in this regard.
So my question for Ms. Miller is, can you commit to
examining innovative financing options and working with OMB
[U.S. Office of Management and Budget] to facilitate local
communities' desire to assist bases with their infrastructure
and military construction needs?
Ms. Miller. Congressman, yes, I would love to help tackle
some of the scoring issues and have argued, where it makes
financial sense, understanding that we will continue to be
scored to the extent that we have a long-term responsibility
for the project funding.
I know we have implemented some creative solutions at Hill,
and, in fact, the building--I worked on the Hill EUL [enhanced
use lease] that has been really successful out there, a huge
EUL. We continue to take--I think we are on site development
lease nine now, and working with MIDA [Military Installation
Development Authority], which you guys have been probably the
leader, of any of the States, in that organization and the
support that you have been able to provide.
I think some other creative financing, besides the enhanced
use lease and continuing to use the revenue for that for
demolition, are things like intergovernmental support
agreements [IGSA], potentially extending the duration of those
beyond the existing 10-year statutory authority to allow us to
enter into sole-source, non-FAR [Federal Acquisition
Regulation] service contracts with the local State and
community.
But our MILCON budget is tight. You know, we spend a third
on COCOM [combatant command] requirements, a third on new-
mission MILCON, and then we have less than 20 percent left for
the entirety of all of our existing infrastructure. Hill is
getting one project, though, as part of the B-21 in our fiscal
year 2022, so that is good news. But, yes, we will commit to
continuing to work to tackle some of the scoring issues.
Mr. Moore. And if my opening wasn't convincing enough,
like, I am willing to dig into the details--our team, full
disposal of our military legislative aide. We are all in on
this. The community is amazing in Utah, and we want to embrace
as much as possible. So I will just reiterate that here. And
then, as we continue to work together, we would love to find
solutions. There is a lot of options there.
And, again, I recognize the reality, so I am never--I am
not one to come out and ask--you know, just recognizing those
realities and trying to find solutions.
The other question that I have--you already started talking
about it--was just, what other types of, you know, options
might there be, doing things at a cheaper cost and accelerated
timeline?
I will pause there if you don't have anything else in
response to that. I think my clock actually started a little
bit late, and so I will gladly yield back some of my time. But
if there are any other suggestions or financing options, I am
open to hear it right now.
Ms. Miller. Sir, from the Air Force perspective, no, I
think it is leveraging--so the MIDA unique opportunity with the
tax increment financing that they were able to do and may be
able to do up at Park City, Deer Valley, that is State-specific
legislation, which we very much appreciated.
From a Federal standpoint, other than extending the IGSA
authority, the scoring would be great to get after, but I don't
know that that can be addressed by statute, maybe by
persuasion. So, happy to partner with you on that. But I have
no other creative solutions, sir.
Mr. Cramer. You've got scoring on both ends, CBO and OMB
Circular A-11. So a lot of folks have worked that, and we will
continue to also work it from the Department.
Mr. Moore. Yes. And I appreciate your mention of EUL. It is
a value proposition. It is a solid option that others could
adopt as well.
So, if anybody ever wants to learn--she already mentioned
Deer Valley. So anybody on the committee is welcome to come to
Deer Valley. I will gladly accept a CODEL to my district and
would be a gracious host.
So thank you for those comments.
Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
You raised the scoring issue. This is a problem in most
everything we do. And, frankly, the scoring, as you have
described your particular problem, is found in everything in
the government. And we really need to address it. It seems to
me very foolish and very unwise, prohibiting us to take
advantage of many of the private partnerships that are out
there, some of which you mentioned.
And so I will look forward to working with you on that, and
I suspect there are others on this who find the same. And, I
don't know, maybe one or two of the folks at the table have an
answer on how we can get past that scoring problem.
Okay. Let's see. We now have Ms. Strickland, followed by
Ms. Speier.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to our
witnesses today.
I will have three lines of questioning: first around
housing, the second one about the unique role of Joint Base
Lewis-McChord that I represent, and then earthquake resiliency.
So I have the privilege of representing Joint Base Lewis-
McChord, or JBLM, as we call it, and its 40,000 service members
call it home. JBLM is the Army's only power [inaudible]
Department continues to focus on the Indo-Pacific. Our Air
Force personnel perform strategic vital airlift missions and
are the only wing tasked with prime nuclear airlift mission.
One of the issues I hear about consistently, both on post
and off post, is housing. We have a housing supply crisis here
in the greater metropolitan region. And the South Sound that I
represent is about 30 miles south of Seattle. Between 2010 and
2019, for example, over 180,000 households moved into my
district, compared to 54,000 the decade prior. So housing
affordability is a major issue, both on and off post.
And currently, on post, there are 776 households on a
waiting list at JBLM, while 70 percent of those who serve live
off post. And so it is my understanding that even if all the
houses on JBLM were fully renovated, there would still be a
significant waiting list. So housing access is a huge readiness
issue. It affects families, and we know it has to be addressed.
So, Mr. Surash, what can the Department do to address the
housing shortage on JBLM, given the high demand for it? And
what do you think we in Congress can do to help alleviate some
of those issues?
Mr. Surash. Congresswoman, thank you very much for that
question.
So I am aware of plans by the privatized, you know, housing
provider there, which I believe is Lincoln at the moment.
Ms. Strickland. Yep.
Mr. Surash. So there is a plan to renovate about--over the
next 5 years, between now and 2025, to renovate just under 600
homes, you know, major renovations, and another 500 with minor
renovations.
I will get back to you to see if there are any other plans
involving adding new homes, you know, from this point on. There
have been homes, I believe, added, you know, since the deal was
put in place. But I will get back to you on any plans to add
additional housing going forward.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 115.]
Ms. Strickland. Great. Thank you for that. And please
include metrics about how you measure what is an acceptable
time for a family to find housing.
I will move on to the next question, and this is for Ms.
Miller.
Our testing and research and development facilities do
significant work, but, unfortunately, they are underresourced
and underfunded. Can you tell me how the Air Force can maintain
our innovative edge when we chronically underfund testing,
research, and development facilities, including the Precision
Measurement Equipment Labs?
Ms. Miller. Yes, ma'am. So I visited JBLM and met with the
wing commander and toured, I think, the exact facility that you
are talking about.
So, as a joint base, we work prioritization of the military
construction on that base through the Army and identify the
prioritization of that through the Army. But I am not trying to
throw the ball at the Army here, because we are all facing the
same challenges with the prioritization being on modernization,
new-mission MILCON, and the combatant command support.
So I can't speak to where within the Army prioritization
that particular facility is, but we are tracking in the Air
Force the importance of it. Even where we have a joint base, I
think we are effectively implementing our joint base agreements
and effectively communicating with the local commander.
When we had the big--I don't even--culvert, the gigantic
culvert, up on the airfield there, we really appreciated the
Army's support in getting after and prioritizing the
improvement of that facility. I think that is a good example of
the joint base working like it should with the Army
prioritizing a key Air Force issue.
Ms. Strickland. And I have a very brief question that you
can answer offline with my staff. But, in March, General Gabram
said that 60 percent of the buildings at JBLM are not up to
code for earthquake, which is a big concern.
So I will take that answer offline with my staff, but thank
you very much for being here today.
And I will yield my time.
Mr. Garamendi. Ms. Strickland, earlier in this hearing, we
spoke extensively about risks at every base. And every base has
a different set of risks, and you certainly have your share of
them there. If I recall, back in the day, there was talk about,
what if your little mountain to the east were to have a serious
mudslide? What would that mean to your community and to the
base? The answer is not good.
So there are many, many different risks. Please continue to
pursue these issues.
Now we go to Ms. Speier. And then we will start a second
round. So, if you wanted to have a second round, please let the
staff know.
Jackie, your turn.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Can you--for some reason, my video
has gone. Can you hear me?
Mr. Garamendi. Yes, we can.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for being here.
I must say that there is great frustration by members on
both the Republican and Democratic side in this hearing about
the inability, for whatever reasons, for the military to beef
up barracks, housing, and childcare.
Mr. Surash, let me start with you. The Army announced with
a great deal of fanfare its $10 billion, 10-year plan to bring
all the barracks up to a good condition. But in the budget for
this year, you are only requesting $260 million. So, you know,
there is a lot of talk, but the walk isn't there.
So, at $260 million a year, you are never going to meet
that 10-year, $10 billion. And, meanwhile, many of these
barracks are really unacceptable. When we were at Fort Hood, a
number of my colleagues on the CODEL who have served in the
military said they had never been in barracks that were as bad
as some of those.
So why didn't you request more funds for barracks?
Mr. Surash. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
So, between 2019 and 2021, ma'am, we invested $2.1 billion
in barracks for both military construction as well as
restoration and modernization. You are totally accurate on the
military construction request in 2022 for $262 [million], but
there is another $461 [million] in restoration and
modernization projects for barracks. So that will give us a
total of about $720 million in 2022. And then, if we were to
add up 2019 through 2022, that is $2.8 billion.
We know we need more, and the Chief of Staff of the Army
chose to include 13 barracks projects on his unfunded
requirements list. That totals a little bit over a half a
billion dollars. And I believe there were 2--2 of those 13
projects on the unfunded list were specifically at Hood, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. So are you still committed to $10 billion over
10 years?
Mr. Surash. We do have that plan, and we will do our best
to properly resource it. We are also taking a look at other
things we can do to possibly reduce the overall requirement.
But we are----
Ms. Speier. All right.
Mr. Surash [continuing]. On that plan.
Ms. Speier. I think what you are hearing from all of us,
though, is: We want action. The talk is just talk.
Let me move to Ms. Miller and the Air Force.
You have identified more than 70 childcare development
centers in poor or failing condition, yet the Air Force only
requested funds for one child development center in fiscal year
2022.
Why is this not more of a priority? We have 9,000 families
that have their children on waiting lists throughout the
military. And if you can identify poor and failing facilities
but then only fund one, we've got a problem. So why is there
not a higher priority for this?
Ms. Miller. Yes, ma'am. So we do have in the Air Force 222
child development centers [CDCs] and school-age centers. Of
those, only one on the Building Condition Index was poor or
red, and that one has a $3.6 million renovation pending. For
the other ones, we have amber, which is still acceptable, it
could use improvement, for 144, and then 74 that are green.
So, of those, I acknowledge that we have not historically
funded CDCs at the level that we ought to. So we stood up a
working group in 2020 and had the master plan, much like the
Army, and then provided a memo where we were looking what is
the prioritized list and what are those projects.
You are correct that we only have one MILCON project for a
CDC on our primary fiscal year 2022 budget, but that we have
five total that are ready for fiscal year 2022 execution, with
four of those on our unfunded priority list.
So, as mentioned, we have very few--you know, less than 20
percent of our MILCON funds go to existing projects, but, of
those, we are prioritizing the very next items that weren't
funded as hopefully getting funded with those CDCs.
And then we are also addressing this with----
Ms. Speier. Ms. Miller, excuse me a moment. What is your
waiting list in the Air Force right now?
Ms. Miller. We have 5,100 families--5,116 kids that had
unmet childcare needs.
Ms. Speier. All right. And what is the wait time?
Ms. Miller. The average wait time was a 151-day wait.
Ms. Speier. Okay. We have heard horror stories of over a
year. But with 5,100 unmet, you can see that we have got to
make this a higher priority.
Answer for me, what is meant by a poor- or failing-
condition childcare center?
Ms. Miller. So we do a Building Condition Index, ma'am,
that assesses the physical infrastructure requirements. So
anytime there is a life, health, or safety issue, those are
identified immediately; none of those go unresolved. This is
where we anticipate that, without investment--and so a red is a
facility that requires significant investment over the next
couple of years or it is going to result in a failed facility.
So these aren't failed facilities. These are poor, requiring
investment.
So that one facility, as mentioned, has the major
renovation planning, with the funding lined up for that. The
other ones that are yellow, though, those do deserve our
attention. Right now, we have 144 of those, so that is where--
--
Ms. Speier. All right.
Ms. Miller [continuing]. We are working with the
prioritization to put----
Ms. Speier. Excuse me, Ms. Miller. I would like for you to
provide the committee and me personally with a list of all of
those that are red or yellow----
Ms. Miller. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. And at what bases they are located
and, also, the definition for ``poor'' or ``failing'' and what
comes under that, if you would. All right?
Ms. Miller. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know how much time I have left, since
I can't see the screen. I have one more question on PFAS, if
that is possible.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, Ms. Speier, as chairman of the
Personnel Committee, why don't you go ahead and take some of
your own time here. You are actually 32 seconds over, but we
are going to cut you a wide swath.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you. I will just ask one
question.
My understanding is that NATO [North Atlantic Treaty
Organization] and some of our civilian European airports are
phasing out fluorinated firefighting foam. Why hasn't the
Department taken steps to replace AFFF [aqueous film forming
foam] with non-fluorinated formulations?
I guess this would be for the Department.
Mr. Cramer. So, Congresswoman, this is Paul Cramer, in case
you can't see me.
So we are making--we have made some significant strides in
finding a replacement for the fluorinated AFFF, and so we are
cautiously optimistic we will meet the timeline. In fact, we
have done some very robust testing on alternatives that will be
a drop-in replacement using the existing apparatus, and that
helps us meet the 2024 timeline.
With respect to the question about NATO and Europe, the
formation they use to replace AFFF in their apparatus caused
them to replace the whole apparatus. The viscosity of the agent
was much different than they had to do before. So it added
significant cost, where we have taken the approach where we are
going to control the use of AFFF, capture that so it no longer
gets into the groundwater, and then find an alternative that
will [inaudible] drop into the existing apparatus and then save
taxpayers a lot of dollars.
And so we have at least four or five formations that are
fluorine-free that will drop into existing apparatus, and those
have now moved from the testing to put out the fire. They have
all not met our current MILDEP [Military Department] standards,
but they have achieved an acceptable standard to put out a
fuel-based fire that our Fire Advisory Board is somewhat
comfortable with that.
So we have now moved into the stage where we are testing
those new formations for ECOTOX [environmental toxicity]. In
essence, you know, we want to make sure that our replacement
chemical isn't any more toxic than the current one we use. In
fact, what we don't want to do is create another environmental
hazard, you know, decades down the road, so we want to have one
that is actually better than the formation we are using today.
And that is the stage we are at now, is to go through that
testing.
So we are cautiously optimistic that we will have a
formation, fluorine-free, drop-in replacement into the existing
apparatus, by the timeline that we have been asked to meet.
Over.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Jackie, thank you for the question. A very
good one, and a good answer for all of us.
I believe it is now my turn for a second round. I am going
to go very quickly here.
In the testimony that all of you have provided, you have
talked about the resiliency and various steps that you are
taking to understand the threats that exist in your area. In
response to Mr. Wilson and his request for maps of the sea-
level rise and flooding in South Carolina, similar information
is available on various bases.
What I would like to offer to the committee and ask of the
witnesses here is a briefing sometime during the month of
September in which those maps and information would be
available to the committee members, the subcommittee as well as
the full committee, so that we might all become aware of the
threat that you need to meet in your resiliency requirements.
So if you would take a look at that at the Department,
think about how you might best inform us of these threats that
exist out there. Ms. Strickland is interested in earthquakes,
and I think the rest of us have our own backyard to care for.
We will do that. I offer that to the committee. We will
make that available, with perhaps a week or two heads-up so
that you can be there. And we will do that informally as a
briefing.
And nice of my staff to know about this ahead of time so
that they now have 2\1/2\ months to get it done and for the
Department to prepare the maps and prepare the briefings for
us.
So we want to go over resiliency, and thank you----
Mr. Cramer. Mr. Chairman, if you don't mind, along that
line, so DCAT is a web-based system, so we can actually go
through the DCAT model for each one of the installations, and
the members--as opposed to printing maps, we could actually do,
you know, an interactive discussion with them using the DCAT
model. And we will take that on and schedule it accordingly.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, bring your big screen.
Mr. Cramer. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi. I would like to do this for all of us, so
that all of us become aware of the extent of the problem. And
then I am quite certain that Mr. [Moore] and others, Kahele and
others, want to drill down and talk about meter by meter or
inch by inch, as they should.
So let's put that together. Let's look at September to put
that together.
Mr. Cramer. Will do.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. I am going to let my questions go at
that point. We will go back through this.
Mr. Wilson, you would be next.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, indeed, I look
forward to the hearings in September or whenever, because I
just have such an interest in working for the benefit of all.
So, hey, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this, and just
keep us informed.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
I think the next would be Mr. Kahele--Mr. Green--excuse me.
Mr. Kahele and then Mr. Green.
Unmute, Kai.
Mr. Kahele. Oh, sorry, sir. I am here. Okay.
My next question is directed to OSD, and it has to do--you
mentioned climate change and sea-level rise. And my question is
specific to the Runit Dome, the lagoon in the center of the
atoll in the Republic of the Marshall Islands [RMI].
As you all know, this is an area where we did extensive
nuclear testing back in the 1950s and 1960s. There is U.S.
nuclear bomb waste that is there. The threat of sea-level rise
due to climate change poses a very real threat to the entire
country and the surrounding region.
The potential of leakage of nuclear bomb waste due to
seepage through the sand base under the dome has generated
concern from the highest levels. President Biden recognized
this extraordinary threat of climate change to the RMI in a
March 25th letter to President Kabua, in which he stated that
the RMI is especially vulnerable to climate impacts among the
world's nations.
So I will jump to my question. Is the Pentagon and
Secretary Austin similarly committed to addressing the threat
of climate change at former U.S. nuclear testing sites?
And can you also comment on the DOD's commitment to
supporting our Freely Associated States, those allies in the
Pacific, including the Republic of the Marshall Islands?
Mr. Cramer. So, Congressman, I am not familiar with the
specific topic, but I will gladly take it back.
But to answer your question, is the Secretary of Defense
committed to climate change, the answer is yes. And he is also
committed to the President of the United States. So we will
honor those commitments within the existing laws and agreements
within the Marshall Islands.
I have been there myself, and it is a pristine area. So I
will have my staff look into this and get on your schedule and
come and meet with you and give you a proper response.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Great.
Well, then I will use the balance of my time just to
educate on the subject.
So the United States detonated 67 bombs, nuclear bombs,
over 12 years, with a force equal in radiation to 1.6 of the
Hiroshima bombs that were detonated in Hiroshima. The dome, the
Runit Dome, which was built in the 1970s, contains more than
3.1 million cubic feet of radioactively contaminated soil and
debris that were dumped into a nuclear bomb test crater on the
north end of Runit Island, and this is covered by a concrete
dome.
And part of the threat is that, with rising sea levels,
there could potentially be leakage from under the dome, which
threatens the population area and the Pacific, of course,
affecting fish stocks and coral reefs.
It is my understanding in previous NDAAs required the
Department of Energy to conduct a study, but that report,
delivered by the Trump administration in June 2020, did not
adequately respond to Congress' concerns. The report concluded
that the contents within the dome are not expected to have an
adverse impact on the environment in the coming years.
And so, if you would, sir, take a look at this particular
issue out in the Republic of the Marshall Islands. It is very
important.
The compact agreement that we have with the Republic of the
Marshall Islands expires in 2023. Those negotiations are
happening now. But, you know, Kwajalein, you know, the
importance of the Marshall Islands in the Pacific Deterrence
Initiative, you know, those agreements that we have and the
compact agreements we have with the Marshallese community is
going to be really important. You know, China is in the area.
We know that. And we want to make sure that we maintain our
competitive edge, especially as it relates to our missile
defense testing and those types of systems we have out at Kwaj.
And this Runit Dome is something that, when you get a
chance, please take a look at it. I would love to work together
with you on it, and appreciate your attention to it.
Mr. Cramer. Will do.
Mr. Kahele. Thank you, sir.
And I will yield back 18 seconds of my time.
Mr. Garamendi. We will put that in your list of
opportunities for the future, Kai. Thank you for bringing the
Pacific, all the Pacific, to our attention.
Mr. Kahele. Okay.
Mr. Garamendi. We now turn to Mr. Green and the 101st
Division.
Mr. Green, are you still with us? Mr. Green.
We will now turn to Mr. Blake--Blake Moore. You are up.
Mr. Moore. No, thank you. I am doing another markup at the
moment anyway, so thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. I am not quite sure I understood that.
Blake Moore, if you want to come on, I think Mr. Green is
busy with another piece of work.
Blake, do you want to come on?
Mr. Moore. Sorry. Could you repeat that, Chairman?
Mr. Garamendi. It is your turn, Blake Moore.
Mr. Moore. Yeah, I will forgo any more questioning. Thank
you. I am in the middle of another markup meeting at the time.
Thank you all for being here.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. Very good. Thank you for your
participation.
I believe we have run through all the members. Is that the
case?
I think we have gone through all of this. I want to end
this with a big thank you to the four witnesses, not only for
what you have done today in informing us but really for your
careers. All of you are career civil servants. Through the
years, you have gathered incredible knowledge, not only about
your current job but about a variety of tasks that you have
undertaken.
And you have served this Nation very well, and I know you
will continue to do that. As the political appointees are
eventually put in place, you will provide them with the
knowledge and information and the history that you carry with
you.
And so, for all of you, thank you. I look forward to
working with you in the days ahead. We have some significant
challenges, many of which we have talked about today but many
more that are on the agenda but not yet discussed.
So, with that, I will call this hearing to adjourn, and
thank you all.
[Whereupon, at 5:47 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

July 14, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

July 14, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

July 14, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Ms. Miller. The USSF is currently utilizing the Defense Readiness
Reporting System (DRRS) to report readiness, with adjustments in work
to make it a better readiness tool for space forces

The USAF Air Expeditionary Task Force (AETF) model within
DRRS does not sufficiently portray readiness of Employed-in-Place (EiP)
USSF forces

USSF is in the process of defining and implementing a new
USSF force presentation model that will enable more robust DRRS
utilization and readiness reporting

The standup of the USSF required changes to the Unit
Identification Codes (UIC) for the new Service that current DRRS tools
do not accept (requires manual workaround)

USSF is investing in Space Force specific DRRS input
tools to account for the new UIC nomenclature and to enable timely and
accurate readiness reporting
[See page 13.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. STRICKLAND
Mr. Surash. In February, almost 700 of the privatized homes at JBLM
were unavailable for occupancy due to a significant between-occupancy
maintenance backlog that resulted from labor shortages in the Fort
Lewis area. The Army approved the Military Housing Privatization
Initiative (MHPI) housing project at JBLM to use $7M in project
Reinvestment Account funds to bring on additional, dedicated contractor
firms to accelerate between occupancy maintenance of vacant quarters
during the current Permanent Change of Station (PCS) season. The Amy
Material Command (AMC) and Army Installation Management Command (IMCOM)
are closely monitoring the MHPI housing project's progress towards the
goal of reducing the vacant quarters backlog to less than 100 by
September 2021. In addition, the MHPI hotel at JBLM that is part of
Army's Privatization of Army Lodging (PAL) program is offering soldiers
the option to remain in the hotel at a room rate equal to their Basic
Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate, pending permanent assignment to on or
off-post housing.   [See page 27.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

July 14, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Microreactors not greater than 50 MW in size offer the
opportunity for significant national security benefits to DOD.
Microreactors could power critical facilities in island mode separate
from the commercial electric grid, and could operate for several years
without need to shut down for refueling, with the ability to protect
against cyber threats and natural phenomena. Some advanced reactor
designs have demonstrated unlimited coping time in the event of a
blackout or other emergency, and can provide black start capabilities.
Please explain how DOD views mobile vs. stationary NRC licensed
reactors for potential application at DOD facilities.
Mr. Cramer. The Department seeks to use innovative technology to
improve energy resilience against all hazards, to include the effects
of climate change. Stationary Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)-
licensed microreactors are an option for permanent DOD installations
within the United States and its territories, especially those in
remote locations, to enhance energy security and energy resilience. In
coordination with DOE, DOD is pursuing the demonstration of a
stationary NRC-licensed reactor at a permanent installation in the
continental United States as a pilot program to validate microreactor
technology and determine the viability of microreactors for future
energy resilience efforts. If the demonstration is successful, DOD
could pursue additional projects similar to the pilot initiative at
suitable locations in the future, incorporating lessons learned from
the pilot.
To provide increased operational capabilities and energy resiliency
in strategic and operational support areas, the Strategic Capabilities
Office, within the Office of Secretary of Defense, is pursuing the
design and development of a working prototype under their program,
Project Pele. Currently there are two vendors in a design competition,
for which final designs will be due in March 2022, with a potential
prototype construction and initial operation by Spring, 2024.
Mr. Wilson. Executive Order 13972, ``Promoting Small Modular
Reactors for National Defense and Space Exploration,'' signed January
5, 2021, requires that DOD ``implement a plan to demonstrate the energy
flexibility capability and cost effectiveness of a Nuclear Regulatory
Commission licensed microreactor at a domestic military installation.''
Please provide a status update on this report. If the report is
complete, please provide a copy of the report.
Mr. Cramer. DOD has prepared a draft Demonstration Plan to meet the
requirements of Executive Order 13972 and is currently coordinating
this plan among various Department stakeholders.
Mr. Wilson. Executive Order 13972, ``Promoting Small Modular
Reactors for National Defense and Space Exploration,'' signed January
5, 2021, requires that DOD ``implement a plan to demonstrate the energy
flexibility capability and cost effectiveness of a Nuclear Regulatory
Commission licensed microreactor at a domestic military installation.''
Please provide a status update on this report. If the report is
complete, please provide a copy of the report.
Mr. Schafer. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Wilson. Executive Order 13972, ``Promoting Small Modular
Reactors for National Defense and Space Exploration,'' signed January
5, 2021, requires that DOD ``implement a plan to demonstrate the energy
flexibility capability and cost effectiveness of a Nuclear Regulatory
Commission licensed microreactor at a domestic military installation.''
Please provide a status update on this report. If the report is
complete, please provide a copy of the report.
Ms. Miller. The report in question is under development by the
Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD). While the Department of the
Air Force did provide inputs, OSD will need to provide the up-to-date
status of the report.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. Does the National Guard have access to the same
authorities and funding source for environmental clean up as the rest
of DOD installations? What are the risks to the cleanup program when
they don't have access to the same authorities and funding source?
Mr. Cramer. State-owned or -operated National Guard facilities have
the same DOD authorities and funding source for environmental cleanup
to address PFOS and PFOA, as well as what DOD considers the first two
investigation phases (e.g., preliminary assessment (PA) and site
investigation (SI)) under the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA, aka Superfund).
The Defense Environment Restoration Program (DERP) law provides DOD
the authority to perform and fund its environmental restoration
responsibilities arising under CERCLA. CERCLA responsibility (i.e.,
liability) extends to, among others, the owner and operator of the
facility. DOD reemphasized in FY18 that the use of DOD environmental
restoration funds does not extend to releases that occurred at State-
owned, State-controlled, and State-operated National Guard facilities.
However, Congress amended DERP in FY20 and FY21 to allow the use of
DERP funds for PFOS and PFOA cleanups at National Guard facilities.
Where National Guard facilities are ineligible for these DERP
funds, they are eligible for other federal funds (i.e., Army and Air
Force National Guard Operation and Maintenance appropriations) for
environmental cleanup actions to address contaminants at state-owned or
operated National Guard facilities. The National Guard works with the
Army or Air Force, as applicable, to receive federal funds for cleanup
actions, and have been doing this for over 30 years. Because the
National Guard must conduct its cleanups in accordance with CERCLA, and
federal funds are used for these cleanups (regardless of whether they
are DERP or federal O&M funds), there are no identified risks.
Mr. Scott. Why were National Guard restoration sites pulled out of
the Defense Environmental Restoration Program under an OSD policy in
FY18 when they were successfully cleaning up sites under the Defense
Environmental Restoration Program for over 30 years?
Mr. Cramer. State owned or operated National Guard facilities have
the same DOD authorities and funding source for environmental cleanup
to address PFOS and PFOA, as well as what DOD considers the f irst two
investigation phases (e.g., preliminary assessment (PA) and site
investigation (SI)) under the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA, aka Superfund). The Defense
Environment Restoration Program (DERP) law provides DOD the authority
to perform and fund its environmental restoration responsibilities
arising under CERCLA. CERCLA responsibility (i.e., liability) extends
to, among others, the owner and operator of the facility.
DOD reemphasized in FY18 that the use of DOD environmental
restoration funds does not extend to releases that occurred at State-
owned, State-controlled, and State-operated National Guard facilities.
However, Congress amended DERP in FY20 and FY21 to allow the use of
DERP funds for PFOS and PFOA cleanups at National Guard facilities.
Additionally, federal funds (i.e., Army and Air Force National Guard
Operation and Maintenance appropriations) have been used for over 30
years for environmental cleanup actions to address contaminants at
state-owned or operated National Guard facilities.
Mr. Scott. When National Guard installations are not eligible for
the Defense Environmental Restoration Program, what do they have to do
to be eligible and how long does it take?
Mr. Cramer. State-owned or -operated National Guard facilities are
eligible for Defense Environment Restoration Program (DERP) funds to
address PFOS and PFOA, what DOD considers the first two investigation
phases (e.g., preliminary assessment (PA) and site investigation (SI))
phases under the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA, aka Superfund). Where National Guard facilities
are ineligible for these DERP funds, they are eligible for other
federal funds (i.e., Army and Air Force National Guard Operation and
Maintenance appropriations) for environmental cleanup actions to
address contaminants at State-owned or -operated National Guard
facilities. The National Guard works with the Army or Air Force, as
applicable, to receive federal funds for cleanup actions, and have been
doing this for over 30 years.
Mr. Scott. The FY20 NDAA authorized National Guard PFOS/PFOA sites
to be moved into DERP. Have all of the sites been transferred? If not,
why?
Mr. Cramer. DOD already uses DERA to fund its initial
investigations under CERCLA (i.e., preliminary assessment/site
inspection) at Guard sites. The FY20 NDAA allowed DERA to be used to
address later phases in the CERCLA process for PFOA and PFOA.
DOD issued guidance on September 29, 2020 for the transfer of
eligible National Guard PFOS/PFOA sites into DERP. The only requirement
is for the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army or Air Force, as
applicable, to provide the Deputy Secretary of Defense for Environment
and Energy Resilience a list of eligible sites that will be moving to
DERP. As of the end of July 2021, DOD has only received this
notification for a small number of sites.
Mr. Scott. What steps has DOD taken to proactively engage with
technical experts and industry to address any concerns about the use of
variable refrigerant flow (VRF) equipment before modifications to
Unified Facilities Criteria's (UFC) VRF requirements are issued?
Mr. Cramer. DOD first published HVAC design criteria on the
installation of new VRF systems in January 2017. Prior to that, DOD had
significant direct involvement with the HVAC industry in general,
including several industry reviews of various proposed updates to HVAC
controls specifications, and several industry forums that included
soliciting industry comments.
These engagements were not focused on VRF systems in particular,
but were open to industry representatives of all HVAC systems, to
include VRF systems. During this process, neither industry associations
nor VRF manufacturers raised any issues or concerns with DOD's proposed
HVAC control system requirements that later surfaced as the VRF-
specific problem.
The January 2017 restrictions in HVAC design criteria were based
upon analysis of VRF manufacturer's technical literature, experience
with previously-installed VRF systems, and review of Department of
Energy studies on VRF systems which were available for DOD technical
personnel to review. This analysis was supported by the broader
industry engagement on HVAC control systems already mentioned.
As a result of the design criteria restrictions, DOD arranged an
in-person meeting of its entire technical team and UFC program managers
with VRF industry representatives at the offices of AHRI in Arlington,
VA in May 2017, focused on understanding respective concerns and
sharing of technical papers and presentations. This engagement
ultimately led to several subsequent updates to DOD criteria that were
informed by, and resulted from, DOD-industry engagement during this
three-year period. The first such update replaced the general
``blanket'' restrictions on new VRF installations with specific design
criteria equivalent to other HVAC systems, effectively placing VRF
systems on a level playing field with other types of HVAC systems. DOD
afforded AHRI the opportunity to review and comment upon this proposed
update prior to its approval and publication. A later update for key
HVAC control system specifications was preceded by DOD seeking
industry-wide input via FedBizOps as described above to both refine
DOD's specification and inform DOD of industry capability to satisfy
it. Based upon its accumulated industry input, DOD subsequently updated
its design criteria yet again to provide VRF system installations under
particular circumstances an exception from meeting DOD's open protocol
control system specification.
Mr. Scott. Given that the Critical Change Request (CCR) process is
largely retroactive, requires industry to submit individual requests
for each proposed UFC revision, and lacks a public platform to track
the resolution status of CCRs submitted, do you believe this process is
sufficient in creating opportunities for DOD and industry to work
together to mitigate technical concerns, optimize equipment
performance, minimize energy consumption, and maximize energy savings?
Mr. Cramer. The Criteria Change Request (CCR) process is but one
tool that DOD can use to engage with stakeholders both internal and
external to the Department; all of these tools are necessary to fully
engage with industry to address issues and develop opportunities in
technical criteria and specifications. A CCR initiates a formal process
that is logged and tracked within the Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC)
program management structure and visible by the affected technical
experts in the Army, Navy, and Air Force for collective action to
adjudicate the submission. The tool enables a direct response back to
CCR submitter as to its disposition once it has been fully reviewed by
DOD technical personnel. A such, it serves as an efficient means of
communication, albeit of a very focused nature and dependent upon the
scope of the CCR itself as it relates to already-published documents.
Other tools offer broader and more open-ended dialog between DOD and
industry, such as ``Industry days'' where DOD invites the public and
specific industries of interest to attend public DOD presentations and
provide live feedback and discussion, typically in advance of adopting
new criteria or specifications. Additionally, the Solicitations and
Awards Management (SAM) process includes formal ``Sources Sought''
actions to solicit industry information on capabilities to meet DOD
requirements, as well as complimentary ``Requests for Industry''
process to solicit input to specific draft criteria and specifications.
The combination of all these tools provides the necessary opportunities
for DOD and industry to resolve technical concerns and develop new
opportunities.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GOLDEN
Mr. Golden. As we work to advance DOD's readiness capabilities
regarding increased extreme weather events, it will be important that
the Department approaches this issue by investing in innovative and new
building technologies. What are some barriers that the DOD faces in
acquisition of innovative building products that can mitigate the
damage caused by extreme weather events?
Mr. Cramer. DOD generally seeks to adopt new technologies only
after they been tested and certified for the commercial market, as long
as the technology is not military-specific. Once new technologies have
been demonstrated as viable, the greatest barrier is typically the
effort required to adopt or establish a suitable specification (or
multiple specifications) for DOD use that ensures DOD receives what it
expects. Even with a suitable specification, the remaining potential
barrier is that of cost-risk-benefit analysis, where cost is weighted
against benefits (such as risk reduction). DOD may avoid a new
technology that mitigates damage from extreme weather if its cost
outweighs the expected cost avoidance from its use.
Mr. Golden. The DOD follows the Comprehensive Environmental
Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), which is a Federal
clean-up law. Where the DOD is the known source of contamination,
CERCLA allows the DOD to provide bottled water, filter systems, and
other removal actions to quickly assure no one is drinking water above
the EPA PFOS/PFOA lifetime Health Advisories level. When a State
establishes their own drinking water standard, the Department evaluates
this as part of an overall site remediation strategy during the
feasibility study (FY) phase of CERCLA. Can you explain what happens
during the DOD's feasibility study phase and what remedial steps the
DOD takes when a State's PFOS/PFOA acceptability standards are less
than the EPA standards?
When a State changes its own PFOS/PFOA drinking water standard and
the DOD is the contaminating source, how is the DOD notified about the
State's change and how does that affect the DOD's remediation strategy
for that State?
Mr. Cramer. During a CERCLA Feasibility Study (FS), site-specific
options for remedial action are developed, screened, and evaluated.
This FS process includes evaluating promulgated federal and state
standards as identified in section 121(d) of CERCLA. This is referred
to as the Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs)
process. If a more stringent state drinking water standard qualifies as
an ARAR, it is incorporated into the cleanup levels that must be
attained at the site upon completion of the remedial action. As part of
the ARARs process, consistent with the NCP, at the Remedial
Investigation (RI) scoping phase, DOD, as the lead agency, initiates
the identification of potential state ARARs. During the FS phase,
States should identify their potential ARARs for evaluation which would
include any new potential state ARARs so they could be incorporated
into the ARARs evaluation process.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. KAHELE
Mr. Kahele. Earlier this year in March, a UXO's was discovered in
the waters off Lanai.
Mr. Schafer, do you have any status updates on this UXO's risk
assessment? Can you commit to working with me and the local community
to explore alternatives to blowing up the UXO? There was a similar case
near Molokini and there was strong public outcry against exploding the
UXO near the fragile coral reefs.
Mr. Schafer. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]

[all]
