- THE FISCAL YEAR 2022 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-49]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

THE FISCAL YEAR 2022

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION

BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 29, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-552                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

ADAM SMITH, Washington, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JACKIE SPEIER, California            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               MO BROOKS, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland,          SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California                TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 DON BACON, Nebraska
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       JIM BANKS, Indiana
JASON CROW, Colorado                 LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia, Vice      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Chair                            C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington       BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                PAT FALLON, Texas
JIMMY PANETTA, California
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Paul Arcangeli, Staff Director
Bill Sutey, Professional Staff Member
Kelly Repair, Professional Staff Member
Emma Morrison, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Ranking Member,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     3
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

McConville, GEN James C., USA, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.........     6
Wormuth, Hon. Christine E., Secretary of the Army, U.S. Army.....     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Wormuth, Hon. Christine E., joint with GEN James C.
McConville.................................................    55

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Letter to Secretary Austin...................................    77

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Waltz....................................................    85

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mrs. Bice....................................................    97
Mr. Brown....................................................    95
Mr. Carbajal.................................................    92
Mr. Gaetz....................................................    94
Mr. Gallagher................................................    93
Mr. Garamendi................................................    89
Mrs. Hartzler................................................    89
Mr. Keating..................................................    94
Mr. Moulton..................................................    90
Mr. Veasey...................................................    95
Mr. Waltz....................................................    95

THE FISCAL YEAR 2022 NATIONAL DEFENSE
AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, June 29, 2021.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Adam Smith (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. This morning our full committee hearing is on
the fiscal year 2022 National Defense Authorization budget
request for the Department of the Army. And we are joined by
the Honorable Christine Wormuth, who is the Secretary of the
Army, not an acting Secretary--this is a momentous day for us,
so appreciate to have you here and congratulations on your
confirmation and appointment--and General James McConville,
Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army.
We are still doing a hybrid hearing, which means some
members, as you will see, are participating virtually, and we
have rules for that. So I will read those rules, and then we
will get started.
Members who are joining remotely must be visible on screen
for the purposes of identity verification, establishing and
maintaining a quorum, participating in the proceeding, and
voting. Those members must continue to use the software
platform video function while in attendance unless they
experience connectivity issues or other technical problems that
render them unable to participate on camera. If a member
experiences technical difficulties, they should contact the
committee staff for assistance.
Video of members' participation will be broadcast in the
room and via the television internet feeds. Members
participating remotely must seek recognition verbally, and they
are asked to mute their microphones when they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep the
software platform video function on the entire time they attend
the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the proceeding.
If members depart for a short while for reasons other than
joining a different proceeding, they should leave the video
function on. If members will be absent for a significant period
or depart to join a different proceeding, they should exit the
software platform entirely and then rejoin it if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature to
communicate with staff regarding technical or logistical
support issues only.
And, finally, I have designated a committee staff member
to, if necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to
cancel any inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the
proceeding.
Thank you.
And greetings. We are--this is our last of the service
posture hearing reviews, and there have been some themes that
have been continuous throughout this. I think the biggest thing
that I am interested in this morning is the Army's
modernization effort, starting with the night court and the
blank slate review. There has been an intense effort--and not
just by the Army; we have spoken with the other services as
well--to modernize the force, to recognize changes in
technology, changes in warfare, and to make sure that we are
funding the appropriate systems to meet those modernization
needs and also preparing the force in terms of readiness and
training to meet those needs, and we would look forward to
hearing from both of you how that process is going, and then,
really, the specifics.
What does that mean? I mean, it all sounds good. You always
want to do what is new and best, but what does it mean in terms
of how it is going to change the way we prepare to deter
adversaries and the way that we would ultimately fight if we
had to?
And what is it in terms of where we need to be spending our
money and not spending our money? Putting meat on those bones I
think is one of the most important things that our committee is
trying to wrestle with as we get ready to pass the NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] for this year.
Second, back focused on the force, the Fort Hood report
that came out, the continued concerns about sexual assault,
again, across the Pentagon, not just in the Army; but, in
particular, you know, Fort Hood was a particular problem that a
report was filed on, that really examined what is going on with
how we are treating our soldiers and protecting them.
As you know, there are a number of proposals, particularly
specific to sexual assault, that this committee is considering
in part as a way to address those issues. And I would be very
curious to hear your comments about how you think we can best
do that.
And also this will come up, so I will go ahead and mention
it, the efforts to deal with systemic racism in issues in the
force. We know that Secretary Austin has made this a priority.
This committee has made this a priority. We had a number of
provisions in last year's bill that were focused on addressing
equality within the services and some adverse impacts that have
been discovered in terms of administration of the UCMJ [Uniform
Code of Military Justice] and also in terms of promotion. So we
would be curious to hear how you are addressing that issue.
And to be clear, I think it is an issue that needs to be
addressed. We have been consumed with the debate over critical
race theory, but that is not really the point. The point is we
have systemic racism in this country. How are we going to
address it? I will be clear, from what I understand about
critical race theory, that is not the way we should be
addressing it. It is not the way Secretary Austin is addressing
it.
So we need to have that discussion and figure out how best
to approach that because this is a real problem and a real
challenge. We are a Nation that is increasingly diverse, where
communities of color are growing in numbers. That should be
reflected in the force. In many ways it is, but it should also
be reflected in promotions. It should be reflected in
leadership. It should be reflected in opportunities. And it
certainly should be reflected in a fair and equitable way that
punishment and rewards are administered within the service, and
I would be really curious about how we are progressing on that
and the direction we are taking on those issues.
And, finally, there is the top line budget. There is a lot
of controversy on this committee about that. It is my opinion
that the President's budget is more than adequate to meet our
national security needs. I have often expressed the opinion
that sometimes a tighter budget actually gets a better result
and incentivizes people to find the right answers that they
need to find in what is always going to be a resource
constrained environment. I think we are in the right place on
that. Not everybody agrees. But I would be curious to hear, you
know, your arguments for why you think this budget is adequate
for your needs and how you are going to go about doing that.
And with that, I will turn it over to the ranking member
for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALABAMA,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
the Secretary and General McConville for being here, and it is
very helpful, and we appreciate your time and effort.
This is, as the chairman said, our last posture review
hearing. Each of these hearings has made one thing very clear:
The President's defense budget is woefully inadequate. It falls
far short of providing our warfighters the resources they need
to carry out their mission.
We have heard from the leaders of the other services about
the sacrifices they are being forced to make as a result of
this budget. Today we will hear the toll it is taking on the
Army, and it is not pretty.
The President's top line for defense is forcing the Army
alone to slash funding by nearly $4 billion. That is in real
dollars; $7.5 billion when adjusted for inflation. The Army is
facing cuts of 12 percent in procurement, 10 percent in
research and development, and 18 percent in MILCON [military
construction].
Like the leaders of the other services, Secretary Wormuth
and General McConville have had to triage their limited budget
allocation. They have decided to focus it on the Army's highest
modernization priorities. There is no question that we need to
make those investments. Doing so ensures that we have the
capabilities to win conflicts 10 or 20 years from now.
But it also means it isn't sufficient in the way of funding
for near-term capabilities. In fact, the Army has nearly $5.5
billion in unfunded priorities. The budget cuts procurement of
critical vertical lift and ground vehicle programs. It buys
fewer missiles and ammunition to replenish our arsenal, and it
delays the modernization of existing assets such as the Abrams
tank.
These cuts worsen current capability gaps, and I am
concerned it leaves the Army ill-prepared for near-term
conflict. Frankly, it is unacceptable. History has proven it is
naive to think we have decades to prepare for the next
conflict. The fact is the Army must be prepared at all times to
fight and win a war against China or any other adversary. That
means our warfighters need the training capability to win the
fight tonight.
I am very concerned this budget could leave the Army and
the rest of the services unprepared to do just that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
And before turning to our witnesses, I should remind
members that we have--for the purpose of this hearing,
questions will go in reverse order. We will go with the most
junior member and work our way up from there. We try to do that
a couple of times. Our committee is so large, we can't get to
everybody, don't want to be excluding the most junior members
all the time, so we are going to go from the bottom up today.
And with that, I will turn it over to Secretary Wormuth for
her opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTINE E. WORMUTH, SECRETARY OF THE ARMY,
U.S. ARMY

Secretary Wormuth. Thank you.
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers, and distinguished
members of the committee, we very much appreciate your
continued support for our Army and our people. It is a real
privilege to appear before you today.
I would like to take a minute to thank General McConville
for his lifetime of service to our Army and our Nation. In my 4
weeks on the job, he has been a great partner, and we are off
to a running start together.
I am honored to be serving as the Secretary of the Army and
to be working with Secretary Austin and Deputy Secretary Hicks
once again. I thank them for their continued leadership.
As I have stepped into this role, I am impressed, but not
surprised, to see the state of our Army and the
professionalism, hard work, and continued sacrifice of our
soldiers and leaders that make up the world's greatest land
fighting force.
I would like to highlight a few key observations on the
state of the Army as I see them today. First, the Army must
continue to heavily invest in the development of its people,
which are really the core and the heart of our Army. We are
steadily working to enhance our force structure, build
inclusive leadership, and invest in quality of life
initiatives. Like my predecessors, I can assure you that
character, culture, and climate within our formations at every
installation will reflect a continued focus on placing people
first.
The harmful behaviors of sexual assault and harassment,
racism and extremism, cannot and will not be tolerated. We will
purposely work to prevent suicide in our Army. Our
responsibility is to ensure every soldier and civilian has the
right leadership, policies, and resources to be safe and
successful among their teams so that they can continue to be
successful in our Nation's defense.
Second, the Army is now a leader in new technology. From
Army Futures Command, to cross-functional teams, to the Rapid
Capabilities and Critical Technologies Office, to fielding
next-generation soldier equipment for individual unit members,
the Army is prototyping and experimenting with new capabilities
and concepts. The Army is at the forefront of developing and
fielding new technology, whether it is counter-unmanned aerial
systems; directed energy; hypersonic weapons; next-generation
assured position, navigation, and timing devices; pushing
software coding to the edge; and in many other areas.
Third, the Army is opening doors in the Indo-Pacific,
Europe, and beyond. The Army can be relied upon to engage with
our allies, foster partnerships, maintain deterrence, and set
conditions for success prior to or while engaging in conflict.
Deterrence requires boots on the ground, and the Department
must be present to succeed in crises. The Army is recognized as
an enduring, reliable partner that can directly contribute by
bringing resources, training, and expertise. Our partnerships
can lay the groundwork for access and cooperation during
contingencies.
Fourth, the next conflict will be an all-domain conflict.
Future conflict will be in, across, all domains with ground
forces to secure terrain, penetrate defenses, and achieve
objectives. The Army's transformation is directly aimed at
supporting the joint warfight, which will depend on the Joint
All-Domain Command and Control concept, expeditionary joint
logistics, and joint maneuver across domains.
As the Army continues to modernize we will maintain our
overmatch against near-peer adversaries, helping to make future
conflict less likely by ensuring the cost to our adversaries
outweigh any benefits they might see.
Finally, the Army's readiness gains and modernization
requirements must be prioritized to continue. The Army
recognized the need to modernize concepts and capabilities to
sharpen our global competitive edge. Working in close
cooperation with you, we established a deliberate, achievable
path to deliver a ready modernized Army. Significant progress
has been made, but success can only be assured through
continued transformation.
The Army has already made and will continue to make tough
decisions to ensure the best use of resources to adapt to and
stay ahead of the capabilities of our adversaries, whether they
are near-peer competitors or newly emergent threats. The Army
will also successfully compete below the threshold of conflict.
The President's budget will help us care for our people,
maintain an enhanced military readiness, and innovate and
modernize. With your continued support, we will pivot to next-
generation capabilities to ensure we can win now and in the
future.
Our Army is in great shape, but we have important work
ahead. I want to use this window of opportunity in the next few
years to make certain that the Army will continue to provide
modernized and ready forces capable of responding globally. I
join General McConville in striving to ensure to provide the
Army the resources it needs to succeed. I know General
McConville is eager to share his thoughts as well.
So I thank you and look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Wormuth and
General McConville can be found in the Appendix on page 55.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
General, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GEN JAMES C. McCONVILLE, USA, CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S.
ARMY

General McConville. I would like to thank the Secretary for
25 years plus of government service and for leading the Army at
this critical time. So thank you, Secretary.
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers, distinguished
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to be
here today and for your continued support to the Army and our
people: our soldiers, our families, our civilians, and our
soldiers for life, our retirees and veterans.
The Army currently has 485,000 Active Duty soldiers and a
little more than 1 million in the total force. That is roughly
the size Army that we had on 9/11. Army soldiers are presently
supporting combatant commanders around the world in more than
140 countries. They form the most lethal and decisive land
force in the world, and they stand ready to fight and win the
Nation's wars as part of the joint force. I could not be more
proud of each and every one of them.
Since last October the Army's priorities have been people,
readiness, and modernization, making us well aligned with the
emerging national security guidance. Putting people first means
recruiting and retaining the best talent our Nation has to
offer, maximizing their potential, and taking care of them. We
are building a culture of cohesive teams that are highly
trained, disciplined, and fit, where everyone is treated with
dignity and respect. That is how we prevent the harmful
behaviors that hurt our soldiers and break trust with the
American people, these being sexual assault and harassment,
acts of racism and extremism, and death by suicide.
All three of my children, two sons and a daughter, plus my
son-in-law are currently serving in the Army. Providing a safe
and secure environment for our soldiers is not only my
responsibility as the Chief of Staff of the Army, it is also a
deeply held personal commitment. We win through our people. The
best fighting forces in the world ensure their soldiers and
units are masters of their craft.
That is why we are shifting to a foundational readiness
model that prioritizes training at the company level and below
first. The Army has rebuilt a high-level readiness with the
support of Congress, but that readiness level is fragile. We
must sustain that high level of readiness while continuing our
most comprehensive transformation and modernization efforts in
over 40 years. This is the only way we will maintain our
overmatch against near-peer competitors and would-be
adversaries.
This year we are turning our multi-domain operations
concepts into real doctrine. We are not only developing but we
are delivering on our six modernization priorities, including
our 31+4 signature systems. With new doctrine, organizations,
and equipment, the Army is offering multiple options to
combatant commanders and multiple dilemmas to competitors and
adversaries, and we are doing so along our sister services and
alongside our allies and partners. The U.S. Army never fights
alone. We are the strongest land force in the world, and a
great source of that strength comes from our allies and
partners. As a people-based organization, we uniquely qualify
to foster these relationships.
Thank you for your continued support to America's sons and
daughters in uniform. I look forward to your questions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
So what is your key takeaway from the Fort Hood report and
from what happened there? And I think you mentioned it in your
opening remarks, what the overall problem is in terms of it is
not just sexual assault. We have got suicide problems.
We have got a real problem seemingly relating to the
service members out there and making sure that they're safe and
protected. But in terms of action items, what do you think is
most important to do in response to that, for both of you?
Madam Secretary, you can go first.
Secretary Wormuth. Chairman, I would say, first of all, I
went down to Fort Hood a couple of weeks ago to see for myself
and to talk to soldiers, and I talked to a small group of
soldiers privately to hear from them candidly.
I think the biggest insight for me out of the report is the
fact that, you know, for the last 20 years the Army has been
enormously busy. The OPTEMPO [operations tempo] has been very
high. Our leaders have been--they have had a lot to do. They
have been focused on deployments and training, and I think it
has made it harder to then, you know, do what they need to do
to care for our soldiers.
So really what we have to do is make sure that our command
climate at the lowest possible level is healthy, and we have a
number of initiatives to get after that; but I think
fundamentally what the Chief and I are trying to emphasize with
the sergeant major is building cohesive teams and taking care
of your squad mates.
And so what we are going to be focusing on is really trying
to build that kind of a culture so that people are taking care
of themselves, leaders are taking care of soldiers, and
soldiers are looking out for each other. But it is going to
take time I think to make significant progress in this area.
The Chairman. General.
General McConville. Yes, Chairman.
And I agree with the Secretary. One of the things that I
took away--and I went down and talked to the troops at Fort
Hood. I served in the 1st Cavalry Division in combat during
2004 to 2005, as many of the senior leaders in the United
States Army.
What I took away was, at the lowest levels it seemed that
leaders were not spending time to really know their soldiers,
to find out what was going on in that group of soldiers that
are 17- to 24-year-olds; and when we study the problems we
have, most of the problems occur with new soldiers, 17- to 24-
year-olds coming into our organizations, and they live in these
things we call squads.
And that is why the Sergeant Major of the Army is going
after to get squad leaders building what I call a golden
triangle, where everyone treats everyone else with dignity and
respect within that squad, where everyone knows their squad
mates, everyone takes care of each other, and they understand
the importance of having a cohesive organization that allows
them to fight and win on the battlefield.
But one of the things I talked about in my opening
statement was foundational readiness. We have got to give time
for junior leaders to spend time with their soldiers and have a
chance to train them, have a chance to get to know each other
in a way that we haven't seen.
And, quite frankly, some of these younger leaders, we have
to teach them how to care for their soldiers and how to treat--
develop a climate where they are all treated with dignity and
respect.
We are going after that; but we are also going after the
leaders. Leaders are responsible for the culture and climate in
their organization. We have an assessment program, a commander
assessment program for battalion commanders and colonel
commander assessments. That is all part of it. We have got
multiple other things going on to determine what is the climate
like, not compliance like how many of these or how many of
those that you have, but what is going on on those junior
levels where most of the issues that I see happen in the Army.
The Chairman. Yes. I think both of your answers are spot
on, and that is the key is you sort of lost touch. I think
there is a general feeling of go do your job, you will be fine,
and there needs to be a far higher level of engagement.
And, also, this is my fault on the question. I want to make
sure it wasn't misleading. It is not just Fort Hood. Fort Hood
got the attention, but you look at some of the statistics,
there are other major bases that, you know, the numbers are
really not that different in terms of suicide, sexual assault,
and problems with personnel. So it is comprehensive, and I
appreciate your approach on that.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General McConville, in your letter accompanying the Army's
unfunded mandate--unfunded requirement list, you acknowledge
the President's budget creates, quote, a downturn in the Army's
purchasing power, close quote. And you also informed us that,
quote, progress is at risk if you don't have real growth of 3-5
percent above inflation going forward.
Can you elaborate on that and tell us, if we pass a budget
that fails to at a minimum keep pace with inflation, hopefully
with an increase, what Army capabilities or programs are at
risk?
General McConville. Yes. Congressman, what we have done
within the budget is try to produce the best Army we can within
the resources we have. That is an Army that is 485,000 end
strength. We were growing end strength; we are not going to be
able to grow end strength. So we are basically keeping the end
strength that we have, which I articulated was at the level of
9/11.
We are keeping a basic level of readiness. We do not want
to go back to where we were a couple of years ago where the
readiness of the Army was of concern. I believe right now the
Army is ready to fight and win. But most importantly, what I
think we have to do is we must transform the Army now for the
next 40 years, and I make the argument every 40 years we
transform the Army.
We did in 1940. We did in 1980 when I came in the Army. We
are in 2020 right now, and so we have done everything we can to
protect those modernization priorities, those 31+4 systems.
And you will see it in my UFR [unfunded requirements] list
there's other things that are not going to get funded that we
would like to do. We have challenge with barracks. We have
challenge with what I call enduring systems that we would like
to bring along in the system, and those are listed in the UFR.
But make no mistake to those who are listening, the Army can
fight and win today.
Mr. Rogers. Yes. And we are all mindful of that, but we
also know you have got to get ready for the future. So what do
you need that this budget does not buy you?
General McConville. Well, I think when we talk about needs,
the reason you ask us to provide an unfunded requirement
letter, which we did, that shows some of the requirements that
were not included in the budget. The only thing I would ask is
we have a prioritized budget. Everything in the budget is what
we need. Those are additional priority-type items, and I would
ask that if there is any--as we look at that, especially when
it comes to our readiness accounts, we have really gone after
them hard to make sure they are as efficient and effective as
we can.
Mr. Rogers. Yes. As I mentioned in my opening statement, we
can't lose sight of the fact that this year's budget gives you
$7.5 billion less in buying power than you had in the previous
year's budget.
When you look at China--and we all acknowledge China is a
peer now that we have to be thoughtful about. As they ramp up
their defense funding, what do you worry about them outpacing
you on in the near future?
General McConville. Well, they have a great economy. They
have--you know, when we take a look at China itself, it is a
very, very strong economy. They have a force that is much
larger than ours. Historically they--especially when we look at
an Army, they have an active duty army that is probably twice
the size of ours. And as they modernize it, we need to stay
ahead of them, and that is what we intend to do. That is why
our 31+4 modernization priorities are so important. They give
us the speed, the range, and the convergence to give us
decision dominance and, quite frankly, overmatch.
So as we move forward, we are doing everything we can to
protect those modernization priorities.
Mr. Rogers. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Horsford is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and to the
ranking member, for the courtesy of going in reverse order. And
I want to thank our witnesses for your service and testimony
today.
I was deeply concerned by recent media reporting that at
least 1,900 weapons, including machine guns and rocket
launchers, had been lost or stolen from arms rooms over the
course of the last decade. Some of these weapons went on to be
used in violent crimes.
While I am, of course, troubled by the fact that this was
brought to our attention through media reporting instead of a
formalized reporting requirement, I am more concerned about the
broader readiness issues it pretends.
I firmly believe that arms rooms are the single best
indicator of the unit's readiness. We can learn nearly
everything we need about a unit's maintenance systems,
accountability, and, ultimately, combat readiness through the
processes implemented in the arms rooms.
For that reason, I am concerned that the loss of such a
staggering number of weapons could indicate more systemic
readiness and accountability issues across the Army.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, first, what steps
is the Army taking to implement systemic fixes to weapons
accountability and to modernize inventory control for sensitive
items?
And, second, can you please update us on your investigation
into these reports and any trends the Army has identified in
units or installations where these weapons have gone missing?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman. First of all,
you know, we take weapons accountability in the Army incredibly
seriously. And soldiers are, you know, trained to be very
responsible, and anytime there is a lack of accountability or a
loss of--a potential loss of a weapon, you know, the entire
unit focuses to find out what has happened and to retrieve it.
What we have done in terms of trying to better understand
the situation is we have stood up essentially a task force that
is led by a three-star general to dig into this, and what we
found so far is that out of about 1.1 million weapons Army-
wide, we have only been able to identify since 2013 384
instances of a weapon going missing.
And to date, I would say it is not apparent to us that
there is a particular trend that is behind the loss or of
accountability. For example, I think in 2019, we had 83 weapons
missing, and last year we had only 10. But we are trying to
look into it and identify if we have any systemic issues as you
noted and will take action on that if we find that there are
systemic issues.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. I look forward to hearing more
about that.
I would like to move on now to the issue of sexual assault
and specifically how the Army plans to hold commanders
accountable for their performance in reducing sexual harassment
and sexual assault. While I fully support efforts to move
sexual assault prosecutions outside of the chain of command,
there is a clear and urgent need to improve accountability
among senior leaders for their effectiveness in combatting
sexual assault and assault within their formations.
Secretary Wormuth, how does the Army intend to collect
metrics that track the performance of senior leaders at
implementing effective SHARP [Sexual Harassment/Assault
Response and Prevention] programs and then hold them
accountable for their performance during promotion and command
selection decisions?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, first of all, as you know,
the Army took the action of suspending or relieving 14 officers
in the wake of the Fort Hood Independent Review Committee.
Going forward, we are going to be--again, we are putting
tremendous emphasis on creating a healthy command climate, and
it is the responsibility of our leaders in the Army to maintain
that command climate.
One of the--we are fundamentally redesigning our SHARP
program, for example. We are also reorganizing our criminal
investigative division and will have a civilian leader of that
division likely with law enforcement background.
One of the things that we are doing to hold our leaders
accountable is through our Command Assessment Program. This is
a new program that the Army has to help us select battalion
commanders, colonels, sergeant majors, acquisition officials,
and as part of that 360-degree review performance process, we
are taking into account past command climate performance. So
through, again, a series of sort of a multiday screening
process, we are evaluating future leaders, and part of that
evaluation rests on how well they are doing in terms of command
climate.
And the Chief may want to add to that.
General McConville. No. I think it is----
The Chairman. I apologize, I wasn't paying attention. The
gentleman's time has expired. And I should warn the witnesses
that we do this even if you are in the middle of a question; we
try to move on so we can get to as many members as possible.
Mr. Fallon is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fallon. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I apologize
for not being there in person, but a virus other than COVID
[coronavirus disease] has gotten me for a few days.
Thank you, General McConville and Secretary Wormuth, for
testifying today and for both of your decades of service to our
country.
General McConville, if I can start with you first, I know
that we share a passion for our soldiers, their safety, and
their well-being and really their development as well, and I
want to applaud your track record of emphasizing personnel
issues. In short, you have a tremendous affection for the
troops, and that shows through your actions.
In that vein, I would like to ask and address a current
situation that the Army finds itself in that could be
interpreted as, unfortunately, neglecting soldier safety and
unnecessarily wasting taxpayer money. What I am referring to is
the Humvee; 150 of our soldiers have been killed in stateside
accidents, preventable Humvee rollovers during training. I know
that you find this just as unacceptable and important as I do.
To address this, the Army has developed a plan to
simultaneously introduce new Humvees to the fleet while
upgrading existing vehicles with what the Army already
considers new or modernized. Additionally, the Army is fielding
replacements for the Humvee, the JLTV [Joint Light Tactical
Vehicle], with an anti-rollover technology already installed,
and I support this overall approach.
However, I was extremely concerned when I saw the budget
request with a mere $10 million in funding the upgrades because
the upgrades are much cheaper, and we can do them quicker. With
the $10 million, only upgrading 1 percent of the 54,000 vehicle
fleet and retrofitting and rendering them safe, it is quicker
and it is cheaper. This gap can't be filled by only new
vehicles, which really does translate, in my humble opinion, to
putting soldiers' lives at risk without critical safety
upgrades. As I mentioned, the cost for fielding a new Humvee is
about $400,000 and upgrading is $17,000.
General, with this in mind, why do you think the Army
appears to be content to pursue what some could say would be a
less safe path and a more expensive one? And I would really
like to hear your thoughts on this, sir.
General McConville. Well, Congressman, I appreciate the
concern. And as you said, we have a tremendous concern for the
life, health, and safety of our soldiers. We do have a
strategy. And, quite frankly, we will take your comments and
take a look at that strategy. But like you said, that is what
we are doing. We are taking existing vehicles and putting the
new braking system on them. We are also purchasing new Humvees.
And the third is, which we are really trying to get to, is the
Joint Light Tactical Vehicle within the resources that we have.
But I will go back and take a look at that. If there is a life,
health, safety issue, that is something we can get after.
Mr. Fallon. General, what would need to happen to ensure
the program could be completed as quickly as possible? Because
it seems to me retrofitting would be quicker than waiting for
new Humvees to come on line. I understand if we have very old
Humvees, it is probably not wise to retrofit them and it would
just be easier to replace them. But some of the newer ones, the
ones that have, you know, about half their life left, might
make it until the JLTV.
General McConville. I owe you a better answer, Congressman,
to take a look at that. I mean, the intent--just like you said,
some of our Humvees are really old. They have been around a
long time. And, quite frankly, we don't want to invest in them
because we may be fixing one safety issue, but we may be going
into another safety issue, and so we owe a look at that. We
certainly want to make sure that every system our soldiers
have, especially when it comes to life, health, and safety, we
are not going to put our soldiers in something that is unsafe,
and we have just got to figure out the best way to do it. You
brought up a good point, and we will take a look at it.
Mr. Fallon. General, thank you.
Secretary Wormuth, I just want to let you know that in a
letter dated May 1, me, myself, and 13 of my colleagues wrote a
letter to then Acting Secretary of the Army Whitley about my
concerns that I just talked to the general about, and I just
wanted to make you aware of it as well.
And then, in closing, and I will yield back, there was a
comment made earlier about the fact that there is systemic
racism in this country. And I just want to, for the record, say
that I respectfully but patently and vociferously disagree; but
that is a topic and a conversation and a debate for another
day.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Murphy is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville for being here with us
today, as well as for your service.
I serve as vice chair of the subcommittee that oversees
U.S. special operations forces, and I wanted to start by asking
you a bit about that. As with the broader military, our special
operators have been primarily focused on combatting violent
extremism since September 11, but they are now rebalancing to
focus more on great power competition with countries like
China, Russia, and Iran.
So could you describe a little bit as to how you are
adapting recruitment and training to help prepare for this
mission? And I am particularly interested in your Special
Forces groups, civil affair units, and psychological operations
units, which I think all have a pretty important role to play
when it comes to working with foreign governments, foreign
militaries, foreign populations, in that context of great power
competition.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman. I will start,
and then I am sure the Chief will want to add.
As you said, our special operators, like special operators
in other services, have been focused on counterinsurgency and
counterterrorism for the last 20 years, but we are now shifting
to strategic competition with China and Russia in particular.
And I think in that context there is very much still going to
be a need for the kinds of skills and expertise that our
Special Forces have to offer.
One way we will be--you know, first of all, we are
rethinking our overall strategy for the special operations
community, and there is an irregular warfare annex to the
existing National Defense Strategy. What we have started to do
is to look at the scenarios that we are using and the types of
exercises that we are using and are changing the elements of
that to align to the kinds of things we might see in strategic
competition.
So I think you will see us, you know, putting an emphasis
on unconventional warfare, on information operations, as you
said, you know, psychological operations. Those are all going
to be things that are relevant to--you know, what some people
call hybrid warfare or, you know, gray-zone conflict, and those
are things where our Special Forces are still going to be very
much needed.
And I will let the Chief add.
General McConville. I think you asked a great question.
I just want to highlight what an incredible job our Special
Forces operations have done over the last 20 years. They have
just done an incredible job. And the great thing about our
Special Forces is they are agile and they are adaptable. They
clearly understand--I have talked to General Rich Clark, I have
talked to Fran Beaudette, I have talked to the leadership down
there.
You know, counterterrorism is not going away. We are still
going to have these type issues. We are still going to have
counterinsurgency type operations. We are still going to have
irregular warfare. That is not going away.
But what you are going to see is I think the groups are
going to shift, and they are going to focus more on the
combatant region that they are actually operating. Most of them
have just been rotating in and out of Afghanistan and Iraq and
have done an incredible job doing that, but the focus is going
to change because the strength in this area of strategic
competition comes from having strong allies and partners.
And our Special Forces are uniquely suited to do that, to
work with allies and partners to build capacities and also to
help them build their capacity in the Special Forces arena
because a lot of these countries have issues with violent
extremism and, quite frankly, we would rather have them provide
the security than I do it.
And I would highlight things like information operations
are something that we are really going to have to be able to
work in the future, and I see them having a very strong
participation in that also. But there is going to be plenty of
work for Special Forces. They are critical to the future of the
country.
Mrs. Murphy. I appreciate you bringing that up actually,
and maybe we can focus on the INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command] AOR [area of responsibility]. I noticed that the Army
is requesting an additional $20 million of funds for security
force assistance brigade activities across the Indo-Pacific.
Can you talk a little bit more about what these brigades
have done, have achieved in other regions and how they are
going to be used in the Indo-Pacific?
General McConville. Yes, I will take that.
What we are seeing is, you know, we talk about this
strategy of peace through strength, and that peace through
strength comes from a holistic government approach, a strong
military, and certainly a strong Army, but it also comes
through strong allies and partners.
And when I look at the security force assistance brigades,
they are designed to help improve the capabilities of
conventional forces with these countries. And if you go--you
know, a lot of people talk about, well, what is the role of the
Army in the Indo-Pacific? Well, most of the people out there
live on land and most of them have armies that need the
capacity to secure themselves.
Special Forces also plays a critical role. They provide
unique skill sets. They are fabulous at developing more high-
end type forces where they are the special operation forces
that can help them. Some of these countries have problems with
terrorists. Some have problems with insurgents, and they can
help develop those----
The Chairman. I apologize. The gentleman's time has
expired, so we will leave it there.
And Mr. Moore is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member. I, too,
love the reverse order, so thank you.
Secretary and General, I appreciate you being here. I was
encouraged to see the Army Materiel Command [AMC] earlier this
year issue the 15-year Army organic industrial base [OIB]
modernization strategy. I agree with General Daly, AMC
commander, that now is the time for wholesale change and the
OIB is an inflection point. How the next 10 to 15 years are
handled will determine the depots' ability to maintain pace
with the Army's next-generation weapon systems.
As cochair of the House Depot Caucus, I have voiced the
need to expedite other OIB modernization plans across the
services to fit the objectives of the National Defense
Strategy.
Secretary, I will direct my questions to you but, General,
absolutely welcome any input. Can you provide an update on the
modernization strategy, the Army OIB modernization strategy and
how you think it can be accomplished in 15 years?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman.
As you said, General Daly and Materiel Command are
embarking on a 15-year organic industrial base plan. Our hope
is that that will be completed at about this time next year.
And really what we are trying to do there is a couple of
different things. You know, first of all, as we undertake this,
you know, first in 40 years ambitious modernization program, we
need to make sure that the industrial base is going to be able
to support all of those next-generation weapons.
So part of what we are looking at in the plan is assessing,
first of all, the current industrial base and whether it will
be able to meet our needs and then identifying any kinds of
gaps that we need to fill to be able to, again, make sure that
we are able to support these new systems over time.
Another important thread in the 15-year plan is, frankly,
looking at our supply chain, which I think the pandemic
experience has shown us is perhaps more fragile than we would
like it to be. We are trying to identify where we may have
potential points of failure in the industrial base. We are
trying to identify where we have foreign suppliers,
understanding, you know, our confidence level with those
foreign suppliers, trying to identify if there are foreign
suppliers that, frankly, we don't want to be purchasing from in
the future.
So those are all issues that we are looking at, as well as,
you know, how we may need to bring in some new manufacturing
capabilities again into our existing base to support the next-
generation programs.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Any particular comment on the 15-
year? Do you feel that there is a chance that could be
accelerated? Do you feel that that was--you know, any insight
into 15 years, why it was chosen? Was there enough research and
thought going into that particular timeline?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, I would imagine--I mean, having
not been there when it was originally decided to undertake the
plan, I think what we are trying to do is move as quickly as we
can because, obviously, we want to modernize our industrial
base as quickly as we can, but also do it in a way that,
frankly, we can support with our resources but are also able to
support in terms of the kind of analysis and the kind of
redesigns that may be needed.
So I think we would look for opportunities to accelerate
that modernization plan where we can, but we have to look at
that in the context of our overall resources and other
objectives that we have, for example, in terms of readiness and
supporting our people.
Mr. Moore. And as you have mentioned advanced
manufacturing, I will add in advanced sensors, robotics,
computer programming machine types of things. Those are
expensive. There is always going to be budget constraints. What
can this committee do to make sure we don't run into similar
delays or unnecessary delays in this modernization plan?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, I think, Congressman, again, you
know, just your continued reliable support for our
modernization efforts would be very helpful. There may be times
where we may come to you to ask for additional authorities.
For example--I mean, right now I don't think that we need
additional authorities; but, for example, we have been given
authorities in terms of science and technology hires that have
been very helpful to us in terms of bringing in civilian
expertise in computer science and neuroscience. So I can
imagine that might be a way where you can support us over time;
but right now I think we have what we need.
Mr. Moore. Excellent.
General, anything to add.
General McConville. I think the importance of the 15-year
plan is to lay out, you know, the whole problem set. As you
know, if we just went with a 3- or 4-year plan, the resources
are not going to be available. But that allows everyone to take
a look, here's how we see things coming in the future.
And the other thing that I think is important to encourage
the depots to modernize. You know, we are going to have new
systems coming in. We can take a look at here's how these--you
know, as a future vertical lift comes on board, as our long-
range precision fires, as our next-generation combat weapons
come, if we are looking out in the future, we can start to
program them in and get them the equipment that is going to
keep them effective and efficiently in the future because many
of our depots and some of our----
The Chairman. Again, I apologize. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Panetta is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Rogers. Madam Secretary, General, good morning, and thank you
for being here. Thank you for your service.
I am just going to try and hit on three areas: military
housing, COVID vaccines, and our posture in Africa. In regards
to military housing, where I represent on the Central Coast of
California, we have a--our military contracts with private
contractors in order to have our military families in
privatized housing. Unfortunately, there are times when that
housing really is subpar, and the biggest issue, I have got to
say, is mold and how that can affect not just the military
member but, of course, the family members and, unfortunately,
the children as well, amongst other issues too.
I just wanted to get your take on how the Army is holding
private contractors responsible, how they are holding them
accountable for their actions or inactions when it comes to
providing this subpar military housing. Look, it doesn't happen
everywhere. We know that. But I believe that one house that has
mold in it is one too many. So just wondering if there is
anything else that we can do to ensure to hold these private
contractors responsible?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
Absolutely agree with you that we want our soldiers and
their families to live in housing that we would want to live
in, and to do that the Army has done a few things.
First of all, we have put responsibility for the privatized
housing oversight of that under AMC, and the commander of
Installations Command meets every single month with the heads
of all of the companies who do our privatized housing to go
through household by household the status of, you know, where
we are making repairs, where we are making renovations.
We have changed, frankly, you know, how we have been paying
those companies. We don't pay incentive fees up front anymore.
We pay them at the end when we are satisfied that they are
performing. And we have also now implemented all 18 provisions
of the Tenant Bill of Rights in 37 of the 44 installations
where we have privatized housing, and we will have the last 7
done we hope by the end of July.
Mr. Panetta. Great.
General.
General McConville. I think if you are talking Fort Hood,
that was my first assignment, so it would----
Mr. Panetta. There were similar houses there at Fort Hood,
exactly.
General McConville. But, you know, we need to invest in the
housing. We have taken a look. We know what housing is good,
and we have done much better on the work orders. We have been
much better on those type things, but some of these houses,
quite frankly, have got to be replaced, and we are working with
the private contractors to do that. They have raised additional
money.
We have got a little over a couple billion dollars now to
go into that, but we have got to have a long-term program to do
that, and that is what we are trying to work right now.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. Thanks to both of you for those
answers.
Moving on to vaccines, what percentage of the Army
personnel are fully vaccinated in regards to the COVID vaccine?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I believe at this point we
have 63 percent of the Active Component has had at least one
shot, and I think we are at about 55 percent who are fully
vaccinated at this time.
Mr. Panetta. What can we do, what can you do to ensure full
vaccination going forward or to increase those numbers?
Secretary Wormuth. I think the most important thing we can
do, Congressman, is what we have been doing, which is to really
explain the benefits of the vaccine to our soldiers and their
families. And when we give them that additional educational
information, we see more of them getting the shots.
And, frankly, as their peers have started getting the
shots, we see more soldiers getting the shots. But part of the
challenge is, you know, a lot of our soldiers are younger and I
think, you know, feel a little bit invincible as a result of
that.
So we still have work to do because certainly I think it
would be beneficial to have as much of the force fully
vaccinated as possible.
Mr. Panetta. How do you feel about a mandatory vaccine in
regards to the COVID vaccine? I mean, is that something you
feel obviously would increase the numbers, but what would that
do to morale?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think--you know, I have
not looked at this in detail in terms of what the implications
are, what our legal authorities are; but certainly, you know,
we have made vaccine mandatory in the past.
Right now we have an emergency use authorization from FDA
[U.S. Food and Drug Administration], so we can't do that. But
over time I would look at that if we didn't continue to see the
percentage increase; but we are seeing that percentage of our
force increase.
Mr. Panetta. General.
General McConville. I agree with the Secretary. I think,
you know, right now it is emergency use. I think once it--you
know, when we see that moving forward, maybe in the next couple
of months that comes out where it is fully accepted, then we
can have the discussion on what is the best way to do it.
But I agree with the Secretary. Now, we think it is in
everyone's interest that, you know, does not have underlying
conditions, is part of the team--you know, we are seeing the
effects right now. I mean, the fact that we are sitting here,
you know, has a lot to do with folks like General Gus Perna and
the team that, you know, got these out and did a great job of
doing that.
So I think, you know, people worry about the speed of the
vaccinations, but, again, I am all signed up.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Jackson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rogers, for holding the hearing today. I also want to thank
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville for being here. Thank
you.
Each branch of the military has testified before this
committee on the President's budget request, and each has
explained how the budget cuts are not impacting their service's
readiness and modernization efforts.
I don't need to explain to either one of you, obviously,
that the Army was the hardest hit by President Biden's budget
cut with a decrease in funding from last fiscal year and a
decrease in end strength. Not only does this not align with the
3-5 percent growth called for in the National Defense Strategy
but it will make it much harder for us to compete with China.
I appreciate both of your efforts to justify this budget
cut as acceptable, but I firmly believe that this request from
President Biden is inadequate.
Of the countless modernization priorities that we need to
focus on, I want to spend a little bit of time talking about
the future vertical lift, one of the Army's six modernization
priorities. The Future Long Range Assault Aircraft, or the
FLRAA, will be a medium-lift aircraft that will eventually
replace the Black Hawk.
The Future Attack and Reconnaissance Aircraft is the Army's
third attempt over the past two decades to develop a new attack
and reconnaissance helicopter.
Both of these are part of the critical future vertical lift
modernization effort that will help us compete with China in
the Indo-Pacific in particular.
The FLRAA is a modernization program that the Army needs,
in my opinion. The Army has consistently discussed the need for
speed and range, as well as survivability when it comes to
future vertical lift aircraft.
There are countless reasons as to why we need to provide
adequate funding for this program, but I want to discuss the
medevac [medical evacuation] mission in this platform as it
takes over for the H-60.
In the theater like the Indo-Pacific, it will be critical
to have aircraft with speed and range necessary to transport an
injured soldier. I have been in the combat zone. I have seen
firsthand how speed and range of medevac aircraft are key
components of whether or not somebody's life is saved.
The golden hour is a concept that presumes that some deaths
are preventable if appropriate care is provided in a timely
fashion. It is imperative that we not only extend the golden
hour radius, but the aircraft supporting the medevac mission
should be able to give injured soldiers the best chance for
survival in the event of an injury in the combat zone.
When it comes to medevac, every second obviously matters.
Future vertical lift and Future Long Range Assault Aircraft
will provide increased speed, range, and endurance.
General McConville, I know that you are an aviator. How
important are speed and range when it comes to a commander's
ability to medevac an injured soldier? And how critical is that
exponential jump in capability associated with this new
platform with regards to medevac and the golden hour and
specifically when looking at the Indo-Pacific theater?
General McConville. I think it is absolutely critical,
Congressman. You know, the point you made, it is absolutely
critical to be able to medevac our soldiers, and we want to be
able to do that.
But what is interesting, as you take a look at what does
the range allow you to do, with the golden hour, you
basically--when you are looking about having troops out there,
we have some leaders right here that have commanded troops in
combat, and what happens is, if you can only go 100 miles an
hour, then, quite frankly, you can only have troops out so far
from that base.
And from that base, you have to have a forward surgical
team, you have to protect it. So you are putting a whole bunch
of your troops on the battlefield just to create that
capability for medevac, which we want to do.
By having this capability, you provide much, much more
options to that ground commander, and I am fully in support of
making this happen. But more importantly, what I am fully in
support of is the way industry is aggressively going at that,
working with us.
That we are flying before we are buying. We are very
concerned about being very efficient the way we do this. We
have got industry teams invested into this capability, and I
think it is something we need for the future.
Dr. Jackson. Yes, sir, I agree with you 100 percent.
Obviously, I think it is a game changer. And I just had some
data here. Obviously, it increases the speed from 120 knots to
280 knots. It increases the maximum radius from 109 nautical
miles to 230 nautical miles, and it decreases the golden hour
radius from 46 nautical miles, pushes it out to 110 nautical
miles. So I think it is an absolute game changer.
I thank you for your response. I look forward to working
with each of you and my colleagues here on the committee to
address the evolving threats that we face and to provide our
young men and women the training, the resources, and everything
they need to accomplish their mission.
Thank you.
With that, I yield back, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Veasey is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
reverse order likewise.
Secretary Wormuth, in your confirmation hearing to the
Senate Armed Services Committee, you confirmed that the long-
range precision fire [LRPF] is still the Army's number one
modernization priority, with particularly importance in the
Indo-Pacific region and Russia.
My concern is that the Army may not be considering the
modernization priority for the enabling capabilities required
to have a successful kill chain. What is the Army doing to
ensure airborne deep-sensing capabilities that include both
SIGINT [signals intelligence] and are sufficient to meet the
LRPF requirement and other demands in the Pacific and in
Europe?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
You know, first of all, people like to prioritize, but the
way I look at our modernization program, we really need to
comprehensively modernize, and we have sort of six focus areas
of which long-range precision fires is one. But equally
important is our network portfolio area, for example, because,
again, to your point, we have to be able to connect our sensors
and shooters together.
We have to be able to defend those systems and our forces
from aerial and missile defense fires. So, for example,
integrated air and missile defense is another portfolio area
that we are emphasizing.
And in our budget we have put 74 percent of our RDT&E
[research, development, test, and evaluation] funds towards the
31+4 modernization, and we have worked very hard to protect the
whole suite of next-generation capability areas.
So while the long-range precision fires I think is a very
important capability both in INDOPACOM and Europe, we
absolutely need those other areas to be modernized as well to
be able to be successful and to be able to contribute to the
joint force.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much.
General McConville, I was just at Fort Hood on a CODEL
[congressional delegation] about a month ago, and we were
talking about the sexual assault and how the Army is trying to
root out racism, and it occurred to me--I was watching a
program from 1964, and they were interviewing these people in
this small southern town to ask them what they thought about
the 1964 Civil Rights Bill.
And I thought it was important because these people, they
weren't in the Klan. They weren't a part of any other hate
group. They were people that were going to the grocery store.
They were part of the Baptist Church. They were just everyday
Americans. And their answer was that Black people already have
civil rights. I don't understand why we need to talk about
equality; black people already have equal rights. And they were
serious. They weren't like, you know, saying it just to be
saying it. And, again, they were just normal people.
And so when you hear people today say that there is no
systemic racism, it is really not a surprise. It is really a
continuation from people just living their everyday lives and
not having to experience that themselves.
So we heard a lot of stories from women and soldiers of
color. How do you--with that sort of micro aggression, how do
you root that out?
How do you work with the generals to make sure that people
are really taking this seriously? Because there is just going
to be that resistance. And even though those people in 1964,
even though it was blatant segregation--it said colored
bathrooms, White bathrooms--they were very serious when they
were looking into that camera saying, Black people already have
equal rights.
And so when it is that engrained, how do you really get to
the root of it to make sure that the workplace is good? Because
one of the things that the soldiers told us when we had off-
the-records with them, when you decide to re-up, if you have a
commander or a noncommissioned officer that is supportive of
you, that may be the determining factor in whether or not you
decide to re-up. If you have somebody that is not going to be
supportive of you, you are probably not going to re-up.
General McConville. I think that, Congressman, at least
what we are trying to do in the Army, and really get down to
the lowest level, is building a cohesive team where everyone
treats everyone with dignity and respect and everyone takes
care of each other.
Well, how do you do that? I mean, some of it is just having
a basic conversation about, ``Where you are from? What is your
story?'' and having those discussions where you build this
team.
Because what is really important in the military is you are
going to fight with your brothers and sisters. And you want
everyone--I use an example.
You know you have got cohesion right in your team when
every single soldier is willing to run through withering fire
to get you when you are being carried away by the Taliban. That
is what Sal Giunta did in the 173rd. But that is the type of
attitude you want inside your organization.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. I think
that is a very important discussion.
Mrs. McClain.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Rogers. And thank you both for being here.
I want to speak on the issue of China and the steps that
the Army is taking to prepare for any eventualities.
Madam Secretary, your budget request to this committee has
requested several cuts in different departments. You request a
cut in total forces from fiscal year 2021's current projected
levels and even a cut in the procurement of munitions.
As China continues to spend billions on building up its
military, why are we requesting a cut in force strength and
munition procurements? It seems like they are going this way on
spending and we are going this way.
In every hearing that I am in, ``China is our number one
threat, China is our number one threat.'' Yet, we continue to
spend less and less money and they continue to spend more and
more. It is very concerning.
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, thank you.
First of all, I am very concerned about China's
comprehensive modernization and the breadth of its
modernization over the last 20 years. They have definitely
taken advantage of the time that we have been in Iraq and
Afghanistan to build their military up quite a bit.
I think what I would say is what is most important, in my
view, in terms of our ability to stay ahead of China--and I
think it is very important to underscore, as the chairman said,
I think, last week--we outmatch China today. There is no
question that our force and that our Army is superior to the
People's Liberation Army, even with the modernization that they
have undertaken.
But it is our next-generation capabilities that are most
important and will make a difference in us staying ahead of
China. And that is why in this budget we have worked so hard to
prioritize the 31+4 programs to make sure that they are
sufficiently funded.
That has meant that we have made some reductions to some of
our older munitions, for example, and we have reduced some of
the funding for some of our enduring programs. But we are
protecting investments in the new capabilities.
Mrs. McClain. But the budget requests also roughly $4
billion in cuts for the research and development, acquisition
and procurement budgets. So isn't that a future budget that we
are also cutting?
Secretary Wormuth. What we have tried do there, again, is
74 percent of our RDT&E is focused on our next-generation
programs. We have, again, to make sure we could protect the
most important crown jewel modernization programs, we did
reduce RDT&E in some other areas.
Mrs. McClain. But research and development is for the
future, correct?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, but--yes. But we have--the most
important future programs we have fully protected.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. I am going to switch gears.
For my final question, I would like to ask you both, Madam
Secretary and General, to comment on what is next for the
Abrams tank.
As China continues to build up its forces, the U.S. Army's
continued procurement of the modern Abrams tank is essential to
our readiness, as well as the U.S. industrial base.
Can you both please give me a sense of what is next for the
generation of Abrams tank, what it is going to look like, or
what requirements and technologies do you have in mind for that
specific tank?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congresswoman. And I will let
the Chief also add.
I would say, first of all, we are continuing to buy the
Abrams tank. That is a system we will continue to need. And we
are making sure that we have funding for it in our budget.
We are also, however, looking at a new Armored Multi-
Purpose Vehicle. That is one of our six modernization focus
areas. So we will be, again, sort of keeping our existing
capability to make sure that we have a bridge until we get to
the future armored capabilities.
And I will let General McConville add.
Mrs. McClain. Is there funding in your request for the new
generation of Abrams?
General McConville. Can I?
Secretary Wormuth. Please.
General McConville. I mean, first of all, when it comes to
the Abrams right now, I see that as--people talk about legacy
and modernization. I have another [inaudible]. I call it
enduring.
The Abrams main battle tank is not going anywhere. We are
continuing to incrementally improve that. We have got the M1A2
SEP [System Enhancement Package] Version 3. We are fielding
that right now. There is a modernization program.
And you will see, based on the resources available, we went
to three quarters. We were fielding a brigade a year. We are
going to three quarters of a brigade a year. And that is in my
unfunded requirement that lays it out.
Some of the programs that we call enduring, that is like
the Apache helicopter, that is the Black Hawk, that is the
Abrams, you will see that fielding slowing down, because we are
trying to give you the best Army we can within the resources
that we have.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Strickland is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you, Chairman Smith and Ranking
Member Rogers.
And thank you to Secretary Wormuth and General McConville.
I have the privilege of representing Joint Base Lewis-
McChord and the more than 40,000 service members who call it
home. Joint Base Lewis-McChord, or JBLM, is the Army's only
force projection platform west of the Rockies in the
continental U.S. and has an important role as the Department
continues to focus on the Indo-Pacific.
I also recognize that Joint Base Lewis-McChord is one of
the fasting growing [inaudible] in the entire United States and
that creates challenges with housing [inaudible] and
encroachment concerns. I am committed to working with JBLM and
all parties to address these issues and maintain JBLM's
readiness.
Secretary Wormuth, I want to discuss several issues that
are very important to my district.
One of my priorities in entering office is to facilitate a
productive and positive relationship between JBLM and the
Nisqually Tribe [inaudible]. As the Nisqually Tribe tries to
meet these growth needs it has been constrained by JBLM on
three sides. The Nisqually are seeking to transfer 112 acres of
unused land from JBLM to the Nisqually.
While negotiations over this transfer have been progressing
for the last year and a half, it is my expectation that all
parties will ensure that the negotiations maintain
prioritization and that negotiations are finalized in a manner
that is equitable and timely.
So, Secretary, will you please commit to working with me to
help resolve this issue in a way that provides equitable
benefits to all parties by fiscal year 2023? My staff and I
stand at the ready.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I certainly commit to you to work on this issue with you. I
am actually going to be going out to see JBLM in August, I
believe, and would be happy to, frankly, learn more about the
situation there, and would be again happy to work with you to
make sure that we are being inclusive in terms of the
negotiations that are ongoing.
Ms. Strickland. Well, thank you. We look forward to your
visit. And thank you for that commitment.
I want to talk a bit now about JBLM's role in ensuring a
free and open Indo-Pacific. It is strategically vital and we
know it is important to maintaining a free and open Indo-
Pacific.
The Army plans to have three Multi-Domain Task Forces,
MDTFs, one in Europe and two in the Indo-Pacific. Joint Base
Lewis-McChord was proud to host the pilot program.
As you consider requirements in the Indo-Pacific, will you
commit to keeping one of the task forces at JBLM?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, we are also very proud of
the first Multi-Domain Task Force and are very pleased that it
is already being part of our ability to experiment with new
concepts and new operational approaches.
Certainly, it is going to be very important to be able to
have a West Coast orientation for our MDTFs. I think we will
want to look overall at our strategy, particularly as this
administration is developing a revised National Defense
Strategy. So we will want to look at the entirety of our global
posture and where we put our new capabilities.
But we are very pleased with the work that MDTF is doing
already, and I think it is in a good place right now.
Ms. Strickland. Right. And then one quick issue that one of
my colleagues raised is the issue of housing.
As one of the fastest growing markets in the country, I
hear from service members coming [inaudible] and their spouses
that housing is hard to find. And it is expensive here because
the supply is constrained.
In many cases, we have a baseline for housing that just
doesn't keep up with the cost of housing in our market. And
spouses are often required to work so that they can meet their
basic needs and put food on the table.
So will you please work with me to find creative solutions
to addressing the housing affordability and supply crisis
affecting our service members? For example, there are over 700
households on the waiting list right now to get housing on post
at JBLM, but we know that 70 percent of those who serve live
off base.
Thank you.
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, Congresswoman. I will certainly
work with you to try to address these kinds of challenges. We
see costs, frankly, also rising, and in Austin, Texas, where we
have Army Futures Command. And we know that is a challenge,
particularly for some of our younger soldiers and families. So
we will do our best to work with you in this area.
Ms. Strickland. Alright. Thank you very much for answering
those questions.
I yield back my time, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Franklin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Rogers.
And I appreciate our witnesses being here today. I know you
all are very busy, so thank you for carving time out of your
days for us.
Mrs. McClain mentioned before and I wanted to touch on some
more, General, the matter of munitions, specifically precision-
guided munitions. In the testimony it was discussed that there
are a limited number of suppliers for key components of those
precision-guided munitions. Those are critical assets, they are
in high demand.
What are we doing to ensure that we are going to keep these
suppliers alive when it looks like our munitions budget is
being cut by about 25 percent? Is that a concern for you? And
what do we address and how are we addressing that going
forward?
General McConville. I think it is a concern. I mean, we
learned a lot about supply chain.
And as you said, some of these precision munitions take a
long--they have some long lead type items that you have to
purchase. And that is part of our equation we take a look at.
So we may be buying long lead, not necessarily--we always
have to be a little more finesse in these type systems. If we
can't afford the entire munition, we may buy the long range up
front, the long lead type items, and go ahead and do that.
But we are taking a close look at that and trying to do the
best we can within the budget we have.
Mr. Franklin. Well, and I know for a lot of these suppliers
predictability and consistency from one year to the next. We
budget in this 12-month cycle, but they need to look out long
term, so that they need to know that we are going to be there
consistently buying, for them to keep their processes in place.
I want to touch a little bit more on this issue we have
talked a little bit regarding discrimination. A couple of
members have brought it up. In his opening remarks, Chairman
Smith had addressed the issue of discrimination in the ranks
and the services issues to eradicate it. I think we can all
agree that that is--it is very important.
Secretary Wormuth, you spoke about the importance of
building cohesive teams--General, you did as well--and talking
about the need for dignity and respect.
In my experience, whether it is sports teams, military
units, businesses, really the foundation of that cohesiveness I
think fundamentally comes down to trust. And that trust is
really built on a matter of character and competence. And
certainly if there is discrimination in the ranks, that is
going to erode at that character element.
I have been surprised. I have had a number of constituents
who were on Active Duty--a lot of veterans, but I am placing
more stock currently in the Active Duty folks--reach out to me,
which is kind surprising. I never in my 26 years in the Navy
would have ever dreamed of going outside the chain of command
to reach out to someone in Congress, but there is a lot of
concern.
One in particular, I thought so much about it I called this
gentleman up, spoke to him at length. He is an Army senior
noncommissioned officer. His concern is that we are sowing--
potentially sowing distrust among the troops and that we are
kind of telling these people, in a military that has civilian
oversight, that your leaders basically can't be trusted.
Whether they know it or not, inherently they have got bias in
everything they do and every decision they make is viewed
through a lens of race that they can't help. I don't know that
I necessarily agree with that.
But, General, what--well, and he went on to say that, ``I
am teaching these guys, these folks''--and he is in a
leadership position or a training capacity. These are folks
that are going to have to give orders in combat. They are going
to have to give them and receive them.
And his concern is, are we creating a climate of mistrust
where when someone makes a decision that is a life or death
moment, and it may involve the death of soldiers, is someone
going to stop to think, ``Now, is that decision, is that order
being given through a lens of race?''
What measures have you taken to help ensure that your
commanders' intent isn't being distorted by the time it reaches
the deckplate levels?
General McConville. I think what is really important is our
approach to all these what some people call harmful behaviors.
How do you get after sexual harassment, sexual assault? How do
you get after extremism, racism if there is in your
organizations?
And I argue that is why it starts with building cohesive
teams where you treat everyone with dignity and respect. And
you bring them together.
We have done a lot of--it is interesting. We had a--I know
we don't have a long answer--but you go to someone that does
this for a living, that wrote ``The Tribe,'' and how you build
cohesive teams for civilians.
Well, you get a small group together. You take them on a
long hike. You have them stay out overnight. And that is really
good for building cohesive teams.
That is exactly what we do in the Army, is we have got to
build cohesive teams, we have got to trust commanders. We have
got to make sure as we change anything that--commanders are the
ones that are going to make this happen. Leaders are the ones
that are going to make things happen in the Army. We should
never forget that.
Mr. Franklin. I thank the gentleman. And I yield back
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Kahele is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kahele. Mahalo, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member Rogers.
And Aloha, Madam Secretary and General McConville.
In your joint written testimony you stated, ``Strategic
readiness involves installation capabilities to mobilize,
train, and deploy formations, and then sustain them from the
homeland.''
I would like to ask a question regarding the Hawaii
Infrastructure Readiness Initiative [HIRI], which the Army has
committed to a 10-year, $1 billion program to invest in the
Army infrastructure in Hawaii.
This will be roughly $100 million per year. It is mostly
MILCON. The funds are essential in repairing, renovating, and
constructing facilities that USARPAC [U.S. Army Pacific] has
identified as critical to meeting the DOD [U.S. Department of
Defense] strategic plans for the Indo-Pacific region.
By the Army's own admission in 2019, approximately 45
percent of all Army infrastructure in Hawaii is failing,
putting efforts to meet operational needs at risk. The total
cost to repair that infrastructure is $1.1 billion and the cost
to address the deficit of that infrastructure is $3 billion.
HIRI addresses several major facility and infrastructure
deficiencies, including aviation maintenance facilities;
operations facilities; tactical equipment maintenance
facilities; the Pohakuloa Training Area; and a vital MILCON
project, the West Loch ammunition storage facility.
Recently, competing demands within the Army have caused the
delay of HIRI projects. Additionally, there is a perceived cap
of $100 million for HIRI projects within the Army that is
causing several projects to be broken up into several smaller
projects to meet this arbitrary cap. And as a result, many
projects are now more expensive than if executed as a single
project.
So my question, Madam Secretary, is how can we accelerate
the timeline of HIRI and help the Army save money by allowing
projects to be executed as a whole instead of a piecemeal
development strategy?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman, for that
question.
First of all, our footprint in Hawaii is very, very
important, particularly as we look to the Indo-Pacific theater,
and we remain committed to the Hawaii Infrastructure Readiness
Initiative.
We are, as you know, making--we are balancing our people,
taking care of our people. We are balancing readiness. We are
balancing modernization. So we are having to make some hard
choices.
I think what I would like to do is look into the issues
that you raise in more detail, particularly the issue of
potentially the fact that we are breaking up larger projects
into smaller projects, to see what we might be able to do to
accelerate things.
But, again, part of this is we are balancing and we have an
overall facilities improvement plan that we use to guide what
we are doing. But we are committed to the infrastructure in
Hawaii, so I will look into that and get back to you.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Thank you.
Sticking with the Indo-Pacific, and my colleague from Ohio
raised this earlier. And I am also concerned that just in the
last hour and 20 minutes of this hearing we have talked about
China multiple times. We always talk about China in this
committee. And I am concerned that some of the talking points
that have come out of the Pentagon are not reflected in the
sense of urgency to respond to China.
And in reviewing the Army's budget and its fiscal year 2022
budget request, I am concerned we are not dedicating enough
funding to the Pacific and INDOPACOM. In the Army's Pacific
Deterrence Initiative request of about $1.8 billion, that is
$1.5 billion less than the Army's request for EDI [European
Deterrence Initiative], which is $3.43 billion.
As we pivot to the Pacific and China and their rapidly
advancing military, sir, General, does this budget meet, in
your opinion, the future needs of the Army to fight, to win in
the Pacific, to deter China from taking any more territory in
the region, to support and keep our forces in the first island
chain, to add more troop rotations, more exercises that can
prepare us for China and for potential conflicts in the Western
Pacific?
General McConville. I think that what is in the budget, it
does, Congressman, as far as setting it. But there is some
long-term--there is a strategic posture review that is going on
right now that is going to inform what type of investments
should be made. We certainly have contingencies for that. We
are taking a look at that.
And just going back to the 25th in Schofield Barracks,
where I had a chance to serve, those barracks are something we
really want to get after. Really concerned about the soldiers
living there. They do an incredible job, and we want to get
after them as soon as we get the resources to make that happen.
Mr. Kahele. All right. Thank you.
Thirty seconds, Madam Secretary. Anything in regards to the
Pentagon's budget and PDI [Pacific Deterrence Initiative]?
Secretary Wormuth. Again, I know that we are looking,
again, Department-wide at PDI to make sure that we are
reflecting congressional intent. But I think we have 69,000
troops aligned with the INDOPACOM with USARPAC, and the focus
of our modernization is really to get after the China threat.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Mahalo.
Mahalo, Mr. Chairman. I yield the remainder of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary and General McConville, thank you for being
with us today.
And, General, thank you for your service and the service of
your children.
My home State of Oklahoma is proud of the tens of thousands
of soldiers who are stationed at Fort Sill. The Fort Sill and
Lawton, Oklahoma, communities work hand in hand to support the
mission of the United States Army and to support the military
personnel and families stationed there.
My first question focuses on the Paladin Integrated
Management program, which is assembled in Elgin, Oklahoma. The
Army identified an unfunded requirement of $149.5 million for
the Paladin program.
When coupled with the Army's fiscal year 2022 budget
request, this would procure up to 36 sets of the equipment.
However, that is still only half of the full rate of production
volume specified in the DOD-approved acquisition program
baseline of 60 sets per year.
I am concerned that this level of volume will cause
significant growth in the cost of each unit and could lead to
adverse impacts on the highly skilled workforce in my State.
General, what analysis did the Army use to determine the
unfunded requirement for that $149.5 million?
General McConville. With the analysis that we used,
Congresswoman, we can come back and give you some detailed
analysis. But it is basically looking about the resources
available. It is looking at what the manufacturer can actually
complete within the time. And then, within the prioritization,
taking a look at what resources are available and making those
type calls.
Mrs. Bice. I believe the 36 sets is actually less than that
required, that allotment of able production in that timeframe.
What do you believe the impact on fielding to soldiers and
the industrial base by moving away from the current volumes of
the 44 to 48 sets per year?
General McConville. Well, they are not going to modernize
as fast as we would like them to.
Mrs. Bice. Madam Secretary.
Secretary Wormuth. I would agree with what the Chief said.
As I am learning in real-time, we have a very detailed process
that goes underneath how we build the budgets. And we look at
equipping. We look at sustaining. We look at training. And we
look in tremendous depth.
But given available resources, we are not always able to
fund all of those priorities in all of those program elements
to the 100 percent level. But we do try to be very, very
thoughtful and careful about where we accept risk, for example.
Mrs. Bice. Do you believe that this is a critical component
for Army readiness?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly the Paladin program is an
enduring program for us. Again, as you have pointed out, we
have reduced the funding somewhat to be able to balance other
requirements, but it continues to be an important capability
for us.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you.
My second question touches on the Extended Range Cannon
Artillery [ERCA] program, which is also assembled at Elgin.
The Army program manager in charge of the range--excuse me
for just a second--recently identified a two-part acquisition
strategy for the program, which includes a competition to build
and assemble kits for ERCA and a separate competition to
integrate those kits into the Paladin.
Can you verify that this is the ERCA acquisition strategy?
Do you have any perspective on that?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, while the ERCA program is
an important part of our long-range precision fires, it is not
a program I have had the opportunity yet to dive into deeply.
So I will yield to my chief to take that one.
General McConville. Yeah. We will come back to you on the
programmatics. I mean, I know what we are doing with the
Extended Range Cannon is something we want to do. We are very
pleased with the result so far, the ranges we are getting.
As we talk about deterrence in great power competition, the
ability to have speed and range, there were other people that
came before committees like this and said we are outranged or
outgunned, we don't see that in the future. And that is what we
are trying to make sure we can produce.
Mrs. Bice. Do you think that we will be able to meet the
goal to field a battalion in 2023 and another in 2024 based on
the requirements? And you may not be able to answer that
given----
General McConville. That is our intent.
Mrs. Bice. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Jacobs is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Wormuth and General McConville,
for being here with us.
I want to start with you, Secretary Wormuth.
The Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle [OMFV] is the first
of several vehicle modernization programs the Army is
developing.
What lessons were learned from last year's cancelation of
the initial solicitation, specifically with the requirements
process? And how can we do better with requirements early in
these programs?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I think the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle is a good
example of how, as I have come into this role, how the Army is
approaching modernization and its acquisition efforts
differently than we have in the past.
So unlike the Future Combat System, for example, where we
loaded up a lot of requirements very early in the process and
were perhaps somewhat unrealistic about what was
technologically possible, with OMFV we are trying to do it in a
much more incremental, iterative way.
So, first, we went out and we did market research to
understand what might be possible, what kinds of producers
might be out there. We then engaged in conversation with
industry about what kinds of characteristics we are looking for
in the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle. We then moved
incrementally to looking at potentially what designs will be
out there.
And we are going to, again, continue to pursue this
iterative approach which, first of all, gives more opportunity
for more companies in the private sector to compete, but also
will give us a better sense of what is actually possible and
achievable before we down-select.
So I think actually we have learned a lot and feel good
about the path that we are on right now with OMFV.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
General McConville, anything to add before I move on to the
next topic?
General McConville. When we talk about transformation, we
are transforming the way we actually buy weapon systems. And
what we are finding is, by going to characteristics vice
requirements early on in the process, we encourage innovation,
we get other people to participate in the process. And as we
move forward we actually get the ``drive before we buy'' or
``fly before we buy,'' which we think is a much better
approach.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
I would now like to discuss the long-range precision fires.
I know we have talked about it a few times already and it was
in your written testimony. But I wanted to drill down a bit
further.
How do you see these nonstrategic hypersonic weapons
playing a role in the battlefield of the future?
Specifically, their long-range nature will completely
change the way the Army needs to collect targeting information.
And has the Army adequately thought about the way sensors
will need to be connected to shooters in order to make these
weapons effective?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, a couple comments on
that.
First of all, I think long-range precision fires are really
essential for the Army--but, frankly, for the entire joint
force--in terms of helping us address the anti-access/area
denial challenges that both China and Russia present to us.
And I think it is important to not forget about the
European theater and about the challenges we face from Russia.
There is a lot of appropriate emphasis on China, but we need to
remember the European theater as well.
And the programs that we are pursuing here, whether it is
Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon or PrSM [Precision Strike Missile]
or the Extended Range Cannon, those are all weapon systems that
will allow us to hit targets from much longer standoff
distances.
And in terms to your very important point about connecting
sensors to shooters, we are trying to use our Project
Convergence initiative, which is sort of our campaign of
learning, to try to help us understand how we can use these
capabilities, how we can work with the other services to use
our sensors to connect to the best shooters for a particular
target.
And we have a joint board of directors for our Project
Convergence initiative that allows us to bring in all of the
services to our efforts so that we can explore those issues.
And the Chief may want to add something.
General McConville. Yeah. I think the Secretary laid it
out.
The only thing I would add, long-range precision fires
require long-range targeting and precision targeting, and we
are certainly developing the capabilities to do that within the
joint force. And that is what we are having the discussion
about: Who is actually going to do that targeting and what is
the best way to do that?
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you.
And in my final 20 seconds, I will just echo my colleagues'
encouragement to make sure we are addressing housing and
continuing to execute the Army Housing Campaign Plan.
And I, too, was on the CODEL to Fort Hood and encourage you
to continue working on sexual assault.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Green is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member.
Thanks to our witnesses for being here. I have known
General McConville for many, many years. And to my members,
fellow members, his service is venerable.
Thank you, sir.
And, Madam Secretary, it is great to meet you.
As I flip through the budget, I know I am digging into the
weeds here, General McConville, but seems like the Army is
getting tasked fairly significantly, in fact it looked like
more than any other service branch, for the INDOPACOM. And I
just wondered if you wouldn't elaborate on that a little bit
and kind of tell us what kind of missions they are getting
tasked to do out there.
General McConville. Yeah. I think it is interesting, a lot
of people want to look at the Indo-Pacific and they see a lot
of blue water out there and they say it is a maritime theater
and it is an air theater. And I would say certainly that is
very, very important.
But we have key allies and partners out there. I can run
the whole list. But I have spent a lot of time with the chiefs
of staffs out there.
And so the question becomes, what does a combatant
commander want from the Army? What do our allies and partners
want?
They certainly want our Multi-Domain Task Force capability,
which has the ability to provide long-range precision effects
and long-range precision fires for deterrence.
Our security force assistance brigades right now are being
used in many countries out there because they are building
partner capabilities and capacity. Special Forces is in high
demand out there for the same type reasons.
We are doing multiple exercises with our allies and
partners, not only in the theater. They have actually come to
our Joint Readiness Training Center because they want to get
that type of training. We think that is extremely important.
When it comes to logistics, the Army does logistics. If you
have got a vaccination, you know a little about Army logistics.
And so the Army has a critical role out there, and we just
need to be postured to provide that.
Dr. Green. Well, good. Thanks for elaborating on that.
My office is getting, Madam Secretary, I would say pictures
texted to us about once a month at a minimum about the barracks
at 1st Brigade.
And I keep pushing this issue. As I have been told, I can't
do an appropriation on it unless you guys, MILCON, puts it on
its list. And I understand there is a 21 percent increase in
the budget for MILCON.
But I would like to ask you to take a look at what those
barracks look like and ask yourself, 1st Brigade, the 101st
Airborne Division, if you would want your son or daughter in
there. My son happens to be. Mold and issues like that need to
be addressed in those buildings.
General McConville, on the issue of aviation, I noticed a
combat aviation request of $2.8 billion, a $1.3 billion
decrease from 2021.
And as we talk about the Army's use in INDOPACOM and the
commander wanting to see you guys out there more, wouldn't
there need to be an increase in the aviation budget as opposed
to a decrease? And if so, is there some risk we are taking? And
can you talk about that risk.
General McConville. Well, we are certainly concerned about
making sure that our pilots get the flying hours that they need
to do. And what you will find is, if we don't invest in flying
hours, whether it is flight school or flying hours in the
units, we see a lack of proficiency, and that tends to come
back in accidents.
So we are concerned about that. We are trying to make sure
that we get the right amount of money that is needed. And I
would say that the money that we have in readiness right now
needs to stay there. We have done some very stringent, I want
to say, uses of readiness. There is not room when we put in
UFRs----
Dr. Green. You can't cut it any more, is what you are
saying.
General McConville. I can't cut it any more. We need to
keep that readiness because it has been very efficiently
managed, I guess is the way I want to say it.
Dr. Green. That is a very good way to say it, I guess.
And I echo what the ranking member said earlier. We are
concerned that the budget that the administration has handed
you or asked you to live under is probably less than what you
need.
But one thing in the final minute that I have. I mentioned
this with General Milley just a few weeks ago. And that is the
CTC [Combat Training Center] rotations.
And I went back and did my homework, and I was right, they
were set for 26 in 2021 and it looks like 17 in 2022. That is a
big concern as we think about China and Russia, these pacing
threats, large-scale ground operations.
Can you elaborate a little bit on that cut? And is 17
enough?
General McConville. Well, Congressman, I probably need to
brief you offline, because I just have--I have the numbers in
front of me. It is a little different.
Dr. Green. Sure.
General McConville. We have got 20.
I think what is interesting is, if you take the 22, we have
22 rotations scheduled, 8 in NTC [National Training Center], 8
in JRTC [Joint Readiness Training Center].
Now, two of those, we are doing something different now. We
are going to actually do the rotations, probably one in Alaska
and one in Hawaii, which is a little--so if you are talking to
the folks at the CTCs, they are going to go, ``Hey, wait a
minute. We used to have this many.''
And the other thing we are doing----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Luria is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And, General McConville, I want to go back to something
General Milley said during his testimony last week. He said:
``Decisive outcomes in war are ultimately achieved on land.''
Do you agree with this statement?
General McConville. Absolutely.
Mrs. Luria. So in your opening statement you write: The
Army remains prepared to fight and win the Nation's wars.
Can you briefly describe what it would mean from the Army's
perspective to win in a war with China or, as General Milley
put it, to achieve a decisive outcome?
General McConville. Yeah. I would say winning with China is
not fighting China. I think the way I would describe it is to
have the ability that we have overmatch.
And, again, I kind of believe in a philosophy of peace
through strength. And that strength comes from a whole-of-
government effort where you have a very strong military, you
have a very strong Army, so people do not want to take the
risks of doing certain things.
And you also have strong allies and partners who share the
same vision of the world order and they are going to stand side
by side and not allow some of these things to happen.
Mrs. Luria. So then focusing on the Army's component on
that, a ground component such as the Army, what would the Army
provide towards this decisive outcome, which I think we would
all agree we would like to not fight ultimately that war?
General McConville. Well, it is going to provide the
capabilities. It is going to provide long-range precision
fires. It is going to provide maneuver vehicles that can--the
only way to compel people is on the ground to stop those type
things from happening.
And what we want to have is a very lethal and agile Army.
And we think we get that through having speed, range, and
convergence that gives us decision dominance, and having the
appropriate amount of capability within the joint force to be
able to deter them from taking on those type actions.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So, as you know and you referred to
earlier, that many strategists have said that the conflict in
the Western Pacific is primarily a naval and an air campaign.
And it seems that, based on this discussion, you see a role for
ground forces and a role for the Army in a conflict in the
Western Pacific.
Recently, the head of Air Force Global Strike Command said
that your effort, the Army's effort to base long-range missiles
in the Pacific, was expensive, duplicative, and stupid, and the
number one priority for PACOM [U.S. Pacific Command] in the
Pacific Deterrent Initiative is missile defense. Yet, that is
your number six modernization priority behind long-range
precision fires, next-generation combat vehicle, vertical lift,
and others in your budget submission.
Can you briefly explain why the Army is pursuing long-range
fires in the Pacific, including shore-based anti-ship missiles,
when, one, there are no basing agreements to house these
weapons in the first island chain; two, the Marine Corps is
developing the same but a more mobile capability; and three,
the cost of delivering this capability far exceeds the Navy and
Air Force capabilities?
General McConville. Yeah. I think, Congresswoman, that we
absolutely need long-range precision fires. I think it provides
multiple options for the combatant commander.
If you take a look at what the Secretary was talking about,
and you have to take a look at anti-access/area denial, and I
would recommend get a classified brief on what those
capabilities they have, because our adversaries have
sophisticated integrated air and missile defense, they have
sophisticated----
Mrs. Luria. I am not trying to argue against long-range
fires, but just the role of the Army in that when the Navy and
the Air Force already--Marine Corps and Air Force are already
developing those capabilities at potentially a lower cost.
And just pivoting on that as well, so the Army has a good
and soon to be improved ground-based missile defense capability
if the Low Tier Air and Missile Defense system works. But the
Navy operates Aegis Ashore Missile Defense System.
Why doesn't the Army take over the Aegis Ashore, which is
what the PACOM commander asked for in Guam, instead of building
a new multibillion dollar radar?
General McConville. Well, we are going to take a look at
what is the best way to do integrated air and missile defense.
We have got an IFPC [Indirect Fire Protection Capability]
capability and Iron Dome capability.
Where the Army is going right now is on an Integrated Air
and Missile Defense Battle Command System that will take
advantage of convergence using multiple sensors to multiple
different shooters. And that is where we are going as far as
that process.
The Aegis right now we do not have people--it is not a
matter of just taking over. We would have to train a whole
cohort of----
Mrs. Luria. I understand that. But my whole point is that
there is duplicity, like, we are duplicating things amongst the
services. When at the same time you and other service chiefs
will talk a lot about jointness, it seems like there is excess
redundancy and funds in this budget that go to things that are
significantly overlapping amongst the services.
And I am sorry, my time has expired.
General McConville. Okay. Thank you.
The Chairman. Before we move on to the next person, two
programming notes. We are going to stop at 2 o'clock and there
are votes between here and there. Again, as I did last time, I
am going to try to keep going and have members coming so we can
maximize the time, make sure someone is here to ask a question.
So just be prepared for that.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, thank you both
for being here today.
And thank you, General, for your commitment to maintaining
peace through strength. I appreciate how you articulated that a
few moments ago.
Last week, I asked Secretary Austin and General Milley, who
were here, about Army readiness. And General Milley had what I
thought was a memorable quote. He said: ``Wars are often
started from afar, from long-range weapon systems. They are
always ended, however, somewhere on the ground. And the last
bullet of a war is usually fired by a Marine or Army
infantryman.''
So it is critical to maintain the readiness of the United
States Army.
Our training centers, both at Fort Irwin and Fort Polk, as
well as in Germany, are going to be critically important moving
forward to maintain our current ground force capabilities. I
represent Fort Polk, it is in my district, proudly.
How would you say the President's budget request for the
Army accounts for those considerations, namely Army readiness
and getting rotations through our training centers? I know you
were addressing that briefly with Congressman Green a few
moments ago. Maybe I will go to the Secretary first.
Secretary Wormuth. Sure, Congressman.
First of all, readiness is incredibly important. It is one
of our--I think of--I sort of think of the overall Army program
as a three-legged stool. You have modernization, you have
readiness, and you have force structure.
So we, as the Chief said, we have funded 20 rotations, CTC
rotations, in our budget because the Army has worked very hard
in the last several years to dig itself out of a readiness
trough that was substantially a result of sequestration and the
Budget Control Act.
And maintaining that readiness to be able to fight tonight
is very important. So we have tried to emphasize that and don't
feel that there is really any head space in that area, if you
will.
I don't know, General McConville, if you want to add to
that.
General McConville. I think our Combat Training Centers are
really the gold standard of how we train battalion and brigade
units. And so, they are absolutely critical for what we are
trying to do.
With the budget, and, again, as we take a look at--we are
trying to most efficiently use the resources we have. So if you
take a look at the 20 rotations, currently we are doing 8 out
at the Combat Training Center at NTC. That is kind of armor,
large-scale type ground combat operations. And most of the
units are fairly close to that, so they are able to do that.
For the Joint Readiness Training Center we are doing a
couple of things. One is we are going to move them actually
maybe to Alaska, the cadre, to run a CTC-like rotation in
Alaska under the conditions. Because if you are going to be an
Arctic warrior, it might be better to be trained in that
environment, and the same thing out in the jungle. So we are
taking a look at that.
And the same thing for units going to Europe. To cut down
the OPTEMPO, we have a CTC there. So what we would like to do
is run them through a Combat Training Center as part of their
deployment, rather than having them get to a deployment and
taking a look at the OPTEMPO.
So we are trying to balance everything within resources.
And one of resources is time. So how do we best use their time?
And if we have to bring a unit's equipment all the way from
Hawaii, put it on a boat, by the time it gets to Fort Polk, and
then put it on a boat and send it back, they are away from
their equipment for a couple months.
So we are trying to figure out the best way to do this
within the resources that we have.
Mr. Johnson. Just a parenthetical note that Fort Polk can
mimic the conditions of anywhere except the Arctic.
General McConville. No, I know. That is right. I spent some
good quality time there.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, sir. I am sure you have.
The new Global Defender exercise is funded in the budget
request and described by the Army as additive and designed to
showcase Army modernization priorities and, quote, ``key
Department of Defense and congressional audiences,'' unquote.
Yet, the large-scale theater-level Defender-Europe exercise
that was previously scheduled for fiscal year 2022 is not
funded in the budget request.
First of all, what are the goals of the Global Defender
exercise? And what does the Army mean by that in terms of the
audiences who it is focused for?
Secretary Wormuth. Why don't I let, given how new I am, why
don't I let the Chief talk about that one?
General McConville. Defenders have really been running
across three kind of scenarios. One is certainly Defender-
Europe, which was a large amount of forces going that was
impacted by COVID, but we still were able to accomplish a lot
of goals. And those will continue, but the focal point was
that. The same thing with 21 Indo-Pacific. That was a major
exercise.
The intent of this exercise is just to take a look at, as
we look at the future, what is the global impact of being
contested all the way from home to one of the theaters we are
going to have to go to?
So, you know, we see the change in environment. We are
seeing little effects of that from cyber and some other things,
that people can basically impact the United States in ways that
we have never seen before.
And so we need to be aware of that. We need to be able to
mobilize our forces. We need to be able to get them through the
various centers. And we need to make sure the infrastructure is
going to support us deploying in a contested environment.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you both.
I am out of time. I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Escobar is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, thank you so
much for being here today. Really appreciate your service to
our country and your time before our committee this morning.
And, Madam Secretary, I look forward to at some point
welcoming you to El Paso and to Fort Bliss.
And, General McConville, I look forward to our visit coming
up soon.
I have the honor and privilege of representing El Paso,
Texas, home to Fort Bliss, America's second largest military
installation, largest Joint Mobilization Force Generation
Installation in the Army, and the 1st Armored Division,
America's only armored tank division.
And I have had the privilege of spending some time visiting
with soldiers, not just on base and off base, not just in my
district, but outside of my district.
And with regard to women in particular, I can tell you, I
really appreciate your leaning into addressing sexual
harassment and sexual assault, because on many fronts we
really, truly have failed women and we have to do better.
The same thing goes for suicides. And we had a conversation
yesterday about the most recent suicide at Fort Bliss and the
tragedy surrounding that suicide. But also this is the second
death in just several months. Two young women soldiers.
And it is--I know that this is a terrible and difficult
issue to address. But what is it?
In looking back, I appreciate that we now understand very
clearly where the chronic issue is and who needs to be provided
resources and reinforcement, so to speak.
But what, in your view, is happening? What is going on here
where we have not done well enough? And what are the first
steps to doing better?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, a couple of things.
On suicide, we are certainly very concerned about that. And
we have a historically high rate of suicide in the Army right
now, which is very concerning.
Often suicides come about with behavioral health issues,
often relationship problems, sometimes financial issues. But I
think what we are trying to do through the ``This is My Squad''
initiative, through working on improving our command climate
down to the lowest level, working on trying to introduce
evidence-based suicide prevention programs, we are trying--some
of the things we are doing I think will help us get after a
range of harmful behaviors, whether it is sexual harassment or
whether it is trying to prevent suicide.
A lot of it is trying to make sure, as General McConville
said, that we have got that golden triangle of, do our soldiers
feel connected to their families, connected to their squad
mates, and connected to their leaders?
And if they have those connections, we have a better
opportunity to get ahead of any potential problems.
But this is something I think we are just going to have to
continue working on. And it is going to take, I think,
consistent, year after year focus and effort.
Ms. Escobar. And I appreciate that.
One thing that I would add, obviously we are not the first
institution to deal with this, and with this particular age
group, as was mentioned, with the vulnerability of this
population.
Are we looking essentially outside the box and outside of
the DOD for best practices and for advice and support?
I appreciate the DOD's response, the Army's response, et
cetera. But there are institutions outside of the U.S. military
who have had to grapple with this as well. And are we looking,
leaning on them at all?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes. I think we are, as I said, trying
to really look outside the Department for evidence-based
suicide prevention programs and to learn from other
institutions.
We have a pilot program running at a couple of major
installations that is focused on the suicide challenge in
particular.
But we absolutely should be looking to every possible
source of good ideas outside of the Army and the Department of
Defense.
Ms. Escobar. And in my last 30 seconds, the last thing I
will add, we have had this conversation about infrastructure on
Fort Bliss, the barracks, the railhead.
And I really look forward to exploring with you and would
seek your commitment to really taking a long, hard look at the
cost-benefit analysis there, especially for the railhead, the
lack of investment in that, and what it is costing us in the
long term the longer we wait.
But also the barracks. Clearly it is a chronic issue. I
have heard it from other colleagues as well on this committee.
But really would love for you to see those barracks on Fort
Bliss. They are in desperate need of investment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Waltz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you, Chief, Madam Secretary.
General McConville, in your Senate testimony you described
2020 as the Year of the National Guard. And I couldn't agree
more, between COVID response, national unrest, vaccine
deployment, record hurricane season, record firefighting
season, plus the overseas missions that they have to be ready
to deploy.
The problem is these domestic missions are
disproportionately affecting our various States where the
Guard's force structure is aligned.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record a
letter signed by 55 of my colleagues from Texas, Florida, and
California addressing this issue. If I could ask consent.
The Chairman. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The letter referred to can be found in the Appendix on
page 77.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
It is addressing this issue that these States per capita
have the smallest National Guard force structure. So they
actually rank 52, 53, and 54, I think somewhat surprisingly.
You overlay with that, they are most prone to natural
disasters, certainly in California, Texas, and Florida in
particular.
So I want to be clear. I am not asking or suggesting that
States should lose force structure. What I am asking your
support to work with us on is that as some of these States
voluntarily shed, because they can't recruit or for other
reasons, that we take those population factors into account.
This domestic mission is critical. And would you--I would
think you would agree that the strain on the force from
domestic missions is impacting the Federal operational mission
in recruiting, in retention. Every time you have to go to that
employer and say, ``I am leaving,'' that really has an impact.
Will you work with us on that and work with NGB [National
Guard Bureau] on this?
General McConville. No, absolutely. And one thing I would
add, Congressman, is we need to take a look as we move in the
future, and I have talked to General Hokanson and General
Jensen, and really we want the input from the Guard on--as you
know, certain States want to have certain type units. Some can
raise special forces or can raise this type organization.
Mr. Waltz. Right.
General McConville. And some have talent in cyber and
different type things.
And so we want to work with the States and lay out, ``Hey,
can you do this, can you put more here,'' and do it in a
collaborative way.
Mr. Waltz. And all of those factors absolutely should be
factored in. But you can't have a tank unit there if you don't
have the ranges, right?
General McConville. That is right.
Mr. Waltz. That should be all factored in.
But population, particularly as they are shifting, and that
domestic mission, which I know isn't your number one priority,
but it impacts you.
And further, I think we need to look at what we are calling
homeland defense, right? Our adversaries have made it clear
with Colonial Pipeline and others that they can hit us here and
will hit us here. When it impacts whole regions, I would put
that squarely in your bucket and not in the Governors' buckets
necessarily.
So that line is getting very blurry. And I would just ask
your support in working with us on that.
Shifting to the budget, I do think there is a narrative out
there that as we shift to the Indo-Pacific that is primarily an
Air Force and Navy fight. And I know that there are a quarter
million soldiers assigned just to Indo-Pacific COCOM [combatant
command]. There are 60 percent of COCOM requirements are on
your shoulders, or on the Army's shoulders.
But as we have little recap investments from the Middle
East, the R&D [research and development] budget is down, our
O&M [operations and maintenance] is stretched, the munitions
budget is cut, increased demand on the Guard, as I mentioned,
Madam Secretary, I am having a hard time believing you have a
sufficient budget.
Are you testifying that you have a sufficient budget for
all of those needs?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, Congressman. I think the budget
that we have now is adequate to provide us the resources that
we need to both maintain our readiness, make sure that we can
fulfill current operational demands from the combatant
commanders, and prepare for the future.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you for that.
Chief, do you have enough money? I will just note that your
predecessors were always here demanding more and fighting for
more. Chief, you testify that you have enough?
General McConville. What I am testifying to, Congressman,
is you have my unfinanced requirements. I can tell you my
priority when it comes to the budget. And we are giving you the
best Army we can with the budget that we received.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Chief.
In the few seconds I have remaining, I just want to go to
the physical requirements of combat.
I applaud the move to a branch-specific, it makes sense, to
a branch-specific physical requirement. And it makes sense.
Infantry and artillery requires more than cyber or dentist.
Madam Secretary, could you submit for the record your plans
to maintain gender-neutral physical requirements or what you
are looking at shifting?
The Chairman. It has got to be yes or no.
Mr. Waltz. For the record. For the record.
Secretary Wormuth. We can certainly brief you on where we
are with APFT [Army Physical Fitness Test] now.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 85.]
The Chairman. The gentleman's has expired.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Bergman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Wormuth, you previously stated that the Army
National Guard may not be able to fund training for the
remainder of the fiscal year if supplemental funding is not
provided to offset the cost of the Capitol security response.
The Air National Guard is also in is a similar position.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, with just a
simple yes or no answer, if supplemental funding isn't
immediately approved, will Guard readiness suffer? That is,
will it be reduced?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, Congressman, it will. We will have
to cut training for August and September.
General McConville. Yes. And I would add, Guard morale will
also be affected, because there are going to be guardsmen that
are not going to get credit for this year's service if they
don't get a chance to make the 39 days.
Mr. Bergman. And that is a great point to dive into,
because not only do you affect the readiness, you affect the
morale. And to restate it, those who have committed to 20-plus
years in the Guard, a sat [satisfactory] year with the 50
points that enables them to have another qualifying year.
This is a big deal. So there should be no delay.
Thank you for your response.
Secretary Wormuth, in your view, what are the differences
between command climate in garrison--example, a base like Fort
Hood--and command climate in a forward-deployed unit engaged in
kinetic activity, that is, combat?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congressman, I would say, for
starters, I think to some extent--and I have learned this in
discussions with commanders in our Army and in previous years
of working in the Pentagon--often when you are there in combat
or forward deployed, potentially being ready for combat, there
is a crucible there where the command climate is often quite
positive because commanders are right there with their
soldiers. They know their soldiers. There is a shared sense of
purpose and objective.
I think at garrison, sometimes that can be more
challenging. I mean, first of all, there is----
Mr. Bergman. And you are on point. My question is, you
know, unit commanders are selected, not elected. They are
selected because they went through rigorous training, years of
experience, and they are tasked with leadership, both life and
death of their units, whether it be in garrison or whether it
be in the fight.
And we talked earlier about, General, as you mentioned, in
the last 20 years, a lots of our unit commanders, especially at
the younger levels, when they have come back from deployment,
have forgotten that they are still in charge of young soldiers
and Marines and airmen. They are not bad people. They are
tired. And we know that when you are in command, you are in
command day on, stay on, 24/7, 30 days a month until
appropriately relieved of your command by someone else.
I guess when I consider how we train and prepare our
commanders, our officers, and senior enlisted for command, we
are walking down a very unique road here, and not a good one,
when we start separating things out of the command authority,
because you are either all in command of everything or you are
in command of nothing. And I believe the road we are walking
down here, as we start separating out, an example, sexual
assault, then what is next.
So I would ask you to consider that as we move forward to
make sure our troops are, number one, ready to fight and,
number two, ready to care for each other, whether it be in
garrison or in the fight.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Speier is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Thank you both for your service. I will commend you, Ms.
Wormuth, for your ability in very short order to have a very
commanding understanding of the issues that confront you.
Let me start with what I am convinced is the next epidemic
in the military, and that is suicide. I just got word that the
11th, count it, the 11th suicide has taken place now in Alaska.
We have got to get a handle on this.
So my first question is, will you please provide me with
the number of suicides at each of our bases around the world?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, Congresswoman, we will. And I agree
with you, we have to get after this. I have been in the job 4
weeks and I get emails every week, more than once, telling me
that one of our soldiers has committed suicide, and it is
extremely disheartening and tragic, and we need to focus on it
more.
Ms. Speier. So, General McConville, the crushing,
unsustainable OPTEMPO I think is a major factor, not just in
suicide. I think it was a major factor in the toxic climate at
Fort Hood, and I am concerned that this problem extends to
other bases and to the rest of the Army.
Last week General Milley testified before the committee,
and he says the OPTEMPO is too high. So what are you doing
within the Army to address the OPTEMPO and make it more
manageable?
General McConville. I absolutely agree with General Milley.
I think one of the things that we learned from Fort Hood, when
people look at Fort Hood, is the amount of deployments that
they did, and part of resources--we often talk about money
here--is time.
It is time for leaders to spend with their soldiers. It is
time to get to know their soldiers. In many cases some of the
soldiers that are having challenges are going to be left behind
because the unit is going forward with them or without them,
but building these cohesive teams--and I use the motto of the
golden triangle--where squad leaders know their soldiers and
every soldier has a buddy, and they know the families because
when we look at these suicides--and I have been looking at this
for a long time, it breaks my heart to lose people to suicide.
It breaks my heart to lose any soldiers, but there is
always something there about why did this soldier not, you
know, have the will to live, what would make them to be in that
position where they no longer want to live.
And we have behavioral health--my daughter does that. She
is a behavioral health officer in the Army right now trying to
help these young men and women. But there is something to do
with connecting them, making them feel connected----
Ms. Speier. Okay. General, I am going to stop you there,
unfortunately, because I have to ask a couple more questions.
General McConville. Okay.
Ms. Speier. But I appreciate your recognition that we have
to address it.
We have an unacceptable condition in many of our barracks
and housing across the military. You have heard from a number
of members talk about housing in their various districts.
At Fort Hood, in my number of visits there, the barracks
were--some are being restored; some are not. The members of the
committee that were on the CODEL that were previously in the
service were appalled at the condition of the barracks at Fort
Hood.
Now, there is a 10-year, $10 billion plan to modernize the
barracks within the Army. There has only been a request for
$262 million for fiscal year 2022. At this rate, you are never
going to do $10 billion in 10 years. So it suggests that there
isn't the commitment to making this a priority.
So, Secretary, would you please comment on that? How--you
need to do a billion dollars a year to be able to make that
commitment that you made of $10 billion over 10 years.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I have been--when I was at Fort Hood, I also had the
opportunity to see the barracks, and I saw good barracks,
modernized barracks, but I also saw bad barracks.
What I would commit to you is, you know, we are--we do have
the $10 billion over 10-year plan. What I would like to say to
you is I will look carefully at that plan because I, myself,
you know, particularly hearing all of the concerns that we are
hearing about barracks, would like to dig into that and make
sure that I feel satisfied that it is going after modernizing
barracks in a way that I feel comfortable with. And I have not
looked at the 10-year plan in detail, so I will commit to do
that and come back to you.
Ms. Speier. All right. One last point. There is $485
million that is being spent on housing, family housing at Fort
Hood, but it is not a decision that the commander has any
authority over based on the contracts that we have----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I am going to recognize Mr. Gaetz for the purposes of a UC
[unanimous consent] request.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I ask for unanimous consent for all committee members to
have 5 legislative days within which to submit documents for
the committee record.
The Chairman. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Ms. Cheney is recognized.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to both of our witnesses for being here today.
I wanted to talk in a little bit more detail about what we
are seeing in terms of our adversaries' capabilities. We have
had multiple testimonies over the course of our posture
hearings this year, as we have in previous years; but this year
in particular comments like the breathtaking speed with which
we are watching the Chinese, for example, modernize.
In the context that we are seeing adversary capabilities
increase, the Biden administration defense budget is woefully
insufficient, inadequate to maintain our own capabilities. In
your joint testimony, you said, ``While America's Army
maintains a tenuous overmatch, it is fleeting.''
And I would like to ask you first, General McConville, we
have heard this again year after year, this notion that we have
still got overmatch but just barely. Could you explain exactly
what you mean by tenuous overmatch and on what basis--I
understand in this setting it may be with less specificity, but
on what basis you feel confident to say we still maintain
tenuous overmatch?
General McConville. Yes, Congresswoman. What I would say is
we are at an inflection point right now. So the systems that we
basically developed in the 1980s, you know, the Big Five weapon
systems, the Abrams and all of those type systems, the doctrine
that we developed, the training, all of those things we
developed, we have incrementally improved over the last 40
years.
I think we are at a point right now where we must transform
the Army to put us on a path to keep us at the overmatch we
need. So what I am talking about, it is not just the six
modernization priorities, which is the 31+4 systems. It is new
doctrine. It is joint all-domain operations of how we are going
to fight as a joint service. And I add a ``C'' to ``combined
all-domain operations'' because we are going to fight with our
allies and partners. It is new organizations we are building,
like the Multi-Domain Task Force. It is going to give us long-
range precision effects, long-range precision fires, that we
need to have to penetrate this anti-access/area denial
capabilities developing. It is new ways we train. It is new
ways that we bring things on board.
And, more importantly, it is a 21st Century Talent
Management System where we manage people and compete for people
very differently.
All of those things need to be done. And as we discuss
this, people are going to say, well, the barracks aren't this
or this. You know, we are trying to take the money we have and
apply it so we are postured the best we can with the money we
have been given for the future.
Ms. Cheney. Well, I appreciate that, and I think that is a
key point for the American people to understand, that you are
doing the best you can, but at this moment our adversaries are
not facing the same constraints.
In a contested environment, General, today, do you think
that the joint force would have dominance across the entire
spectrum?
General McConville. I do.
Ms. Cheney. Because 2 years ago, in 2018, as the Army began
to change the doctrine, there was testimony at that time that,
in fact, then we would not have. But do you think that we have
now increased our capacities and our capabilities, that they
have improved since 2018?
General McConville. I think we have. I think we are on a
good path right now. I feel comfortable with the Army we have.
I spent a lot of time talking to allies and partners and moving
around, and I have fought with this Army, and I feel pretty
comfortable that we are on the right path with the Army we
have. And, again, I think where we are going is going to give
us not the tenuous overmatch. I think it is going to give us
significant overmatch that we need for the future.
Ms. Cheney. Well, I would also just urge that we can't get
to that significant overmatch if we don't have the resources,
and time is not on our side.
And I appreciated your comments about whole of government,
but, again, I come back to the notion that the deterrence
fundamentally requires that our adversaries understand we have
the capability and the will, and that is the military
capability and the will.
And so, Secretary Wormuth, could you explain how you are
thinking about deterrence in new ways? Because it seems pretty
clear that being able to depend upon overmatch, being able to
depend upon dominance across every domain isn't where we are
headed with this budget. So what are the new ways that you are
thinking about effective deterrence in that world?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, I would say a couple of
things. First of all, I think one, you know, area of overmatch
that we have is our relationships with allies and partners.
And, you know, I firmly believe that part of our deterrent
is going to be signaling clearly that we have friends that
China doesn't have in the theater, for example, who would be
willing to be with us. And the Army has put a lot of emphasis
and I think is well positioned to strengthen and thicken that
network of relationships of allies and partners.
I think another area that we need to work on and that we
are working on with things like our artificial intelligence
integration----
Ms. Cheney. My time has expired, Secretary. I look forward
to continuing that discussion. I think that there are no amount
of allies that can substitute if we allow our adversaries to
get ahead of us from a capability standpoint.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Morelle is recognized for 5 minutes.
I think you are still muted, Mr. Morelle. Could you try and
unmute yourself?
All right. Mr. Kim is recognized for 5 minutes.
We will try and get back to Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the two of
you for coming on. It is great to see the both of you again.
I wanted to start with you, Secretary Wormuth. About a week
ago, a little over a week ago, there was an article in The
Washington Post about hunger concerns in our military,
particularly with regard to reservists saying that, you know,
there are increasing data showing that there is hunger and food
insecurity amongst our service members and their families.
In that same article there was a spokesperson for the Guard
that said that he was skeptical about the food insecurity
census data and that he had not encountered service members who
have complained of household hunger.
So I guess I just wanted to kind of get a sense of how the
Department of Defense and how you see this. Is this a problem
that you are aware of or do you feel like it is something that
is under control?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. And it is good
to see you.
I think, you know, this is not an area that I have been
able to dig in extensively in terms of having a lot of
analytical data, but certainly I have heard anecdotally some
expressions of concern about food insecurity. And I think if
you look at the--you know, our military families have suffered
a lot of hardships during this past year with COVID, as have
millions of Americans, and so it is entirely possible to me
that there may be families, you know, with spouses who have
lost their jobs, for example, that may be contributing to this.
I think what we are trying to do for starters certainly is
to make sure that we are providing educational resources to our
soldiers and their families to help them with things like
financial planning to make sure that they know what resources
are available, to help them with food insecurity if they are
struggling.
Mr. Kim. Well, I appreciate your response and the way that
you approached it because I think that this is something that
clearly we all need to look into more and try and figure out
what it is that we can understand. I mean, I look at the
priorities, and your testimony is saying that your top
priorities are about investing in people and sustaining
readiness.
And certainly I think, you know, investing in people and
sustaining readiness, you know, starts with making sure that we
have our service members and their families being able to have
what they need to be able to be healthy.
So I was a little alarmed by just the skepticism that was
kind of laid out by that one spokesperson. So I would love to
be able to continue to work on this because I can tell you from
my end, we have indications and we have reports in my district
of community service organizations needing to provide food
assistance to dozens of service member families in my district
and it has been getting worse.
So this is something that I have been worried about for
quite a few months, and I just feel like this is something that
we need to address. I think we can all agree that no one in
uniform should go hungry. I mean, I would love to say no one in
America should go hungry. I think that is something as well
that we recognize, but those that protect us.
In that same vein, another thing that I would like to just
get on your radar, may not be something you are tracking right
at the forefront, but, you know, there is a piece of
legislation that I am trying to work forward with my colleague,
Trent Kelly, called The Healthcare for Our Troops Act, and if
you don't mind, kind of take a look at this, but it is the same
kind of approach.
It is saying that right now we have over 120,000, if not
more, Guard and reservists wearing a uniform that don't have
healthcare, and that seems like a huge problem. That seems like
a readiness issue.
That seems like a problem in terms of just treating people
with decency and especially those that are there to try and
protect us. So I just wanted to get it on your radar and would
love to be able to follow up with you.
But I think you would agree, Secretary, that, again, anyone
that wears a uniform should be able to have the food that they
need, to be able to provide for their family, and certainly,
when they are certainly putting themselves in harm's way,
should have the healthcare that they need, too. Is that
correct?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, Congressman. And as you know, you
know, when our guardsmen, soldiers, men or women, are
mobilized, you know, particularly for a length of time beyond
30 days, I believe, they do qualify for healthcare insurance in
that phase; but there are certainly some who, you know, if they
don't have civilian employer coverage, healthcare can be a
challenge. So that is certainly something I would like to look
into with you.
Mr. Kim. I think that is something that we can deliver for
them and especially given what they have done. We look at what
Guard and reservists have done over the last year, all the
different mission sets we have been pushing them towards, so I
would love to be able to work with you on that.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Votes have been called. Mr. Kim, could you do me a favor
and stick around for like 5 minutes? I hate to do this
publicly, but I have got to run and vote and come back. We need
someone to run the committee. I will go and do that.
Mr. Bacon, you are recognized for 5 minutes. I will be
right back.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member. Madam Secretary and General McConville, you are both
doing a great job today, so I appreciate your leadership.
Most of my questions are directed to the general. First, on
long-range fires, there is a need. China has an asymmetrical
advantage. But I am a big believer, proponent for the B-21 and
the Navy long-range fires. That is not to say there is not a
place for the Army version here. My concern is housing and
basing.
Are we confident we can find countries in the INDOPACOM
region that will take these weapon systems?
General McConville. I think, Congressman, if we take a look
around the world--and I don't want to get ahead of certain
countries because their politics may not be such, but I know
one country that a lot of people thought that we couldn't get
troops into, and at one time, based on interests, we were
500,000 troops there.
So I think things can change, and what we are looking at is
providing that option. There are some places where we certainly
can get that capability as set, and then as far as the ability
to actually base that, that is a discussion that we will have
to have. But I don't want to get in front of some of our allies
and partners, especially in this environment.
Mr. Bacon. Well, I see a need, but I hate to see it
undercut two other long-range capabilities that we know we can
find basing for. But I just think that is the long pole in the
tent and----
General McConville. I would be glad to discuss it as part
of another venue. I think it would be worthwhile to have that
discussion.
Mr. Bacon. Okay.
General McConville. Because it is certainly worthy of
discussion. And I think from a military standpoint, we should
not limit ourselves to some of the options, especially when we
are taking a look at what we see the future threat, at least
from where I sit.
Mr. Bacon. Well, I think multiple angles of attacking
capability are needed, so I would be sympathetic.
When it comes to Taiwan, what more can we do to improve
deterrence there? Because day one of China attacking is a day
too late. What we do now is deterrence.
General McConville. Well, I think from a Taiwan standpoint,
you know, them having the appropriate capabilities and
capacities, it is a fairly large country. But, I mean, when you
think about what--if I was to give them advice, anti-access/
area denial, how do you get that? You get that with an
integrated air and missile defense capability, and you get that
with some type of anti-amphibious capability, and I would make
sure they had that.
Mr. Bacon. I am totally with you, absolutely, and I think
we have to work now to ensure they have access to these
capabilities.
Also, I just want to say I agree with your concerns about
removing commanders' case disposition authority. I think--I am
a five-time commander in the Air Force myself--having two chain
of commands would create friction and concerns, I believe. I
think it undermines the cohesion of a squadron. But if we are
going to do it, we should limit it to Article 120 offenses. So
can you elaborate on your proposal to make changes on a 3-day
trial basis and why this would be beneficial to the force?
General McConville. Three-day, I am not sure--are you
talking about to the Secretary, Inhofe letter? Is that the one
that you are----
Mr. Bacon. Correct. Thank you.
General McConville. I guess I am a believer in commanders.
This certainly had an opportunity to give best military advice
both to you all and to the Secretary of Defense, and there is
going to be a position coming forward. I trust commanders.
Commanders are going to implement these type of things. And
at the same time there is going to be a decision made on what
is the best way to get after that, and once that decision is
made, since I have had my chance to give my best military
advice, I will follow that decision.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. And I appreciate your position on it.
As a five-time commander, I agree with you.
Right now we are involved with Poland with the Enhanced
Forward Presence mission there. I worry about the Baltics. I am
the chairman of the Baltic Security Caucus. I think that is the
most vulnerable area when it comes to NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization] and Russia. What more can we do to also
improve deterrence from the Baltic states?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, one thing I think we can
do--and the Chief I think alluded to this a little bit in his
discussion earlier about Special Forces--is really provide--you
know, I think there is--we want the Baltics to present a
deterrent to Russia, and I think part of what we can do in the
Army is have our special operations forces work with the Baltic
militaries to help them in terms of, you know, frankly,
developing kind of potentially resistance, what I would call
resistance capabilities.
And I think the Balts can do that relatively inexpensively,
but they would benefit I think quite a bit from our expertise
and, you know, deep knowledge base with our Special Forces.
Mr. Bacon. Let me just close and say we have rotating units
going in and out of the Baltics.
I would sure like to see a more permanent presence, if they
are amenable to it, because I think it makes deterrence more
assured if you are coming from the perspective of the Russians.
But I am out of time, so I have to yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Kim [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
We are going to turn it over to Mr. Morelle. Mr. Morelle,
over to you.
Mr. Morelle. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to
the Secretary and general for being here, for your testimony,
for your service to our country.
Secretary Wormuth, I wanted to go back and follow up a
little bit on a line of questioning my colleague,
Representative Horsford, began with some time ago regarding
weapons accountability. And having read some of the articles on
this question, gun safety is critically important to all of us
as Americans, and given the recent spike in violence, much of
it with illegal weapons, I wanted to just follow up on the task
force that you said the Army set up, and I look forward to
tracking the progress and the recommended changes.
It was a little concerning to me, I think there was a
significant discrepancy in the number of missing weapons
reported in the Associated Press articles versus what the task
force has found. It was about a discrepancy of maybe 500 or
more weapons. And I wondered if looking--first of all, just
figure out whether the task force is going to look at that
discrepancy and try to understand what has caused it and to
look at the trends of the lost weapons, is the task force also
addressing how to make sure that reported losses in the future
are accurate?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes, you are right. There is a discrepancy between the
figure that the Associated Press has reported and what we are--
what we have found to date based on the documentation that the
Army has available to it, and certainly we will look into that
to understand the nature of that discrepancy. I am not
intimately familiar with the records, if you will, that the
Associated Press based its reporting on.
But we will look into that, and we are certainly trying to,
you know, use the most authoritative documentation that is
available to the Army to keep track of this. And if there are
systemic issues that arise, we will absolutely develop
recommendations to address them, and I would be happy to
discuss that with you at that time.
Mr. Morelle. I appreciate that. And I would say that I
think that the report suggests that they feel like the number
that they have made may be undercounted, and it is certainly
not just the Army. They acknowledge the other services as well.
I appreciated hearing you say how trained soldiers are to
be responsible and that the entire unit focuses on retrieval.
The fact that the weapons are going missing, I am sure to you
and to me and to most people who read the articles, is
concerning. Is the task force considering changes in training
to ensure greater accountability and reduced loss on the part
of soldiers?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I don't think the task
force has yet, you know, come to conclusions about what the key
shortfalls are or, you know, areas that are problematic; but if
our work reveals that we need to change or increase our
training to make sure we have got accountability, we will do
that.
Mr. Morelle. Great.
And I would just leave you with this, and I appreciate your
candor and I recognize you are probably just getting into
looking at the subject; but I am just hoping that we will
certainly have accurate reporting, that there will be
transparency.
And, lastly, given the number of reported violent incidents
around the country, some of them involving weapons that are
being obtained from the military, I would certainly hope that
we will have continued communication between the Army and the
Congress about just the nature of the problem, what is being
done, and whether or not we are able to make some inroads in
addressing it.
So thank you for your testimony, for all your good work.
And I yield back to the chair.
Mr. Kim. Next we are going to call on, if he is available,
Representative Scott.
Well, thank you so much.
Right now, as you know, we are in the middle of votes, so
we are certainly having a few members kind of scrounge around
so--but I wanted to thank the two of you for coming here and
for us to be able to have this conversation. It is so
incredibly important as we are thinking through here some of
our next steps and to make sure that we are giving our military
the resources that they need to be as strong as they are.
So appreciate your service there, and we are going to gavel
out on this hearing.
Thank you so very much.
[Whereupon, at 1:28 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ

Secretary Wormuth. The Army has currently established gender-
neutral grading standards on the Army Combat Fitness Test (ACFT). The
required number of repetitions or time limits for each event is exactly
the same for men and women. Prior to considering other modifications,
and before the final decision to fully implement the ACFT, we are
accumulating further data across the Army, in all three components. The
Army is collecting this data while awaiting a congressionally directed
independent study as well.   [See page 41.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI

Mr. Garamendi. Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, I am
concerned that the Army does not know when it is dependent on China for
critical and irreplaceable components and materials. In particular,
PCBs and other microelectronics are often sourced from China, or even
assembled into components in China, without any need to report that
fact to the Army or DOD. Are you comfortable with this situation, where
3rd, 4th, or 5th tier subcontractors are making critical electronic
components that enable next-generation Army systems, like IVAS and
JADC2? Would you agree that understanding the extent of the problem is
a key need for the Army in determining how resilient its systems are
against foreign infiltration or disruption?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. With regard to security
risk, the Army has program protection plans in place to ensure that
components are reviewed and tested prior to their inclusion in Army
equipment, including electronic equipment. However, in addition to such
efforts, we must continuously work to understand and assess the risk in
our supply chain in order to further reduce risk. The microelectronics
supply chain has become global in nature, driven by market forces to
lower cost. The Department of Defense is less than 1% of the
microelectronics demand and has therefore limited leverage to influence
suppliers. To manage this risk, the Army is working with the Office of
the Secretary of Defense to support the Interagency Defense
Microelectronics Cross-Functional Team (DMCFT), which will address
these issues in microelectronics. By using a whole of government
approach, DMCFT will address the key microelectronics challenges to
deliver capabilities for current and future missions. As an example,
DMCFT will seek to ensure access to domestic fabrication, packaging,
and testing facilities and the development of tools and capabilities
for advanced supply chain analysis and integrity. It is also the
intention of the DMCFT to understand current part usage, the risks
associated with legacy components, and to develop digital engineering
techniques to aid in the modernization of these legacy parts.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER
Mrs. Hartzler. Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, I am
deeply concerned about the budget request for the procurement of Army
ammunition, specifically the small and medium caliber account. The FY22
President's Budget request reflects severe reductions in the budget
request for the 5.56MM, 7.62MM, and .50 Caliber ammunition. The
reductions from the FY21 enacted levels equate to reductions of 26%,
28%, and 49% respectively, for an overall reduction of approximately
30% in the small arms ammunition account.
This is concerning to me because last year's FY22 FYDP reflected an
increase for each of these accounts. I am concerned that these severe
reductions will affect the overall readiness of our ground forces and
severely handicap their ability to train and to fight. Additionally,
the severity of these reductions will have an impact on the ability to
sustain a workforce at the Lake City Ammunition Plant, the location
where the Army plans to produce the 6.8mm ammunition for the Next
Generation Squad Weapon. With these proposed cuts, the Army is risking
losing an experienced workforce, which could take nine months to a year
to restore.
Why is the Army requesting such a large reduction from what was
previous planned for small arms ammunition? What solutions are being
considered within the Pentagon to mitigate risks to the health and
resiliency of America's critical defense industrial support base?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The Army ammunition
enterprise completed an extensive analysis determining our current
levels of ammunition globally for small and medium caliber ammunition
required to support the national strategy. In this process, the Army
munitions requirements process identifies war reserve, training, and
test munitions requirements as part of the Total Munitions
Requirements. The Center for Army Analysis conducted modeling and
simulation of the Combatant Command war plans to ensure their munitions
needs are met. At this time, there is sufficient inventory of small and
medium caliber ammunition to support COCOM requirements. Based on a
comparison of the munitions requirement to the current and projected
inventory, the Army was able to determine the funding levels necessary
to maintain sufficient inventory to meet current requirements as well
as the necessary funding required to replenish small and medium caliber
consumption to meet future requirements. This process also took into
consideration the organic industrial base by ensuring that the funding
reductions to small and medium caliber ammunition maintained minimum
sustainment rates, which will protect the critical production
capabilities at the Lake City Ammunition Plant and other facilities.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON
Mr. Moulton. In the Department's budget justification documents, it
clearly states that ``the Department is prioritizing China as the
number one pacing challenge and has included the Pacific Deterrence
Initiative to . . . bolster deterrence and maintain our competitive
advantage.'' The Pacific Deterrence Initiative is a clear demonstration
of the Department's commitment to matching and surpassing the threat of
China. And if you look through the initiative, there are funding lines
going to the Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, Missile Defense Agency, and
others . . . but zero funding lines directly for the Army.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, I think it's interesting
that in one of the Department's most prominent initiatives for
countering China, it did not see any role for the Army. Why should
Congress continue to fund the Army at a steady rate when we all agree
we need to focus on China, and the Department doesn't seem to think the
Army plays a big role in that fight?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The Secretary of Defense,
the Army, and the entire Department of Defense are committed to
prioritizing China as the number one pacing threat. The FY 2022 Pacific
Deterrence Initiative (PDI) justification book features a $5.1 billion
subset of the Department's FY 2022 budget request in targeted
investments for the Indo-Pacific region. Although Army investments and
activities were not included in this PDI amount, DOD did approve $1.9
billion within the Army top-line for continuing and expanding the Army
commitment in the Indo-Pacific.
The Army has had, and continues to play, a critical role in
deterring Chinese aggression and in opening doors in the Indo-Pacific
for both diplomatic and military-to-military engagement. Given the full
scope of the challenges in the Indo-Pacific, the Army views the
development of advanced, asymmetric capabilities and organizational
capacity designed to operate in an anti-access/area denial environment
as centrally important to Pacific deterrence. To expand and enhance the
Army's commitment to the Indo-Pacific security environment, the Army
has undergone a multi-year effort to develop the necessary structure to
rapidly move forces into competition or conflict. The Army maintains a
persistent presence with allies and partners through Security Force
Assistance Brigade (SFAB) and Multi-Domain Task Force (MDTF)
deployments, as well as through the establishment of a theater
processing, exploitation, and dissemination center that improves
critical intelligence and targeting capabilities. These Army formations
and initiatives directly contribute to sustaining and deepening our
alliances and partnerships in the Indo-Pacific, advancing the U.S.
vision for a free and open, rules-based Indo-Pacific order and enabling
collective responses to common challenges that undermine security and
stability. Furthermore, the Army continues to provide forces that are
resilient, ready, and postured to respond quickly and effectively
against aggression in the region.
Maintaining military readiness and promoting experimentation and
innovation is a critical element of deterring aggression and preventing
conflict. The Army actively executes theater-level joint exercises to
do so, including two exercises this year as part of Defender Pacific
2021. The first, Forager 21, a U.S. Army Pacific (USARPAC) exercise,
tested the ability to flow land power forces into occupied territory
through combined Army and Japanese Ground Self Defense Force airborne
operations; integrated Army, Air Force, and Coast Guard elements; and
experimented employment of the Army's Multi-Domain Task Force. The
second exercise, Talisman Sabre 21, took place in the summer of 2021.
Talisman Sabre is the largest bilateral combined training activity
between the Australian Defense Force and the United States military. It
exercised combined operations between the U.S., Australia, South Korea,
Canada, Japan, New Zealand, and the UK. As part of this exercise the
U.S. Army launched the first Patriot Interceptor from Australia. These
activities, which are enabled by the Army's budget request, signal and
emphasize the Army's commitment to the Indo-Pacific security
environment and support to our allies and partners in the region.
In addition to exercises, the Army's FY 2022 request supports
increased readiness with requested funds for the Joint Pacific
Multinational Readiness Center (JPMRC), an exportable Combat Training
Center (CTC) system. This will enable USARPAC to ensure the readiness
of two Brigade Combat Teams, as well as numerous other brigade-sized
elements at home station in Alaska and Hawaii who must train, operate,
and fight in either tropical jungle/archipelagic conditions or extreme
cold/mountainous conditions. This capability is adapting how the Army
generates, postures, trains and equips its forces for the Indo-Pacific
and Arctic, while seeking smart efficiencies.
Equally vital for the Indo-Pacific environment are Army theater
support capabilities and a forward force posture that ensures
resiliency. The funding requested allows the Army to expand the number
of Army prepositioned stock locations in the theater, reducing
strategic lift requirements and enabling rapid Army delivery of vital
theater opening/port opening capabilities, logistics, munitions and
medical sustainment stocks to the Joint Force from dispersed locations.
Additionally, the Army will optimize Army Watercraft Systems (AWS)--
that facilitate joint operations in the INDOPACOM theater--in three
ways: (1) increasing the ability to deliver supplies to remote island
locations; (2) refurbishing and expanding AWS assets in the western
Pacific, to include posting the Army's two newest Koruda Class
Logistics Support Vessels (LSVs) in Japan; and (3) fielding new units
in Japan and other strategic positions to pair transportation, ship-to-
shore connector vessels, and austere port management throughout the
Indo-Pacific.
To win in an Indo-Pacific theater contingency, the DOD must sustain
and grow a lethal and resilient force able to protect the interests of
the United States as well as our allies and partners. Continuing to
modernize Army formations and capabilities while improving key theater
support elements, ensures the Joint Force is best equipped, trained,
and positioned to accomplish this in competition or conflict. The
Army's FY 2022 budget, specifically the $1.9 billion tied to the Indo-
Pacific, supports Pacific Area of Responsibility training and
operations, experimentation and innovation within the Army's signature
modernization efforts, enhances interoperability, and enables
sustainment and logistical support to key theater enabling units. To
meet emerging challenges, the Army is transforming to provide the Joint
Force with the speed, range, and convergence of cutting edge
technologies that will generate the decision dominance and overmatch
required to win the next fight; achievable with Congressional support
through timely, adequate, predictable, and sustained funding.
Mr. Moulton. Secretary Wormuth, I appreciated your opening
statement and its emphasis on modernization for the Army. But it isn't
enough to just buy new equipment: we also need to train our forces to
use that equipment effectively with future warfighting environments in
mind. We can buy all the unmanned ground and air vehicles we want, but
it won't do us any good if deployed units don't know how to use them
and haven't integrated them into their concepts of operation. Has the
Army updated its training for enlisted ranks and officers to integrate
new technologies that they will have to use in the future, like drones
and AI-augmented equipment? Has the Army updated its education
curriculums for officers to shape their decision-making in a way that
accounts for new technologies like AI that will change the speed and
complexity of their operating environments?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, the Army continuously updates training and
professional military education to account for changes in technology
and to prepare Soldiers and leaders to operate in complex environments.
The Army is supporting the development and fielding of capabilities
needed to train and educate the Army for Multi-Domain Operations (MDO).
Emerging capabilities, such as cyber, space, and electronic warfare,
are integrated into both home station training and training rotations
at our Combat Training Centers (CTCs). To support the larger warfighter
exercises used to train and develop leaders at the division, corps, and
theater Army headquarters levels, the simulation capabilities are
continually updated and includes cyber, electronic warfare, and space
capabilities.
Additionally, the Army is identifying those camps, posts, and
stations that must be modernized for our Soldiers to maximize the
employment of new technologies. These improvements include: (1) MDO and
Mobile Protected Firepower capable range complexes, (2) upgraded CTC
OPFOR capabilities that will not only test maneuver and fires, but also
our ability to fight against electronic warfare, cyber, and degraded
space operational environments, and (3) the implementation of the
Synthetic Training Environment.
Regarding improvements to the Army's professional military
education (PME) program, the Command and General Staff College (CGSC)
incorporates artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies
into the curriculum, including during the capstone division-level
tabletop exercise. Additionally, the newly developed Information
Advantage Scholars program offers electives that explore AI, cyber, and
other emerging technologies in greater depth. At the School for
Advanced Military Studies (SAMS), students receive one lesson specific
to AI, and they consider AI and other emerging technologies in general
within their ``Future Operational Environment'' block of instruction.
Additionally, conceptual and soon-to-be-fielded capabilities are
inherent to the tabletop exercise design, so graduates can successfully
employ the capabilities they will soon see within the force. Lastly,
while company grade PME does not specifically address new technologies
or AI, it does develop the fundamental critical and creative thinking
skills required to effectively employ decision-making processes and
includes content regarding the military implications of rapidly
changing technology and an increasingly complex environment.
Mr. Moulton. General McConville, as we hopefully reach the tail-end
of COVID, it seems appropriate to think about its impact on the force
and how we can be better prepared for the next biological threat. It's
clear that COVID took a toll on operational readiness, and it seems
unlikely that this is the last biothreat the force will face. I'm aware
of various efforts, ranging from mass surveillance testing to biothreat
detection equipment, that might improve future responses, but I'm
concerned that DOD will neglect these potential solutions now that the
immediate threat of COVID has passed. How does this year's budget
prepare the Army for future biothreats, whether they come from
unintentional or malicious sources?
General McConville. The Army will continue to include biological
threats (both naturally occurring and manmade) as a part of Army
modernization. The FY22 Army budget request includes investment into
vaccines, therapeutics, and drugs to close gaps where the Army cannot
close them by other means. The Army has also recently published an Army
Biological Defense Strategy (ABDS) to help focus Army efforts to
maintain the Army's capability and capacity to accomplish its mission
and ensure readiness in the face of biological hazards and threats. The
Army recently added the considerations in the ABDS into the Army
Modernization Strategy. The Army will continue to work closely with
Defense-wide efforts to ensure that biological defense is prioritized
in such a way to ensure that the capabilities are available to meet
emerging threats.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL
Mr. Carbajal. Secretary Wormuth, the science and technology
directorate is critical for the Army's ability to develop
groundbreaking capabilities for the next generation of warfighting.
However, I have concerns that the Army is willing to sacrifice
investments in S&T in order to resource near-term investments and
modernization priorities. The Army's University Affiliated Research
Center, the Institute for Collaborate Biotechnologies, is located in my
district at UCSB. The ICB conducts 6.1 basic research projects and used
to receive funding for 6.2 applied research funding until FY2019. How
will the Department further utilize Army UARCs for applied research
projects? And more generally, how is this budget balancing needed
research that will support long-term projects for short-term
modernization projects?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army maintains a science and technology
(S&T) portfolio balanced between investment in near- and mid-term
research aligned to the Army Modernization Priorities and investment in
mid- and far-term research in technologies that will enable the next
generation of military capability. Army funding for far-term basic
research investments remains steady. Total Army S&T funding in the
President's Budget Request (PBR) for Fiscal Year 2022 (FY22) is $2.7
billion, approximately $100 million above PBR FY21. In the PBR for
FY22, the Army specifically realigns 6.2 and 6.3 resources from near-
term research aligned to the 6 Modernization Priorities to mid- and
far-term research into enabling technologies to lay the technological
foundation for the future force. The Army's University Affiliated
Research Centers (UARCs), including the Institute for Collaborative
Biotechnologies (ICB), conduct innovative basic research aligned to the
Army's Priority Research Areas. The Army is actively seeking
opportunities to transition innovations from the UARCs into our 6.2
applied research programs. Recent transition successes highlighted by
the ICB include the large-scale Army production of protein-based
materials emerging from basic research at the ICB, and transfer of
biological additive manufacturing technologies and materials from the
ICB to Army labs.
Mr. Carbajal. General McConville, as the Space Force is being stood
up, the services invested in the space domain are having to adjust. How
is the Army working through reassignment of personnel and programs to
the Space Force? What efforts do you envision remaining Army core
competencies when it comes to the Space domain?
General McConville. The Army is fully supporting the establishment
of the Space Force. Currently, the Army is planning and executing the
transfer of two critical space-related capabilities. The first is the
wideband communications satellite payload planning and control
function. The Army is conducting deliberate planning for the phased
transfer of responsibility for this function. At transfer, the U.S.
Space Force will assume responsibility for organization, training, and
equipping this function, as well as presenting it to the U.S. Space
Command for employment. Our priority and focus is to ensure the timely
transfer of this capability without disrupting this important mission.
The second transfer will be the theater missile warning and battlespace
characterization function with its associated military authorizations.
This is currently in the initial planning phase. Additionally, the Army
assigned and detailed 21 officers and two civilians to the Office of
the Chief of Space Operations to assist in creating and establishing
the Space Force service headquarters and operational structure. The
Army also developed and published an InterService Transfer Policy for
Regular Army Enlisted Service Members to transfer to the Space Force,
to help provide manning support, as required, from all ranks and
specialties. The Army and the Chief of Space Operations have agreed
that the Army will retain groundbased space control capabilities, which
are essential for success in Multi-Domain Operations. The Army will
retain its core space expertise in our Space Cadre, consisting
primarily of Army Space Operations Officers, which is a career field
that Army officers can choose after initial assignments in other basic
branches. The Army will continue research, development, testing, and
experimentation with space-enabled capabilities focused specifically on
supporting Army requirements.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER
Mr. Gallagher. Secretary Wormuth, during your confirmation hearing,
you called out long-range precision fires as your #1 modernization
priority. How do the Army's Mobile Medium Range Missile and Precision
Strike Missile contribute to the Army's plan in light of threats from
China and Russia, and what would be the consequence if these programs
went unfunded?
Secretary Wormuth. After a detailed analysis of our peer
competitors across the globe against our existing capability gaps, we
have identified Long Range Precision Fires as a vital modernization
priority. To alleviate those gaps and in coordination with the Navy and
Air Force, the Army determined the need for hypersonic weapons, mid-
range capable weapons, and a deep strike missile. The Army's Mid-Range
Capability (MRC) and Precision Strike Missile (PrsM) contributes to the
joint fight by providing the Combatant Commander with a maritime strike
and deep fires capability. The MRC complements the Long Range
Hypersonic Weapon (LRHW) and provides the Joint Force commander
additional capability against maritime and littoral targets. The PrSM
first complements, then ultimately replaces, the Army Tactical Missile
(ATACMS), providing theater and corps commanders the ability to shape
the deep fight in large scale combat operations. The PrSM will evolve
to have a maritime strike capability, enabling the Army's ability to
deny opponents access to the sea lanes. The loss of program funding for
these weapons will impact the Army's ability to compete, and win, in
multiple theaters including the Pacific.
Mr. Gallagher. General McConville, I am concerned by the Army's
decision to terminate out the Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck
Extended Service Program (HEMTT ESP) modernization program in the face
of significant requirements across all three components of the Army for
this essential combat enabling program. Given the important role these
vehicles play for our National Guard and Reserve forces, and that we
may have to rely on the Guard and Reserve more in the future, I have a
hard time understanding the program termination. General McConville, do
you agree that the HEMTT A4 fleet is an important enabler to support
Brigade Combat Team formations?
General McConville. The Army fully recognizes the important role
that the Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck plays in Brigade Combat
Team formations. Currently, the Army has 100% of its HEMTT requirement
on-hand and over 70% of the HEMTT fleet has been modernized to the A4
configuration. Earlier this year, we started a comprehensive study of
our tactical wheeled vehicle fleet in support of Multi-Domain
Operations. The results of that study will inform future HEMTT
modernization requirements.
Mr. Gallagher. General, I am also concerned about the Army's
failure to maintain a stable industrial base for tactical wheeled
vehicles. The rapid shifts in funding for programs like the JLTV and
others make it hard for the small businesses that support this
industrial base to stay in business. Given the importance of a strong,
stable industrial base in that can surge capacity in the event of war,
how does the Army determine the breaking point of an industrial base
that could be called upon at any minute to ramp up production or
restart from a production break?
General McConville. The Army's Tactical Wheeled Vehicle (TWV) fleet
is a critical enabler for the Army's employment of lethal and non-
lethal capabilities in all formations. Funding requests are balanced
against the Army's modernization efforts, aligned with the National
Defense Strategy. The Army monitors the TWV industrial base through
periodic engagements with industry partners, industrial base
assessments, and other methods. The Army mitigates risk by maintaining
a warm TWV industrial base to support ongoing modernization and
readiness.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KEATING
Mr. Keating. General McConville mentioned the importance of allies
and partners. Secretary Wormuth mentioned supply chain issues that the
Covid pandemic highlighted.
What plans beyond our domestic supply chain does the Army have for
a second ring for an allied supply chain network?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The challenges of global
supply chains require the Army to actively work with our allies to
mitigate risks in the availability and cost of items. Leveraging of our
National Technology and Industrial Base partners (Australia, Canada,
and the United Kingdom) and other close allies allows us to broaden our
access to components and spread the demand over a large base to ensure
ready production capacity. This approach ensures that the U.S. has
access to the best technology while strengthening our relationship with
partner nations.
Mr. Keating. Regarding the changes to Defender Europe's scheduled
exercises, how have our allies reacted to this change? What
modifications have occurred in our training procedures?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. During the onset of
COVID, impacts to allies and partner nations supporting DEFENDER 22
varied based on their internal COVID-19 control measures. However, our
allies and partner nations are now able to participate in the scheduled
exercises. DEFENDER 22 will employ Army, Joint Forces, allies, and
partner forces to exercise the Persistent Training Environment in
Europe (PTE-E); all exercise and training objectives will be met.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GAETZ
Mr. Gaetz. Given the difficulty of supporting large civilian
populations with comparatively small NG force structure in certain
States/territories, why does NGB refuse to consider guardsmen-to-
citizen ratios when allocating new, or re-allocating existing, force
structure?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The National Guard Bureau
follows Department of Defense, Army, and Air Force guidance and
processes in determining force structure size, mix, and allocation. The
National Guard Bureau does not explicitly consider the size of a
state's population in determining where to allocate force structure;
however, it does consider the ability to recruit and the propensity to
serve, which indirectly accounts for population size. A metric
considering strict population size without consideration of potential
for recruitment could result in a force structure that could not be
sustained in the state.
Mr. Gaetz. Given the fact that some States/territories are forced
to use their NG troops for domestic response year after year much more
than others, why doesn't NGB consider historical domestic operations
tempo data when deciding on force structure apportionment to help
``disaster-prone'' States relieve this strain?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The primary consideration
for National Guard capabilities is its federal mission as the combat
reserve for the Army. The Army National Guard allocates its portion of
the total Army force structure based on demographics, supportability,
and suitability, as well as the need to balance the allocation of
capabilities by echelon across the 54 states, territories, and the
District of Columbia. Disaster-prone states also have the option to
raise state militias to focus solely on the Governor's domestic
response needs in order to relieve strain on the Army National Guard
formations.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. As States voluntarily divest force structure, will the
National Guard Bureau, amongst its criteria for force structure
rebalance decisions, consider domestic up-tempo missions and population
growth, to relieve the strain on recruitment and retention on State
Guard formations?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. If states should
voluntarily divest force structure, the Army National Guard will
allocate force structure based on demographics, supportability,
suitability, and a balanced allocation of capabilities by echelon
across the 54 states, territories, and the District of Columbia. These
considerations are driven by the National Guard's primary purpose as
the combat reserve of the Army. Governors also have the option to raise
state militias to focus solely on the domestic response needs to
relieve strain on the Army National Guard formations.
Mr. Waltz. The Colonial Pipeline incident demonstrated how
adversaries can hit the homeland and affecting entire regions. The
lines between Federal and State missions are becoming increasingly
blurry. How can the National Guard Bureau better define ``Homeland
Defense'' when it comes the Federal and State response missions?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The lines between federal
and state missions are becoming increasingly blurred, especially within
the competition environment that is short of conflict. The National
Guard Bureau has a critical role within the Department of Defense to
address incidents that straddle federal and state jurisdiction. The
National Guard Bureau will coordinate with the Department of Defense to
better define the term ``Homeland Defense,'' and its relationship to
state response missions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. VEASEY
Mr. Veasey. The Army has repeatedly stated that long range
precision fires (LRPF) is the number one modernization priority.
However, the necessary sensing platforms are not properly funded or
prioritized right now. In order to execute the LRPF mission, an
airborne deep sensing capability that will carry both radar and signals
intelligence and will have the range to meet the global requirements
while operating a minimal fleet size must also be funded and
prioritized. This platform is the High Altitude Detection and
Exploitation System or HADES. Funding was provided in FY21 in the
EMARRS line with the intent to fund this capability as HADES and
additional funding is still being put against platforms that cannot
meet the requirements for global range and multi intelligence. What are
you doing to accelerate HADES as the solution to meet the requirement
for deep sensing to support long range precision fires?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army is pursuing a robust approach that will
accelerate the fielding of HADES and drive-down the programmatic and
operational risks associated with multi-intelligence Army ISR
capability development. In August 2020, the Army Requirements Oversight
Council approved the abbreviated requirements document for HADES.
However, the Army's Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
(ISR) Task Force is currently utilizing contractor-owned prototypes to
conduct a variety of technology demonstrations and Soldier touchpoints
in the Pacific and European theaters. Additionally, we continue to
exercise these surrogate systems in Army Futures Command-led
experiments, such as EDGE-21, Global Defender, and Project Convergence.
In FY22, the Army will expand on these essential experimental efforts
to refine the final HADES capability requirements, maximize competition
in the industrial-base, and reduce cost escalation for the follow-on
program of record. We are working with our joint partners to ensure the
Army's future investments in sensing platforms are fully aligned with
the strategic aims of the Joint Warfighting Concept and responsive to
the specific collection requirements levied by forward-deployed Army
and Joint Commanders.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. The Future Vertical Lift aircraft are an important
component of the Army's modernization strategy and will bring needed
speed, range, and maneuverability when it is fielded. While the
aircraft capabilities are vital, the aircraft alone does not constitute
a weapons system and does not provide overmatch capability against a
peer-threat and we must have an acquisition plan for the associated
sensors as well. What is the Army's timeline to plan to fund, develop,
and procure advanced mission sensors to integrate into rotorcraft
weapon systems? Additionally, FLRAA is the most expensive program in
the portfolio and is a few months from a final RFP release. How will
the Army's Final FLRAA RFP address the total weapon system needed to
fight and win in the peer near-peer conflict?
Secretary Wormuth. The FY22 Future Long-Range Assault Aircraft
(FLRAA) competitive contract award to a single vendor will encompass
the development, prototyping, flight test, and fielding of the FLRAA
weapons system, not just the air vehicle. The Future Attack
Reconnaissance Aircraft (FARA) and FLRAA programs are working in
conjunction to maximize mission equipment commonality, while optimizing
performance for each aircraft's unique mission and design. Both
programs utilize the Future Vertical Lift (FVL) architecture framework
of standards and interfaces, enabling future mission systems
commonality and adaptability. The FVL architecture provides the basis
for rapid hardware and software upgrades as the threat evolves.
To address the total FLRAA weapon system cost, the Request for
Proposals (RFP) maximizes competition, which allows the Army to
negotiate for competitively priced options and critical intellectual
property. In constructing the RFP, the Army consistently communicated
FLRAA's requirements to both Bell and Sikorsky-Boeing, incorporating
their feedback to improve the final RFP. The final FLRAA RFP was
released on 6 July 2021. The Army believes the resulting contract will
produce a weapon system that will contribute heavily in competition and
potential conflict.
Mr. Brown. The FARA and FLRAA mission equipment strategies have
taken two different approaches, even though their schedules are very
close. How is the Army creating synergies between the two platforms and
assessing ways to maximize the benefits of commonality in mission
systems? What is the projected budget required for the mission systems
for FARA and FLRAA over what would have been the FYDP if it was
delivered?
Secretary Wormuth. The FARA and FLRAA programs are working in
conjunction to maximize mission equipment commonality, while optimizing
performance for each aircraft's unique mission and design. Both
programs utilize the Future Vertical Lift (FVL) architecture framework
of standards and interfaces, enabling future mission systems
commonality and adaptability. The FVL architecture provides the basis
for rapid hardware and software upgrades as the threat evolves.
Further, the FVL ecosystem includes the use of a Modular Open Systems
Approach (MOSA). MOSA ensures that the design of each aircraft is
modular, specifies key/critical interfaces, and utilizes consensus
based upon standards. MOSA increases industry's business opportunities
and reduces the Government's dependence on single sources for numerous
hardware and software components. Lastly, the Army is pursuing ``leap-
ahead'' technologies for FVL through a disciplined approach. Achievable
and affordable technologies inform all FVL requirements documents.
Recent Congressional Budget Office and Center for Strategic and
International Studies reports provide indication that the Army's
timeline and plans for FARA and FLRAA are affordable.
FARA and FLRAA analyses, demonstrations, risk reduction, and
prototyping efforts will inform future budgets. The Army is committed
to keeping Congress updated on these efforts. Procurement requirements
will initially align to support the Army's First Unit Equipped target
of FY 2030 and will be informed by the vendors' performance throughout
developmental testing. The Army remains committed to the long-term
affordability of both FARA and FLRAA. This commitment includes goals
and caps on Average Procurement Unit Cost and Operations and
Sustainment costs, which really serve as the long-term measures of
affordability. The Army is committed to transparency regarding the FARA
and FLRAA programs, and will provide further information at appropriate
junctures, understanding the current Administration's ongoing efforts
regarding National Security and Defense Strategies.
Mr. Brown. Secretary Wormuth, what is the sensor architecture for
Long Range Precision Fires (LRPF) and how is this capability being
integrated into the modernization effort? How does organic ISR
capability within the Army affect the operational effectiveness of
LRPF?
Secretary Wormuth. The sensor architecture for Army Long Range
Precision Fires (LRPF) is one portion of the joint sensor architecture.
The Army's Tactical Intelligence Targeting Access Node (TITAN) will
receive intelligence data from surface, air, and space sensors from
multiple systems operating in all Services. TITAN will then quickly
produce actionable target information and relay that information to
command and control systems that will generate and transmit the Fire
Mission to a specific shooter. The Army is focusing on this
architecture in our Project Convergence series, reducing total response
time from target identification to fires launch from minutes to
seconds. The network is the critical element of the Army's fires
architecture. Organic ISR capabilities within Army forces enrich the
joint force's intelligence picture and reduce the potential for single
points of failure within the joint force. All elements of the joint
force, not just Army forces, benefit from Army organic ISR
capabilities, just as Army forces benefit from other Service, and even
multinational, ISR capabilities. Organic ISR forces also enable Army
forces to find and neutralize critical targets that may not be
supportable by limited national-level or other Service ISR
capabilities.
Mr. Brown. General McConville, it's critical that the Army is
equipped with the platforms and capabilities it needs to meet the
pacing threats of China and Russia. Investing in Army modernization
priorities will not only deter these competitors but also ensure
overmatch in potential future conflicts. What capabilities does the
Army need in the Indo-Pacific that are similar to the capabilities it
has in Europe, and how are they different? What are the Army's
projected force structure requirements for airborne deep sensing ISR
capabilities and how are you balancing the competing demands of near
peer/A2AD conflict in the two separate theaters of the IndoPacific and
in Europe?
General McConville. The Army requires Multi-Domain Operations
(MDO)-enabled capabilities, including at the division level, in Brigade
Combat Teams (BCTs), and with enablers. In addition, the Army requires
MDO enabled long range fires, cyber, and air defense capabilities in
both theaters. Looking ahead at projected force structure, the Army is
studying layered, multiintelligence, cross-service options for the
optimal mix of manned and unmanned systems arrayed at echelon from
Theater (MDTF) to the Tactical (BCT) hosting a variety of MDOaligned
aerial and non-aerial ISR capabilities. The Army is balancing competing
demands of near peer/A2AD conflict in separate theaters by prioritizing
investments in capabilities suitable for use against multiple threats,
including long range fires, air defense, cyber, electronic warfare,
network, and Soldier lethality.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. BICE
Mrs. Bice. I understand that the Army is not assembling the
Extended Range Cannon Artillery at Elgin, OK, but instead the program
is currently utilizing Army organic depots/arsenals for assembly of the
early prototypes. Earlier this spring, the Program Manager in an on-
line forum (Michigan Defense Exposition) identified that that ERCA will
be a two-part acquisition approach beyond these initial prototypes with
the first competition to validate the US Army designed/built prototypes
and the 2nd competition to select a vendor to build/assemble and
integrate ERCA kits onto a recently built M109A7 PIM howitzer. I
understand that the first part of that strategy (validate design) was
recently published by the Army as a Market Survey.
Could you please verify whether this is in fact the approved Army
acquisition strategy?
If so, how does this two-part acquisition strategy support GEN
McConville's testimony to field a battalion set in 2023 and the second
battalion set in 2024 in light of the Government Accounting Office
(GAO) May 2021 report that identified an 8 month schedule slip to the
ERCA program ``due to COVID, technology risks and technology immaturity
of 6 of the 8 key technologies for ERCA success''?
How does this acquisition plan, tied to the PIM production
reductions in this budget request affect expected work at Elgin, OK?
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville. The Extended Range Cannon
Artillery (ERCA) rapid prototyping strategy is a direct reflection of
the Army's intent to field a battalion set in 2023 by providing 18 ERCA
prototypes (one battalion) at the end of Fiscal Year 2023 (FY23) for a
one-year operational assessment throughout FY24. This timeline already
accounts for COVID-19 impacts and technology maturity issues. The
organic industrial base is building the rapid prototype systems and
commercial vendors are supplying some of the prototype components. For
the final production configuration, ERCA will transition from a rapid
prototyping effort to a traditional acquisition program. The production
strategy is in development to support fielding the first production
vehicles to the operational test unit in FY25 and will not affect the
ongoing Self-Propelled Howitzer Paladin Integrated Management (PIM)
production. The risk of impacts to the BAE facility at Elgin, Oklahoma
due to decreased funding for base PIM production is being assessed.

[all]
