- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-39] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-39]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2022 ARMY AND

MARINE CORPS GROUND SYSTEMS MODERNIZATION PROGRAMS

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 7, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-619              WASHINGTON : 2021

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey, Chairman

RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey, Vice     SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
Chair                            MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              DON BACON, Nebraska
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida         RONNY JACKSON, Texas
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Bill Sutey, Professional Staff Member
Kelly Repair, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hartzler, Hon. Vicky, a Representative from Missouri, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........     2
Norcross, Hon. Donald, a Representative from New Jersey,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces.........     1

WITNESSES

Bush, Douglas R., Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army for
Acquisition, Logistics and Technology, Department of the Army..     3
Murray, GEN John M., USA, Commanding General, Army Futures
Command........................................................     5
Stefany, Frederick J., Acting Assistant Secretary of the Navy for
Research, Development and Acquisition, Department of the Navy;
accompanied by LtGen Eric M. Smith, USMC, Commanding General,
U.S. Marine Corps Combat Development Command, and Deputy
Commandant for Combat Development and Integration..............     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Bush, Douglas R., joint with GEN John M. Murray..............    39
Norcross, Hon. Donald........................................    37
Stefany, Frederick J., joint with LtGen Eric M. Smith........    55

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Ms. Sherrill.................................................    69

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Brown....................................................    76
Dr. DesJarlais...............................................    73
Mr. Turner...................................................    73

FISCAL YEAR 2022 ARMY AND MARINE CORPS GROUND SYSTEMS MODERNIZATION
PROGRAMS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Monday, June 7, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Donald Norcross (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DONALD NORCROSS, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM NEW JERSEY, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND
LAND FORCES

Mr. Norcross. The hearing will come to order. The Tactical
Air and Land Forces Subcommittee meets today to review the Army
and Marine Corps ground modernization program for fiscal year
2022 budget request. Excuse me.
I would like to thank our witnesses for being with us today
and for the work done to put in together this year's budget
request to Congress.
Following a year of unprecedented challenges, the committee
is eager to hear details from today's witnesses on how the
service budget request will satisfy the equipment requirements
in the Army and Marine Corps both today and into the future.
The subcommittee will closely examine the choices made for
modernization, as well as how those choices are preserved and
reduce risk in our defense industrial base.
Certainly this year, COVID pandemic has elevated our
concerns for the successful management of the risk in the
industrial base. I am grateful to both Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, and senior leadership for their openness with this.
I also want to add for those men and women working
throughout the Nation at the depots, at the factories, during
the pandemic, we really appreciate what you have done, and it
is incredibly important to our country.
We are going to look at the following impacts on both the
military and civilian fronts, supporting their management
through this pandemic, and now look forward to restoring the
workforce to a safe, efficient operation.
The goal for both services is always to achieve a modern
ground force that can match or exceed our peer and near-peer
potential adversaries. Services must realistically assess their
requirement and make those tradeoffs at an acceptable risk
between investment priorities, current and future capabilities,
and the industrial base security and stability.
Across the past three budget cycles, Army and Marine Corps
have made significant changes and tough choices with respect to
their plans to develop, produce, and field future capabilities.
An essential matter of congressional oversight, we must have
the confidence that the Army and Marine Corps modernization
strategies are realistic, achievable, and affordable.
We understand that the services' budget request and
modernization plans, that many of the high-priority development
programs will soon enter low-rate initial production, complete
operational testing, and, if testing successfully, start full-
rate production.
The number of systems entering these phases at this time
creates a bow wave of new procurement funding that if not
budgeted means that the modernization strategy is not
achievable.
Today we will ask each of the witnesses to state for the
record that given the 2022 budget request and the assumed or
planned funding levels over the next 5 years, all priority
ground modernization programs are affordable and achievable.
The distinguished Army, Navy, and Marine Corps leaders
before the subcommittee today, as well as being qualified, they
are going to have to explain their modernization budget
requests.
I would like to welcome Mr. Doug Bush, Acting Assistant
Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics and
Technology; General John Murray, Commanding General, Army
Futures Command; Mr. ``Jay'' Stefany, Acting Assistant
Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and
Acquisition; and Lieutenant General Eric Smith, Commanding
General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command and the Deputy
Commandant for Combat Development and Integration.
We look forward to your testimony and discussing these
topics. But before we begin, I would like to turn to our
ranking member from the great State of Missouri, Mrs. Hartzler,
for any comments she has.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Norcross can be found in the
Appendix on page 37.]

STATEMENT OF HON. VICKY HARTZLER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSOURI, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would first like to thank our witnesses for being with us
today and for the hard work that you put in this year's budget
request to Congress. We have a lot to cover today, and I look
forward to having a healthy discussion with our distinguished
panel of witnesses, some of whom have testified before us on
these topics just over a year ago.
And what a year it has been, full of extraordinary
challenges, uncertainty, and transitions for everyone, none
more so than for our military and its supporting industrial
base.
And now the President's fiscal year 2022 budget request
asks the Department of Defense and the industrial bases which
support it, to do even more with less. I, like many of my
colleagues, am deeply concerned about the proposed top line and
that it does not adequately resource the 2018 National Defense
Strategy and further places military leadership in an untenable
position of having to make impossible choices between near-term
operational readiness, the sustainment of enduring
capabilities, and long-term modernization priorities.
Today is an opportunity for our witnesses to address these
concerns. As we discuss the future modernization of the Army
and Marine Corps ground programs, I expect the witnesses to
identify what risk the Army and Marine Corps are accepting in
the short-term in order to keep planned modernization programs
affordable and on course to meet the mid- to long-term defense
requirements of creating a more lethal, resilient, and agile
force, able to compete, deter, and win against future threats
from both peer competitors and rogue actors.
I commend our military leaders for their dedication and
hard work to continuously reassess modernization investment
priorities and reallocate already limited resources to fund the
development and procurement of essential defense requirements
and capabilities necessary to build a more lethal defense
force.
The Army, in particular, has terminated or reduced 310
existing programs in the last 3 years, including the
elimination or delay of 37 programs in fiscal year 2022 alone
to meet this end state.
I am interested in the Army and Marine Corps assessment of
how a flat top line and the resulting imposition of cuts and
decreases to lower priority programs and investment accounts
affect the health and stability of the industrial base.
Cutting plans and funding for development and procurement
programs creates vendor uncertainty, workforce disruptions, and
a lack of predictability over time. Doing so also increases
unit cost and risks the loss of industrial capacity,
capability, and resilience when minimum sustaining rates are
not met.
Finally, I want to stress the importance of jointness
between the Army and the Marine Corps. I would like our
witnesses to discuss how they are continuing to communicate and
coordinate on critical modernization programs that could
address similar operational requirements such as body armor,
long-range precision fires, and next-generation small arms
weapons.
I thank the chairman for organizing this important and
timely hearing, and I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Next, we understand that each Army witness will provide
short opening remarks, starting with Mr. Bush, followed by
General Murray; then Mr. Stefany will provide their perspective
from the Marine Corps.
Without objection, each of the witnesses' prepared
statements will be included in the hearing record.
So ordered.
Mr. Bush, welcome and please start.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS R. BUSH, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY FOR ACQUISITION, LOGISTICS AND TECHNOLOGY, DEPARTMENT OF
THE ARMY

Mr. Bush. Thank you, sir. Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member
Hartzler, distinguished members of the House Armed Services
Committee on Tactical Air and Land Forces, good afternoon.
Thank you for the invitation to appear before you to discuss
the Army's ground modernization program and the resources
requested in the President's budget for fiscal year 2022.
I am pleased to be joined today by my teammate, General
Mike Murray, as well as our Navy and Marine Corps counterparts.
We appreciate your making our written statement part of the
record for today's hearing.
Mr. Chairman, Army Acquisition, Logistics and Technology,
and Army Futures Command's shared mission is to make sure that
the Army continues to achieve overmatch against all potential
adversaries, ensuring that our Army can fulfill its mandate to
compete successfully, deter, and if necessary, fight and win
our Nation's wars as part of the joint force. We support the
Army's transformation through modernization in order to meet
future challenges.
Even during a global pandemic, this past year has been one
of dramatic change, rapid innovation, shared challenges, and
significant progress with an unprecedented unity of efforts
across the Army modernization enterprise.
I would like to next answer the committee's specific
questions provided in the invitation we received to testify.
First, the committee asked us to provide, quote, major plan
changes to the modernization and equipping strategy and an
explanation of any new modernization--major new modernization
initiatives between fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2022.
The answer to those questions is that, first, the Army has
no major planned changes and, second, that there are no new
major modernization initiatives.
Second, the committee asked us to provide justification
for, quote, unfunded priorities, major equipment shortfalls, or
unacceptable risk. With regard to unfunded priorities, I would
refer members to the Army Chief of Staff's unfunded priorities
list.
In addition, I am not aware of any major equipment
shortfalls or unacceptable risks in my area of responsibility.
Finally, the committee asked for a, quote, assessment of
risks associated with major program terminations or reductions
between fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2022.
My assessment is that the small number of programs
terminated or cancelled and the larger number of program
reductions do not create unmanageable risks.
Overall, I think the fiscal year 2022 budget request for
Army modernization reflects continuity and the Army's continued
commitment to its high-priority modernization programs.
While members will find that adjustments were made to some
programs, I believe that the fiscal year 2022 budget request of
$34.1 billion for Army research, development, and acquisition,
reflects careful choices and supports continued progress on the
Army's top modernization priorities.
Army modernization also includes a commitment to reform. We
are grateful to you and your colleagues on the committee for
reform initiatives that have been instrumental to our efforts
to streamline and gain efficiencies in the acquisition process
and accelerate the delivery of capability to soldiers.
This includes our use of middle-tier acquisition authority
for rapid prototyping to accelerate select efforts linked to
our modernization priorities, including the extended-range
cannon artillery, integrated visual augmentation system, and
next-generation squad weapon, among others.
We have also used other transactional authority, or OTAs,
to help us streamline acquisition research initiatives,
prototype projects, and follow-on production efforts. In both
of these areas, you have my commitment that the Army will use
these authorities conservatively and only when needed to
accomplish Army modernization objectives.
You also have my commitment to ensure that appropriate
internal Army oversight measures are in place to monitor the
use of these authorities.
Let me close by saying the realization of our modernization
efforts is highly dependent on what is in the Army's fiscal
year 2022 budget request. Investments in this budget request
complement and reinforce Army modernization efforts that you
have so steadfastly supported.
The key is predictable, adequate, timely, and sustained
funding to ensure the United States Army is the best equipped
land force in the world. I sincerely appreciate your time
today, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Bush and General
Murray can be found in the Appendix on page 39.]
Mr. Norcross. General Murray.

STATEMENT OF GEN JOHN M. MURRAY, USA, COMMANDING GENERAL, ARMY
FUTURES COMMAND

General Murray. Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member Hartzler,
and distinguished members of the Tactical Air and Land
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify about
Army ground modernization programs on behalf of the soldiers
and civilians of Army Futures Command.
These men and women are working hard each and every day to
modernize our Army. And it is an honor to join Mr. Doug Bush as
well as Mr. Stefany and Lieutenant General Smith here today,
and I would just note that the partnership between AFC [Army
Futures Command] and ASA(ALT) [Assistant Secretary of the Army
for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology] was strong in the
past, and it remains strong under Mr. Bush's dedicated
leadership.
The Army is in the midst of a transformational change. This
change is necessary to maintain our global competitive edge and
to deter future conflict, and to fight and win if called upon
as part of the joint force.
The Army is transforming how we fight, what we fight with,
how we organize, how we do business, and who we are. Budget
convergence, the Army's campaign of learning and
experimentation, is informing all of these aspects of
transformation, and I would like to say a word about each of
them in turn.
First, we are transforming how we fight. The Army's current
concept is Multi-Domain Operations, our contribution to the
developing joint warfighting concept. Right now the Army's
Training and Doctrine Command is in the process of
transitioning Multi-Domain Operations, the concept, into the
next Army doctrine.
At the same time, Army Futures Command's Future Studies
Program is bringing together our concept writers, intelligence
professionals, and S&T [science and technology] experts with
leading thinkers from academia, industry, and other communities
to build our next concept.
Second, we are transforming what we fight with. Our
materiel modernization includes the ``31+4'' signature efforts
based upon our 6 consistent modernization priorities. Our
fiscal year 2022 request includes $11.3 billion to support
these signature efforts.
Thirty-one of these efforts are led by powerful teams
comprised of our cross-functional teams, program executive
offices, and program managers, and four of these efforts are
led by the Army's Rapid Capabilities and Critical Technologies
Office.
Twenty-two of these capabilities are projected to be ready
to begin fielding over the next 4 years.
Third, we are transforming how we organize. The multi-
domain task force will enable convergence, the integration of
effects across all domains for joint force commanders to create
multiple dilemmas for our adversaries.
Security Force Assistance Brigades foster close
partnerships with host-nation ground forces in critical
locations. They give us a strong foundation in competition and
a head start in crisis and conflict.
Fourth, we are transforming how we do business. Soldier-
centered design puts technology and prototypes in the hands of
soldiers from the operational force early, so we can learn.
Learning early changes how we generate requirements and how we
partner with both traditional and nontraditional industry.
Our Army Applications Lab is spearheading effective ways to
work with nontraditional innovators, leveraging existing
authorities to make it easier for them to work with the Army.
Fifth, we are transforming who we are. We are exploring how
to best find, train, utilize, and keep the tech talent we know
we will need for a future fight.
Our Artificial Intelligence Integration Center works with
Carnegie Mellon University to offer data science courses, to
grow software designers and engineers and to foster a more
technology-savvy workforce. Our software factory takes soldiers
from any career field with the right aptitude and grows them
into skilled coders.
We are in the process of transforming almost every aspect
of our Army. There are, however, two key things we are holding
on to--that would be our purpose and our most precious
resource, our soldiers.
Our fiscal year 2022 request builds on the consistent
priorities and strong momentum of our fiscal year 2021 request.
Stable and consistent funding from Congress supports our
ability to serve our Nation, take care of our people, and
continue the momentum of our modernization efforts.
Thank you for your consistent support of our Army and our
families, and thank you for having me here today. It is an
honor to lead and represent the soldiers, civilians, and
families of Army Futures Command, and I very much look forward
to your questions. Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, General.
Mr. Stefany, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF FREDERICK J. STEFANY, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF THE NAVY FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION,
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY; ACCOMPANIED BY LTGEN ERIC M. SMITH,
USMC, COMMANDING GENERAL, U.S. MARINE CORPS COMBAT DEVELOPMENT
COMMAND, AND DEPUTY COMMANDANT FOR COMBAT DEVELOPMENT AND
INTEGRATION

Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir, Chairman. As you mentioned, we have
a single statement for General Smith and myself.
Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member Hartzler, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of myself and Lieutenant
General Eric Smith, the Deputy Commandant for Combat
Development and Integration, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to address the Department of Navy's
fiscal year 2022 budget request for Marine Corps ground
modernization programs. We are pleased to testify alongside our
Department of the Army colleagues.
Marines traditionally serve as soldiers of the sea,
capabilities that are closely aligned to those of our Army
brethren. We continue to collaborate and are supporting
interconnected programs as the Department of the Navy
integrates with the joint force across our ground modernization
portfolio.
The Marine Corps is transforming warfighting capabilities
to provide an organized, trained, and equipped force, postured
for competition and to respond to crisis in a contested
maritime space.
As we focus on the pending threat presented by our
strategic competitors, we thank Congress and this subcommittee
for your leadership and your support.
The President's fiscal year 2022 budget request for Marine
Corps ground modernization takes a full step out of the
Commandant's Planning Guidance and Force Design 2030 Strategic
Initiative.
The budget supports the vision for distributed maritime
operations and focuses on capabilities our forward-deployed
forces need to deter conflict with an emphasis on long-range
precision fires, resilient communication, and training.
Ground modernization programs referenced in our written
statement are affordable, executable, and on schedule. The
fiscal year 2022 request prioritizes investments that maximize
naval contributions to the joint force, while reducing risk in
programs of record and accelerating capability delivery to
Marines in the field.
The request represents the deliberate and informed
development of a modernized, integrated, all-domain naval force
for the future that requires us to think differently, move
faster, and prioritize every dollar to meet an uncertain and
complex environment. The Marine Corps ground modernization
portfolio aims to do just that.
The lieutenant general and I look forward to your
questions. Thank you, sir.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Stefany and General
Smith can be found in the Appendix on page 55.]
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. I appreciate it. I just want to
drop back as the foundation for the hearing that I had asked
the question for the record, that given the 2020 request, the
planned funding levels over the next 5 years, all the priority
ground modernization programs are affordable and achievable.
Mr. Bush, would you agree with that statement?
Mr. Bush. Sir, I would, with an important caveat, that the
administration has only presented the fiscal year 2022 numbers
at this point.
Mr. Norcross. Absolutely. General Murray, would you concur?
General Murray. I concur with Mr. Bush's caveat, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. Thank you and Mr. Stefany for
addressing that.
General Smith, would you agree with that?
General Smith. Mr. Chairman, I do, in concert with
Secretary Stefany, yes, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Terrific. Thank you. You know, 3 years of
night court, the constant review, reallocation of money, this
is a major shift. Mrs. Hartzler talked about the industrial
base and uncertainty, so the risk in each of these can be
significant.
But one of the items I want to touch base on now is with
the reorganization of the Army related to research,
development, and acquisition, financial management of programs
as we see the erosion of civilian responsibility and authority
for control and oversight.
Mr. Bush, what is your assessment of the status and the
plans for change, if any, regarding the distribution of
responsibilities and authority for oversight of the Army
modernization and the relationship between acquisition
community and Army Futures Command?
Mr. Bush. Mr. Chairman, the law is crystal clear in this
regard, if you look at title 10, with regard to how
responsibility is allocated to civilians for acquisition and
research and development.
That being said, the Army does have flexibility within the
law to task, organize, and assign responsibilities across the
Army and the Army staff. So I am comfortable with the law and
the way it works, and the Army will follow the law, and I see
no current issues in that regard.
The teamwork is necessary to make everything happen, so the
Army modernization cannot be accomplished by my organization
alone, nor by General Murray's or anybody else's. But right
now, I am comfortable with what the law says, sir.
Mr. Norcross. So you have that independent authority
necessary to approve, modify, prohibit, reverse actions,
everything you need to research and development to acquisition
recommendations, decision or action, is it inconsistent or
contrary? Do you feel you have that authority and control?
Mr. Bush. I do, sir, if necessary, derived from the
Secretary of the Army's ultimate authority with regard to such
matters.
Mr. Norcross. Terrific. Certainly a lot of discussion has
been going on. It just didn't start this year.
This is for General Murray and then you, Mr. Bush.
Subcommittees pay particular attention and are generally
supportive of the Army's ambitious modernization strategy. I
talked about that just a moment ago.
But the consideration and technical achievability, the
risks, the affordability in the 2022 budget request for
research, development, and acquisition is an 11 percent
decrease as compared to last year's enacted amount.
This does not inspire confidence in the stability of your
programs, given the evidence of a likely procurement bow wave.
We talked about that a few minutes ago. When expensive systems
are in development, they rarely get cheaper, and obviously that
up ramp is one of our biggest concerns.
Understanding the Army's modernization strategy was
perhaps--and some have suggested--never realistically
affordable, and that your plans are unachievable without
additional funding from your current and likely top lines.
We talked about reallocation of dollars, but there has been
suggestion that you are not going to be able to do that just
with the allocations, that you are going to need a plus-up. How
are you going to deal with the flat lines this year, perhaps
future, in achieving those goals that are your number one
priorities.
Mr. Bush. Mr. Chairman, I will start, and I would like
General Murray to also fill in here given his many years of
experience. I would first point out that the Army's overall
budget is $173 billion. The portion we are here to testify
about today is $34 billion, or only about 20 percent of that.
So, in the future, Army leaders do have an ability to, if
they chose to, allocate additional resources to this area of
the Army's budget that would affect the affordability
calculations you mentioned, sir.
The second thing I would point out there is, other things
can change, and that is, the Army does have dials it can turn
regarding the pace of acquiring new systems. The force
structure of the Army could change, which would result in
changes to what we are required to produce. And other factors.
So, at this point, sir, fiscal year 2022, the Army was able
to maintain sufficient funding for its highest priorities to
keep them on their current paths. That is obviously not a
hundred percent guarantee of success in the future.
But the fiscal year 2022 request, sir, I thought was
balanced appropriately. In future years, decisions will be made
at the appropriate time.
General Murray. And I would just add, Mr. Chairman, that in
addition to what Mr. Bush has said already, is, we go through a
process in front of the 5-year defense FYDP [Future Years
Defense Program] bill--we call it a SPAR [strategic portfolio
analysis and review]--where we sit down and look at exactly
what you are talking about, even outside of the FYDP, the 5-
year defense plan, to ensure that we begin to look at resources
in the outyears to make sure that we can afford to do exactly
what you are talking about.
And I mentioned upfront, 22 in the next 4 years, but some
of these won't deliver and really go into full-rate production
until late 2020s and even early 2030s, some of the programs.
And so I do think that we take a hard look at that every year.
The affordability piece of it is a discussion Mr. Bush and I
have every year, with everybody that puts this plan together.
But I would just remind you that this is more than
modernization for the Army. We call this a transformational
change, which General McConville describes as once every 40
years. And, you know, the risk of not following through on the
transformation we have started is our soldiers are going to
have the same equipment they have today 20 years from now. And
I do think that will put them at a serious disadvantage on that
future battlefield.
Mr. Norcross. So from what I hear, the suggestion that was
made recently that plans for this production fielding is not
achievable without additional funding, based on what you told
me, you both disagree with that. Is that correct?
General Murray. I will speak first, sir. I do disagree with
that.
Mr. Norcross. Very good.
Mr. Bush.
Mr. Bush. Yes, sir, I also disagree.
There is always choices to be made within an entity as
large as the Army in regards to the priority efforts. So it is
up to the judgment of leaders to make those calls.
General Murray. And I would just add, sir, with risk.
Mr. Norcross. Informed risk. You do that every day, and
that is certainly one of the challenges. Thank you.
I now recognize Mrs. Hartzler, our ranking member.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bush, I would like to start with you. I am deeply
concerned about the budget request for the procurement of Army
ammunition, and specifically the small- and medium-caliber
request account. The fiscal year 2022 President's budget
request reflects severe reductions in the budget request for
the 5.56 millimeter, the 7.62 millimeter, and the .50 caliber
ammunition.
The reductions from the fiscal year 2021 enacted levels
equate to reductions of 26 percent, 28 percent, and 49 percent
respectively for an overall reduction of approximately 30
percent in the small arms ammunition account.
This is concerning to me because last year's fiscal year
2022 FYDP reflected an increase for each of those accounts, and
so we are not only not increasing them, but we have severe
reductions. I am concerned that these severe reductions will
affect the overall readiness of our ground forces and severely
handicap their ability to train and to fight.
Additionally, the severity of these reductions will have an
impact on the ability to sustain a workforce at the Lake City
ammunition plant, the location of where the Army plans to build
the 6.8 millimeter ammunition for the next-generation squad
weapon.
With these proposed cuts, the Army is risking losing an
experienced workforce which could take 9 months to years to
restore, and the projection from the current contractor is that
500 to 700 employees would lose their jobs. And many of these
employees are not only constituents of mine, but they have
worked there for years and have this training and this
capability that just can't be easily replaced or the spigot
turned back on in 9 months.
So, Mr. Bush, why is the Army requesting such a large
reduction from what was previously planned for small arms
ammunition, and what solutions are being considered within the
Pentagon to mitigate the risk to the health and resilience of
America's critical defense industrial support base?
Mr. Bush. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question. So I
would start with--and I will let General Murray add on the
requirements side here--the Army every year makes adjustments
to its ammunition production in order to achieve stocks
required for both training and overseas contingencies and war
plans. So year-to-year fluctuations do occur.
Those reductions that you noted do reflect a movement of
funds away from those things to protect other things in the
budget so they are part of that judgment call that was made.
I am not familiar, I apologize, with the specific potential
workforce effects you are citing. I am happy to meet with you
and your staff to discuss those to learn more about. I have not
heard any numbers along those lines, ma'am, but I would be
happy to learn more and work with you on how those are
calculated or what the possible options might be to mitigate.
If you wouldn't mind, I would like General Murray to answer
the requirements part if that is okay.
General Murray. Yes, ma'am, and thank you, Mr. Bush. Ma'am,
that is part of what the chairman mentioned earlier in terms of
the decrease in RDA [research, development, and acquisition]
and procurement accounts. So $4.2 billion, as we looked at that
decrease across the board, where could we accept risk--what we
consider to be an acceptable risk in order to account for that
decrease in the RDA and procurement--and the procurement
accounts, or the RDA accounts.
And so, when we worked with the operational community here
inside the Pentagon and then with Forces Command who does the
training, as we looked across the board, we thought that was an
acceptable level of risk given the stocks we currently have on
hand and what is projected in terms of requirements for those
calibers of ammunition.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. So let's talk about the next squad
weapon. So the subcommittee understands the next-generation
squad weapon is evaluating three candidate rifles and three
candidate 6.8 millimeter bullet technologies to replace the M4
carbine and its 5.56 millimeter round in close combat
[inaudible].
So can you give us a status of the next-generation squad
weapon program and under what circumstances and when will the
Army consider retirement of all 5.56 millimeter rifles and
carbines and provide soldiers the 6.8 millimeter rifles?
Mr. Bush. Ma'am, I can take the first part of that on the
programmatics. I will let General Murray talk about
requirements. So, as you know, this is a program that is using
new authorities from Congress. We are in the middle of rapid
prototyping right now with, as you mentioned, more than one
vendor.
We are looking to make a rapid fielding decision early in
the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, down to one, at which
point we would proceed into rapid fielding and initial
production. That includes selecting the ammunition to go along
with the weapon.
So, ma'am, as you know right now, that requirement is not
for the entire Army. So I will let General Murray talk about
the future of 5.56.
General Murray. Yes, ma'am. And it is actually, as you
know, two different weapons. So rifle and an automatic rifle
with a common cartridge. And, as you mentioned, ma'am, right
now we are programming for the close-combat force, plus some
additionals in terms of Special Operations Command. The number
is somewhere around 120,000 we are talking about right now,
with a combination of the two.
And then we have not considered yet whether we will replace
the M4 and the M16, the M4 carbine and the M16, which fires the
5.56 millimeter ammunition you spoke of. That is a future
decision to be made, very much dependent upon what we find with
the prototyping effort we have going on right now.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Very good.
Mr. Bush, please describe the plan and timeline to
establish the 6.8 millimeter ammunition manufacturing at Lake
City Army Ammunition Plant to support the fielding of and
training with the new rifle as well as [inaudible].
Mr. Bush. Yes, ma'am. So----
Mrs. Hartzler. Please describe--yeah, the plan and the
timeline for the production of 6.8 ammunition there at Lake
City.
Mr. Bush. Yes, ma'am. So fiscal year 2022 request includes
funding for preliminary work necessary to support whatever
ammunition type is selected for production at Lake City in the
future. So that is my understanding, is that all that
preliminary work is properly funded and fully funded in fiscal
year 2022.
What would follow is a transition over a number of years
from initially contractor-produced ammunition to capability at
Lake City to produce everything the Army needs for that new
type of ammunition. It would take place over, I believe it is 3
to 4 years before it is completely transitioned because of the
requirements for a new facility.
Mrs. Hartzler. Uh-huh. Okay. Very good. And before we
change subjects, I do appreciate your offer to meet with me and
my staff about this issue and how to mitigate it and to learn
more because obviously this is real concerning to us here in
Missouri. So----
Mr. Bush. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Hartzler [continuing]. Thank you, yes.
If I could talk a little bit--shift to combat vehicle
programs, Lieutenant General Smith, I am pleased to see the
Marine Corps fiscal year 2022 request continues procurement
plans for the purchase of 92 amphibious combat vehicles [ACVs]
for Marine Corps replacement for the aging amphibious assault
vehicle, which I recently had a chance to see the new one.
As the Marine Corps primary armored infantry carrier for
ship-to-shore assault and armored operations inland, please
provide the status of the Marine Corps progress for the
development and fielding of the ACV.
General Smith. Yes, ma'am, thank you for that. Ma'am, the
amphibious combat vehicle is on track; it is on schedule for
performance and for cost. So the folks up at BAE up in York,
Pennsylvania, kind of fought their way through COVID.
They worked with the Italian Government--IVECO [Industrial
Vehicles Corporation] was the original manufacturer--to make
sure that that program stayed viable through COVID. We are on
track for the production numbers that we anticipated seeing.
We produced the first two platoons of those vehicles. One
platoon carries an entire company. It is a little bit of Marine
math, but a platoon carries a company. And so we have
prioritized our Marine expeditionary units who are always out
there deployed on board our naval amphibious ships.
So the first two of those platoons are out. They are out in
California and our desert training base at Twentynine Palms.
Their readiness is good.
The training shift first to the second platoon, changing
from tracked vehicles to wheeled vehicles required a little bit
of adjustment for our drivers. They made that change and met
their objectives for the initial operating testing
capabilities. But we did declare initial operating capability
[inaudible] on schedule, on performance, and on budget, and
scheduled to meet our needs in the most rapid way possible to
replace the amphibious assault vehicle, which, as you said, is
aging, and that is what we owe the Marines.
I don't know if that answers your question, ma'am. I would
like to get into----
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes.
General Smith [continuing]. If it doesn't.
Mrs. Hartzler. No. That sounds like good news to me. It is
nice when you hear that it is on cost, and it is on schedule
production-wise, and certainly it is needed after some of the--
the accident and what has happened with some of the other
vehicles. So we are glad to see that.
General Murray, I would like to ask you, the next-
generation combat vehicle is one of the Army's top six
modernization priorities, and the Army has used resources freed
up by program terminations and reductions to fund efforts to
develop a next-generation combat vehicle.
Central to this effort has been development of the
Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle [OMFV], a program intended
to replace the B2 Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle.
Can you provide an update on the Army's modified strategy
and current plans for the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle,
and how did these plans and last year's cancellation of the
solicitation for the OMFV affect plans for further upgrades and
fielding of the Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle?
General Murray. Yes, ma'am. And so for OMFV, the Optionally
Manned Fighting Vehicle, as you probably know, we started off
with an entirely different approach when we approached it from
a--and I will say this--requirements standpoint. An entirely
different approach is we didn't start with the requirement.
We started with a list of characteristics that we went out
to industry, and it was really intended with characteristics
and not requirements to allow industry to be creative and take
advantage of the innovative thought and processes that go on
inside of industry.
So we put out an RFP [request for proposal]. We had a
number of vendors come back and express interest, and we also
started not with bending metal. We started with a digital
design as our first phase. We are getting [inaudible] where we
will down-select to up to five vendors based upon those digital
designs, and then we will take it a step further and work with
those five vendors.
And we are a number of years out before we will ask any of
whoever it is that we end up selecting to actually bend metal
and produce a vehicle. So we are trying to take advantage of
commercial best practices in terms of digital twinning and
digital design to include putting soldiers against these
digital designs for a virtual soldier touchpoint to make sure
we understand what is most important to our soldiers as we
progress forward.
Right now we believe we are on track. My conversations with
industry is, they are receptive of this approach, and then we
will see as this program progresses.
In terms of the M2 Bradley, you know, that is our infantry
fighting vehicle for today and for the near-term future. So we
do have plans for the Bradley--what we call the A4, the most
recent version of the Bradley. We will most likely not produce
A4s across the Army because we won't need to by the time we get
to the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle.
But the sustainment of the Bradley fighting vehicle, there
are funds against that. The upgrade of the Bradley fighting
vehicle for both the A3 version and the A4 version, there are
funds against that to make sure that our soldiers have the
capability they will need until we are able to deliver the
Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicles.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. Thank you for the update.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Mr. Carbajal, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Smith and General Murray, the Army and Marine Corps
are resourcing initiatives to improve the form, fit, and
function of personal protective equipment [PPE] to better
accommodate female soldiers and Marines.
Can you update our subcommittee on the status of these
efforts to improve PPE for female service members? Does the
budget provide you enough funds to properly study and then
procure this PPE?
General Murray. Sir, I will go first. The answer to your
last question is, absolutely. So as you know, the Army has been
working on--and, you know, we called it female body armor, but
what I prefer to say is body armor that is better produced and
cut for our female soldiers, so things like--to accommodate
different sizes, we have vastly expanded the types of sizes we
are offering.
And I would argue it is not only just for our females, but
it is also our smaller statured male soldiers as well. We have
made some special accommodations for female-specific gear in
terms of undergarments for the body armor, different cuts of
what we call the plate carrier, or the IBA [interceptor multi-
threat body armor system], where the plates go into.
We are making modifications to the plates themselves to
enable not only our female soldiers but all soldiers to become
better marksmen in terms of the--we call it a shooter's cut. We
have done more research on lighter weight materials and seeing
some significant improvements in the ability to have light
weight for all our soldiers, not only the body armor itself but
the helmet as well, and keep the same levels of protection.
So the research and development up at Natick is almost
continuous, and then as we make those breakthroughs, we roll
that out into production to continually improve our protection
for our soldiers.
General Smith. Mr. Carbajal, it is Eric Smith for the
Marine Corps. What I would say, sir, is that our first and
foremost piece is we are interested in Marines' comfort, but
what I am committed to is their protection. So what we have
done is we have changed the number of sizes that we have.
Instead of the old-timey small, medium, and large, we have
made extra small, extra small short, extra small long, extra
small et cetera, and that includes right now, going from the
normal 5th percentile to 95th percentile--that is how we fit
most things--to the 2nd to 98th percentile.
I mean, we can cover anybody between the 2nd and 98th
percentile. That currently leaves approximately 200 individual
Marines, most of whom are female, below, in that 1 to 2 percent
for smallest stature, and actually about 3,000 Marines, mostly
male, in the bigger than 98. They are extremely tall, et
cetera.
So, in the case of females, in particular, it is about 200
who do not have body armor that fits them, what we determined
to be, appropriately. So we have to custom-work that before
they would go into a combat zone. That is not the case we have
now. There is no one deployed with ill-fitting body armor, but
we do have 200 Marines who we cannot outfit properly without
going to a customized version.
So, like General Murray, we are absolutely in lockstep with
the Army in looking for the best, lightest, body armor that
protects, adjusting the cuts in shoulders, deltoids, et cetera,
so it best fits the individual Marine.
We do have the money to do it. We have what we need. There
is a--the Holy Grail, if you will, sir, is conformal body
armor, when you start bending plates to make it perfectly fit a
body. That is not in the scale, in the realm of possible now,
sir. When it becomes the industry standard, that is great. That
will take care of a hundred percent, but that doesn't exist
now, sir.
So we default to protection; comfort comes second. And,
again, we are about 200 Marines fall below what we are able to
outfit without going custom.
Does that answer your question, sir?
Mr. Carbajal. Yes, it does. Thank you very much.
General Smith, my colleagues and I would like assurances
that the Marine Corps is taking the necessary steps to prevent
any future tragic assault amphibious vehicle accidents like the
one that occurred off of the California coast in 2020.
What safety upgrades are being applied to the AAVs
[amphibious assault vehicles] throughout the fleet, and how
will be the ACV be safer and more effective?
General Smith. Yes, sir. First, sir, anytime we bring that
mishap up, the first thing we owe--I owe--is personal
condolences, which aren't enough and don't do anything to bring
back our dead sailor and our eight dead Marines. Nothing I can
say today will fix that, and the mishap was 100 percent
preventable and also 100 percent inexcusable on every level.
What we have done, sir, for the AAV that still does exist
until the amphibious combat vehicle can replace it, we have
inspected all of our vehicles for their watertight seals, and
nothing gets into the water without that inspection. There is a
pretty robust checklist for everything from training to the
actual seals on the vehicle to make sure that those vehicles
that do enter the water, with safety boats for training, are
completely viable and safe.
The ACV is a completely--the amphib combat vehicle is a
different design, sir. It does not hold water like the AAV. The
ACV, sir, does not work off of a thing called the plenum, where
water is purposely brought in to cool the engine. There is a
very small engine compartment that lets about 20 gallons or so
of water in there to cool it.
It has a completely different hull form that has fewer
penetration points so that water cannot get in and accumulate,
fewer entry points. It runs off of a completely different
design than the, you know, 50-year-old AAV, the amphibious
assault vehicle.
So the design is completely different, sir, and we do not
and will not see those kind of incidents with the amphib combat
vehicle----
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, General. I am out of time. I have
a couple more questions, but they will be submitted for the
record. Thank you very much.
Back to you, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
thank our witnesses today.
General Smith, I would like to start with you. We know that
it has been a lot of focus on the changing nature of what the
Marine Corps is going to be faced with, and we know that you
have to be able to reach out and place at risk our adversaries
at long distances.
And one of those elements in the Commandant's Planning
Guidance is about ground-based anti-ship missiles, and I want
to refer to testimony not just from the Commandant in his
Planning Guidance but also in March of 2021, the former
INDOPACOM [United States Indo-Pacific Command] commander,
Admiral Phil Davidson, emphasized this, and I want to use his
words.
He said this, he said the expansion of ground-based fires
enables the maneuver of our maritime and air forces because
what you get is the requirement for much more intense search
for offensive capability out of our adversaries. They also have
to look for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance in
their networks. If we want to make our adversaries work harder
to find our stuff and defend against it, that is what
deterrence is about. It is about imposing costs.
And as I look at Admiral Davidson's words and I ponder
them, as well as the Commandant's Planning Guidance, I find
myself in complete agreement, which is why, last year,
Congressman Gallagher and myself worked to correct the
appropriators' mistake that unfortunately found itself in
cutting funding in half for the ground-based anti-ship
missiles.
And, unfortunately, the cuts stood in the final
appropriations bill. I just don't think the appropriators
understood the critical nature of that and why it was needed.
In the PB [President's budget] 2022 request, the Marine
Corps is also seeking funding for $102 million for 10
production representative models and also to make sure those
models are operationally tested as part of the ground-based
anti-ship missile capability.
I want to get you to elaborate on why this anti-ship
missile capability is so critically important for the Marine
Corps, especially as you are looking to distribute your
operations, to create lethality in different areas, to raise
the level of uncertainty for our adversaries.
I want to make sure we understand, you know, why this is
important in the Marine Corps force design strategy, and why it
is the foundation of what you are doing going ahead in the
Indo-Pacific.
General Smith. Thank you, Mr. Wittman. I will be brief.
Sir, that ground-based anti-ship missile, which is the Naval
Strike Missile, the same one fired out of an LCS [littoral
combat ship], out of Navy systems, it fits on the back of a
joint light tactical vehicle which has been robotized. Highly
mobile, internally transportable in our C-130s, moveable via
the future light amphibious warship and all of our current
surface connectors.
That small Marine unit we would refer to as an
expeditionary advance base operation, perhaps 75 Marines, that
is carrying up to, let's say, 18 of these missiles, highly
mobile, can, in fact, place at risk an adversary naval force,
reaching out--in the unclassified setting, sir--in excess of a
hundred miles against a ship--we have successfully tested this
at Point Mugu--at a range of right around a hundred miles,
again, for the purposes of this open hearing. That missile
allows us to hold forces, enemy forces, at risk and to open sea
lanes in support of distributed maritime operations for our
fleet commanders.
When we have this and when the adversary has to respect a
force of only 75 Marines, they have to, to your point and
Admiral Davidson's point, and Admiral Aquilino, the current
commander's point, it causes the adversary to spread out their
information--or intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance
network and look at everything, because when everything is a
threat, that is how you enable fleet maneuver. Because now they
are worried about everything, things that were too small to
worry about, now that small thing has some lethality that can
bring down a vessel, by the way, that cost $2 billion at the
expense of a $1.7 million missile. Does that answer your
question, sir?
Mr. Wittman. Yes, sir, General Smith. I appreciate that.
That is great. That is incredibly important, as we go forward,
to make sure that is properly resourced.
I want to go now to Mr. Bush and Mr. Stefany. As you know,
the First District of Virginia has a tremendous number of
Active Duty military stationed in bases in every branch of the
service, including the Coast Guard, and we also have an
extraordinary group of civilians that work with companies that
support our members of the military.
There is a tremendous amount of innovation and creation out
there, and what I hear constantly is the high level of
frustration, and that it is too hard to do business with the
Department of Defense. They get into the SBIR [Small Business
Innovation Research] process and the Small Business Technology
Transfer, or the STTR programs.
The problem is, is they can do the research and
development, so they can do the phase 1 and phase 2, but it is
very hard for them to graduate, to actually scale up, to take
what they have developed in concept and actually grow their
businesses.
And one of two things happen. Either they get capped
because if they grow larger, they actually get penalized; they
can't do business. Or they finally give in and one of the big
primes purchases them, and then that innovation and technology
never makes its way into the hands of our warfighter because
the primaries buy it up and then shelve it. So they are
essentially pushing back against competition.
I want to know, you know, what is DOD doing to actively
discourage this in order to help. I hear a lot of words about,
``Oh, yeah, yeah, we are looking at those companies,'' but I
see very little in terms of real numbers.
I want to know what you are doing internally to fix this
systemic acquisitions issue and what you are doing to try to
get these businesses that work very hard to grow and that take
very innovative and creative ideas and actually get them to the
point where we can field them.
That is what I believe the future is going to be, and
unfortunately what happens right now is they either fade away
or they get vacuumed up by the primes. Mr. Bush or Mr. Stefany.
Mr. Stefany. Okay. Yes, sir, I will take this one first,
Representative Wittman. So, yes, you are describing what I
guess we would describe often as the valley of death in the
research and development world----
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
Mr. Stefany [continuing]. Where a small company or even a
midsize company will have a great idea, we get it going, and
then it doesn't get pulled into a major acquisition program
with the big prime. So very, very aware of the problem, and as
far as what we are doing about it, well, we have a number of--
our Office of Naval Research has, we call it integrated naval
prototyping program that is specifically built to cross that,
to take promising ideas that actually have matured to what you
would say maybe a SBIR level 2, and get them across and pull
them into an experimentation or an actual prototyping, a rapid
prototyping event attached to a major program.
And so we could show you that alignment, where we are
trying to actually take those and map them directly to programs
of record so that you can actually see those alignments.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Mr. Stefany. And in the past, it has been like we just kind
of waited for industry to do it, and now we are trying to
actively map them across.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Mr. Norcross. The gentleman's time has expired. We are
going to have another round here.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Brown, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brown. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank our witnesses for being here today.
My first question is for General Murray. Good afternoon. I
had an opportunity recently to meet with your colleague,
General Potter, the Army G-2, and it is my understanding that
the G-2 leads the ISR [Intelligence, Surveillance, and
Reconnaissance] Task Force, charged with ensuring that ISR
concerns and capabilities are integrated into and support the
CFTs [cross-functional teams] as required.
Can you just describe to the committee the process by which
the ISR Task Force interacts with the CFTs and how any ISR
requirements or modernization priorities are being addressed by
Army Futures Command? Thank you.
General Murray. Thank you, Congressman Brown. It is good to
see you again. So, much like logistics, ISR is a part of every
one of the cross-functional teams. And if you looked at the way
we look at requirements, things like TITAN [Tactical
Intelligence Targeting Access Node], which is an intel
[intelligence] system, is very, very high on our list as we
look at our future requirements. The ISR Task Force is a key
contributor of things like Project Convergence back in the one
we did last fall, the one we will do, again, this fall and the
one we will do in 2022. The ability to--if you remember,
Project Convergence 20 was all about sensor-to-shooter look and
the ISR Task Force provides us the sensors through either
organic means, national means, other service means, but that
all revolves around the ISR Task Force.
The ISR Task Force is also intimately involved with the
Artificial Intelligence Task Force at Carnegie Mellon as we
begin to look at the algorithms that we are developing to
really refine that sensing and do some of the automated--the
PED [processing, exploitation, and dissemination] work, the
processing of the information that comes off the sensors.
General Potter and I have conversations probably at least
weekly, if not more, in terms of the integration of the sensing
part of it that ISR provides.
So, short of being another cross-functional team, ISR Task
Force and the superstars they have got on that task force are
in daily conversations, not only at AFC headquarters but really
across all of the cross-functional teams that are highlighted
and key parts of all the experimentation we do, most recently
EDGE 21 [Experimental Demonstration Gateway Exercise 2021] at
Dugway Proving Ground.
Mr. Brown. Thank you. For General Smith and also for you,
General Murray, picking up where I think Representative Wittman
was in terms of presenting, you know, multiple lethalities and
challenges to our adversaries. I always get a little concerned
when I hear, you know, one service suggesting that another
service's modernization priorities are not necessarily well
conceived or that they're duplicative.
The Army has as the top modernization priority long-range
precision fires, and General Smith, you just talked about with
Representative Wittman, the value, the importance of the
ground-based anti-ship missile. Air Force certainly has a role
to play as well. I mean, they provide a long-range air-to-
ground, air-to-air fire. Can you just talk a little bit about
how the Joint Requirements Oversight Council is involved in
ensuring that these modernization priorities with the different
services are kind of aligned with one another or in sync with
one another, not at odds with one another but, in fact,
complement each other when we think about the joint warfighter
operating concept?
We will start with General Smith, and then we will go over
to General Murray, please.
General Smith. Congressman, good to see you, sir. The JROC,
Joint Requirements Oversight Council, does, in fact, sir,
conform program to records. So underneath the leadership of
General Hyten, our Vice Chairman, you must pass requirements
through the JROC. So all of the things that we seek in terms of
long-range precision fires and I am in literally, sir, in
weekly contact with Lieutenant General Richardson who is the
deputy down for General Murray, literally weekly, sir, on our
long-range precision fire efforts together. We are
appropriately overlapped, but not duplicative. We each have a
role to play. We are certainly very light and mobile and have X
range. The Army is much more long range. They bring more heft
to the fight. Both of those are characteristics that the joint
force commander has asked for.
So, again, sir, we both seek long-range precision fires
that we can employ within our maneuver space and within our
units, but they are certainly not duplicative, sir. They are
complementary, and the JROC does oversee that. And I will stop
there, sir, and pass to General Murray.
General Murray. And, Chairman, I think we are out of time.
You want me to answer that?
Mr. Norcross. You can finish the answer.
General Murray. Right. And I would just echo General
Smith's comments. And we do do, between the Army and the Marine
Corps and really if you look at Project Convergence across all
five of the services to now include the Space Force, it is
weekly synchronization meetings. I echo his comments on the
JROC's role. And then the other thing I would say, Congressman,
it is all in support of the joint warfighting concept, and as
that emerges, I think you will see the complementary nature of
that, and I appreciate you using that word and our ability to
provide multiple dilemmas from the land, from the sea, from the
air is critical to present those multiple dilemmas to any
potential adversary and not allow them to focus on one
particular thing.
And I would just say in closing is we always have and
always will fight as a joint force, and we will all make
contributions to that fight.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Norcross. You got it.
Mr. Bacon, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate the panel today. Thanks for your
leadership in our Army/Marines. We are grateful to you. Mr.
Bush, you have touched on this, but I am getting some mixed
signals, or maybe I am just not understanding, so let me just
clarify. We know we have a need to modernize our tactical
wheeled vehicles and maintain a rate of production that
sustains the industry's future capacity. It appears to me from
the research I was doing that the Army cut this budget area and
shifted funds to other areas. So we are concerned about how
this will weaken a fragile domestic industrial base.
Can you--do you see this as a risk? Are we covering the
need? I would like to get your perspective. Thank you.
Mr. Bush. Sir, you are correct in identifying that funds
were shifted from some elements of that portfolio to protect
other things, yes, sir. So the Army's judgment is that at this
time it is an acceptable risk, but there are no such thing as
no risk, especially when you make changes year on year. Sir, at
this time we don't see an existential risk to that industrial
base across the United States, but that doesn't mean there is
going to be any effect at all from the shift of resources.
Mr. Bacon. Is it true that we have shifted resources in
many of the recent budgets? Is that correct?
Mr. Bush. Sir, I can't speak in detail about previous
budgets, but if you look across the tactical wheeled vehicle
fleet, year to year, there are changes there, and sometimes
things are moved from there to other higher priorities.
Mr. Bacon. What is a concern to us on the committee that we
be able to preserve this industrial capacity. If we get too
weak and fragile, we won't be able to recover, and we don't
want to rely on overseas sources. So we may come back to that.
We may have to look at that in the NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act], for the one we are working on.
General Smith, I would like to ask you about the Ground/Air
Task Oriented Radar, or the G/ATOR, and how it is being
developed and its current status. The U.S. Marine Corps is
seeking a plus-up of about $301 million for eight more G/ATORs.
General, how will the Marines integrate this system into the
Marine littoral regiment? And are the current tactical wheeled
vehicles, are they built to accommodate the G/ATOR, or is it
easy to integrate? Thank you.
General Smith. Sure. Thanks for the question. The G/ATOR
radar is our radar of the future. It is called the TPS-80. We
are seeking to accelerate a success story. Like the ACV, it is
on schedule, on cost, and it is actually exceeding performance
parameters. We fully populated one of the radars at a test
facility in Baltimore and what it achieved would exceed the
classification level of this committee and most of the spaces
within the House.
We would have to go to a different compartment to talk
about it. So it is a real success story. It is internally
transportable by our KC-130Js, which is the key for us, sir.
And what it does is it gathers and passes data to the joint
force. Under General Murray's leadership and that of Lieutenant
General Jim Richardson for Project Convergence 21, we will take
one of our G/ATOR radars out to Project Convergence at the Yuma
Proving Ground this fall, and it will gather and pass data to
the joint force, to the Navy, to the Army. It is a phenomenal
collector even in a passive mode. So we are trying to
accelerate the success and finish the buy early to save dollars
and get that proven asset into the hands of the warfighters. We
took it to Australia last year, had an exercise called Talisman
Sabre, performed extremely well, and it is on performance,
schedule, and cost. And it is, again, highly mobile, sir, and
highly useful in the Indo-Pacific or other theaters because of
its lightness and mobility and the wheeled vehicles that move
it are part of our inventory, sir, and it is mobile on the
ground with our current ground vehicle--or ground vehicle
strategy enable that ability, sir.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. Shifting gears to both General Murray
and General Smith--and I know my time's running short. I see a
need for long-range surface-to-surface precision fires,
especially when your opponents or potential adversaries have
them. I also see a problem in the Pacific where there is lack
of operating areas.
Does this not concern you when we have very limited
operating areas whereas China can hide them anywhere in its
country? Won't this be a challenge for us for putting a lot of
resources in this weapons system? And I know I don't have much
time left. So I have got 10 seconds. Thank you.
General Smith. Very quickly. So, obviously, sir, there is
two pieces. For us the best place that you can operate from is
the naval vessel, but I would offer, sir, that these long-range
precision fires assets, we do have a lot of friends in the
region. In all candor, China does not. We have a lot of friends
there. And we do always seek diplomatic efforts to gain access.
If--and I won't [inaudible], but these long-range fires
capabilities that the Army seeks in very long range and we seek
in a short or medium range to complement each other, if an
existential threat to [inaudible] derives, sir, we each carry
the capability--I will not speak for the Army, but I have seen
them in action. I worked for them in Iraq. We have the ability
to seize for a short period of time and hold pieces of ground
in order to conduct operations even when not, quote, approved.
That is why we do raids, airfield seizures, et cetera. So,
while not the first option, sir, it is a capability that the
Marine Corps retains. And I would pass to General Murray.
Mr. Bacon. I will yield my time back. I really appreciate
your-all's insights.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for indulging me an extra
minute.
Mr. Norcross. Absolutely.
Ms. Sherrill, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you.
Mr. Bush and General Murray, as we switch to the 6.8
millimeter round and leave behind the NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization] standard 5.56 millimeter ammunition, I
just have a couple questions about interoperability. So what
can you tell us about whether our NATO allies would support a
planned NATO-wide adoption of the 6.8 millimeter round?
General Murray. Good afternoon, ma'am. Right now, we are
not having those conversations, to my knowledge, with NATO
because we have not yet made the decision to go away from 5.56
millimeter. And so the 6.8 would initially go to the close-
combat forces, which is around 120,000, leaving yet the rest of
the 1.1 million people in the United States Army across all
three COMPOs [components] with 5.56 and the M4 carbine/M16.
That is a future decision based upon what we see out of the 6.8
developmental work that we are doing right now.
Ms. Sherrill. Great. Thank you. And then I wanted to move
into some of the discussion about land mines. So, as you know,
the use of land mines in warfare is quite controversial. There
is an international mine ban treaty against anti-personnel
mines of which the U.S. is not a member, but historically many
U.S. commanders are against the use of land mines due to the
risks they present to mobility and the fear of killing their
own forces, according to a GAO [Government Accountability
Office] study. Just some questions about the inclusion of land
mine procurement in the fiscal year 2022 budget.
Mr. Bush or General Murray, how much of the procurement is
focused on anti-personnel land mines?
Mr. Bush. Ma'am, I believe very little. The programs we
have, to my knowledge, are focused more on anti-vehicles.
Ms. Sherrill. So did the U.S. use any anti-personnel land
mines in recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan?
Mr. Bush. Ma'am, again, I am not aware. I would have to get
that one for you for the record, if we actually used those
systems in conflicts.
Ms. Sherrill. Do you know when the last time the U.S. used
mines in conflict? And I am happy to submit that for the
record.
General Murray. We are probably going to take that one for
the record. I don't want to give you a wrong answer. My
experience, which is almost 5 years between Iraq and
Afghanistan, we were not using anti-personnel mines, but that--
that is 5 years out of the last 20. So we probably better take
that for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 69.]
Ms. Sherrill. I will submit it for the record. Thanks.
So I know you mentioned that you had the money that you
needed for female body armor, small stature body armor, but it
is on the list of unfunded priorities provided by the committee
staff. It lists female or small stature body armor as unfunded,
and so when was the last time women or small stature soldiers
used this body armor in conflict? I assumed they have been
using this in recent conflict. We have had the female body
armor and the small stature body armor, from your testimony?
Mr. Bush. Yes, ma'am. It has been a transition. The latest
efforts is what General Murray was describing very well
regarding the multiple sizes, and it is--with regard to the
unfunded item, that is over and above what is in the budget,
and I believe the unfunded list refers to that as an
opportunity to accelerate fielding. So there is funding for
some. It is not zero in the base budget. That money in the UFR
[unfunded request] list, my reading of it was, it would
accelerate the pace of fielding.
Ms. Sherrill. And then--so it just seems like this female
body armor, small stature body armor, is a critical funding
piece, having been in the military myself with gear that didn't
fit, not being able to fly over water during specifically cold
months because my dry suit didn't fit, you know, this seems
like a pretty critical piece of gear. And, I guess, as I am
looking at the transition to great power competition against
near-peers, why are we looking at land mines as an imperative?
General Murray. Well, ma'am, so land mines are used
primarily to shape terrain. And so both, from an anti-vehicle,
anti-personnel standpoint, I am going back in history how I
grew up in the Army. It is really a terrain-shaping munition.
The investment we are doing right now in terms of land mines
are policy compliant--although, we are not a signatory--policy
compliant munitions so we have that ability to shape terrain in
the future. And why do you want to shape terrain is to narrow
options for your opponent.
Ms. Sherrill. And I can submit my final question for the
record because I am running out of time, but I am curious about
if you foresee use of land mines in any sort of conflict with
China in the future? And I can take that for the record.
Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Mr. Jackson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Chairman Norcross, Ranking Member
Hartzler, and thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
The first thing I want to say is something that many of my
colleagues, including ranking member, have already said. The
budget cut to the Department of Defense being proposed by this
administration, in my mind, is somewhat unacceptable in the
situation we are in right now. I support cutting waste and
finding ways to save money. However, decreasing the top line
for the Department of Defense is, in my mind, a shortsighted
and political move at best.
The Army was one of the hardest hit by this year's budget
request with the 2 percent decrease in proposed funding from
last year's enacted level. However, cuts for the Army won't be
just starting in fiscal year 2022. We know this. Over the last
3 years, the Army has terminated 310 existing programs, and in
the fiscal year 2022 request, the Army proposed to cut or delay
an additional 37. These cuts include armored vehicles,
intelligence workstations, and individual weapon sites. I
maintain a belief that if a program is not working as we would
like it to, we should stop funding it. However, I am not in
favor of cutting programs that are beneficial or potentially
beneficial to the warfighter.
The Army claims that the fiscal year 2022 request maintains
the modernization focus and the momentum that was begun in 2018
with the establishment of the Army Futures Command. The Army
also has said that this year's request will not slow our
efforts of building a force by 2028 that is more modern and
relevant to peer competition in conflict. I strongly support
the mission of the Army Futures Command and cross-functional
teams. However, I am confused how we have nearly 350 different
programs that can be cut, yet the Army is telling us that there
will be minimal impact.
General Murray, I will direct my question to you. I would
like you to provide some clarity on this, if you can. How do we
have nearly 350 programs that could be cut, yet removing these
programs have no impact on ongoing modernization and lethality
efforts? And why would we even have had those programs in place
to start with if they weren't worth the investment that we have
put in this so far?
General Murray. Thank you, sir, for that question. And I
actually think it is probably a mischaracterization to say they
weren't important to begin with. So you mentioned some armored
vehicles that some would call legacy, but are really going to
be enduring systems. And so, as we looked at how we could
protect the Army's highest priorities, the 31+4 signature
systems and to make sure that we are ready for that--that
multi-domain ready force in 2028 and then even beyond that into
2035 as we look at production is where can we take some what we
consider to be and our Army simulators consider to be
acceptable risk to make sure that we can maintain the
transformation that we began in 2018. And I said this earlier,
it is much more than just modernization; it is how do you go
through this transformational change and really begin to take
advantage of the technologies that, in some cases, are already
here to make sure that we are ready for that future warfight.
So it is not that any of those programs weren't valuable to
us. It is not that any of those programs were misconceived when
we started them. It is just areas that we could go to to take
some level of acceptable risk to make sure that our highest
priorities get funded first.
Dr. Jackson. Yes, sir. Thank you. I just want to ask one
more question, too, and you may or may not be able to answer
this. But I understand the future cost savings may exist, but I
just want to be clear: Do you know how much money--how much
money has been invested already in the 37 programs that are
proposed to be delayed or cut in fiscal year 2022? How much
money have we already put into those programs? Any idea?
Mr. Bush. Sir, I can work on getting you that number. It is
a little easier to understand the small number of terminations.
Some programs that were slightly reduced, for example, the
Abrams tank. The lifetime government investment of that is
going to be in the many, many, many billions. But, sir, I can
work with you and your staff to narrow down exactly the numbers
you are looking for and get those for you.
General Murray. Sir, I would also answer, if I could. So
some of the terminations were terminations inside of our
equipping phase. Some of these were transitions to sustainment.
So the program is just there. It is just transitioning into the
sustainment phase in its life cycle.
Dr. Jackson. Okay. That is great. Yeah, I would like to get
more information on that. I think you guys are doing a
wonderful job. I just want to be able to make sure that I can
explain to my constituents what we are doing with the money,
especially when it comes to the defense budget. I am really,
you know, a strong defender of our DOD budget, and I want to
make sure that I can explain to people when we are getting rid
of programs, why we are doing it, and, you know, that the money
wasn't wasted, and so on and so forth.
So I appreciate your time and those answers.
And, with that, I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. Is Mr. Horsford on? I didn't see
him.
If not, Mr. Green, you are recognized.
Dr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today, we face--and I
want to thank our witnesses for being here. I, too, want to
echo what my colleague Congressman Jackson said. Today, we face
unique threats. We are all talking about the great power
competition, large-scale ground operations, the switch from
fighting a war on terror to, you know, great power competition.
The Chinese military has increased its defense spending
sixfold since 2000. President Biden saw fit this time to slash
our defense budget by over $4 billion in real dollars, and as,
you know, Congressman Jackson said, the Army seems to be
bearing the brunt of that. They have got the largest Army/Navy
in the world--and this is China, of course--and they work to
significantly modernize their weapons systems to gain a
superiority.
Russia is more than just posturing toward Eastern Europe,
and, of course, China is repeatedly violating Taiwanese air
space. There are new affiliates from al-Qaida and ISIS [Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria], and the Biden administration is
seeking to uproot the progress of the previous administration.
Despite the bipartisan National Defense Strategy Commission
recommending a 3 to 5 percent increase in defense spending
above the rate of inflation, President Biden is proposing to
add trillions of dollars to deficit spending, raising non-
defense 16 percent in the face of cutting $4 billion from DOD
in real dollars.
The moment we fail to maintain vigilance is the moment when
a belligerent power will seize the opportunity to tip the
balance of power. And I just needed to say that and express my
frustration with those real dollar cuts. In terms of my
questions, I was curious as I listened to you, both the Marine
Corps and the Army, describe research into body armor. Are you
guys both separately doing research projects on body armor and
fit to Marines and U.S. Army personnel?
General Murray. I would describe it as collaborative
research, Congressman. And so we do our research up at Natick
in Massachusetts, and then, across all of our research and
development portfolios, it is actually very collaborative. So
the researchers, the senior researchers, from all three of the
services, in this case, represented--Marine Corps represented
by the Navy--actually sit down on a quarterly basis, and we
share our research results so that each one of us understands
what everybody else is working on, where we can take advantage
of each other's research.
Dr. Green. So you all are actively--you have two programs
going, and then you just share information; is that how it
works?
General Murray. I can talk to the Army program. I really
can't speak to the Marine Corps program, sir.
General Smith. I will. For the Marine Corps, we are in
follow of the Army. So our folks are absolutely at the table
with the Army. So we use that same research, sir, and we then
take the plate, for example, and we put it into a plate carrier
that best fits, you know, a Marine who's doing amphibious ops.
But the bulk of it, sir, the plate, that thing that protects
you, we are absolutely together.
So that is a--the SAPI [small arms protective insert]
plate, sir, that is [inaudible] for all of us.
Dr. Green. So the technology on the materials for stopping
the enemy round or shrapnel or whatever is a joint thing, and
then you and the Marine Corps take that plate and fit it into a
piece of equipment that works for a soldier or a Marine when he
goes over into the water, right, on a ship?
General Smith. 100 percent correct.
Dr. Green. As he is coming to shore. Okay. I just wanted to
make sure. It sounded as if we had two unique programs going in
your testimony, and that really concerned me, just like I think
it was someone else--actually, someone across the aisle was
talking about duplicity. That is a big concern for us, how
those taxpayer dollars are used to make sure we are not being
duplicitous there. I, too, am very interested, and this is
probably a question best for Army Futures, General Murray.
The industrial base, can you kind of let us know how they
are involved in Army Futures Command? And when I got out of the
Army and started my healthcare company, I realized probably the
biggest challenge was scale and growing my company. And so it
seems to me that if those--the industrial base guys are at the
tip of the innovation spear, it might speed the process and if
you could explain kind of how you all are doing that, if you
are doing that, and what advantage you are getting from it if
you do?
General Murray. And, sir, I will start that, and then I
will let Mr. Bush comment as well. So--and just a small
example, and it is not only the large primes, but it is also
the smaller businesses as you mentioned as you start up your
business. So, for instance, we--here later this month, we will
have what we call a CEO [chief executive officer] roundtable,
and it really--what I have kind of stumbled on is describing
what problems we are trying to solve to our industry partners
is a key thing to do upfront. And so they understand what is
important to us, they understand the problems we are trying to
solve, which allows them to invest their dollars to do the
research they need to do to address those future problems.
So we will do that again this fall--later this month. Last
fall, we had well over 400 industry partners on the net as we
described the problems we were trying to solve through Project
Convergence. So I do think it is that continuous, constant
dialogue, whether it is a large prime or a small business, to
understand the problems that we are dealing with is the most
important conversation upfront.
Dr. Green. To put that into perspective, I took my company
from $180k in revenue to $600 million in revenue, so I
understand the challenge. It is not, you know, on the scale of
the United States military, but that is--you got to put the
innovator at the tip of the spear, as well as the guy who is
going to manufacture that thing. I think your idea here with
the CEOs is amazing.
It would be great if I could--I don't know if you all would
allow us to come in and be a fly on the wall, but that would--I
would learn a lot from that if you would allow it.
General Murray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bush. Happy to do that, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
We are going to do a lightning round here. And [inaudible]
expect everybody to get through it.
General, there were several questions about the long-range
precision fire and the fact that several of the services are
doing that, and we heard the commentary by some folks in the
Air Force about being expensive. Have you or Department of
Defense or other services done a comparative analysis, the cost
per engagement between the different services and their long-
range fire, to give us a sense of cost, efficiency?
Obviously, they are not all doing exactly the same thing.
Do you know any studies that have been involved on these
systems?
General Murray. Chairman, I can't speak for DOD, and I
obviously can't speak for the other services. I will tell you
that, within the Army, about a year ago, I have an organization
within Army Futures Command that does analysis for me, is we
began to look at the cost, if you will, and really the right
mix of long-range fires capabilities. We called them at that
point strategic fires, but the longer range fires within the
Army portfolio and what we are looking at. And that did
consider, from an operational effectiveness primarily, what the
right mix would be, and there are costs associated with that
within the Army's long-range fires portfolio.
General Smith. Mr. Chairman, on the Marine Corps side, we
have the Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory. We have also done
our own operations analysis division to look at a cost
imposition strategy. And what we seek is the reverse of, with
no offense for those of us that fought in Iraq and Afghanistan,
where we would fire a multi-hundred-thousand dollar Hellfire
missile at a $4,000 pickup truck which happened to have a
machine gun in the back of it, that is a cost imposition
problem.
We are now talking about a low million dollar missile
against an almost $2 billion ship. So we did do cost analysis
on what it takes to incapacitate or to sink a vessel, and the
cost differential is significant between what we are investing
and what the enemy would have to do to both protect the ship in
terms of active and passive measures and the actual cost of
when we succeed versus when they succeed.
Mr. Norcross. So your analysis was within the Corps itself
and not in comparison to the other services. Is that correct?
General Smith. Sir, that is correct; although, the joint
warfighting concept and then, obviously, I wouldn't speak for
OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] Cost Assessment [and]
Program Evaluation or the Joint Staff, but they certainly
oversee how much each of the services is investing in and
looking at a portfolio of long-range systems all driven by the
joint force commanders' need for, much like a golf bag, seven
irons and drivers both look like clubs, but they are certainly
not the same. But you will require them all in a relatively
difficult maritime environment such as the Indo-Pacific.
Mr. Norcross. And the fact that there is differences in how
you apply them and certainly the cost, it is a factor because
that goes hand in glove with risk, as we heard earlier. Some
programs are not making it.
Mrs. Hartzler, are you still on?
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, sir.
The administration presents a very dramatic shift in
funding in the President's budget for submission without any
details on the Future Years Defense Plans, the FYDP.
Additionally, the Army identified $4.4 billion worth of
unfunded requirements to go along with this dramatic shift in
spending priorities. This places Congress at a disadvantage
because we can't see the impacts of supporting or disagreeing
with these dramatic shifts or these unfunded requirements
across the FYDP.
The insights that comes from the FYDP are essential to
ensuring that Congress and this committee can execute our
constitutional oversight requirement. So when will the Army
deliver a FYDP, and what should our expectations be of fiscal
year 2023 and beyond? And, thirdly, will there be further
program restructures, or has the Army completed most of its
adjustments with the President's budget of 2022?
Mr. Bush. Ma'am, the current plan, as I understand it, is
for the budget--fiscal year 2023 budget that is delivered early
next year would have the full FYDP picture for Congress to
consider. There are, I think, year to year always going to be
program adjustments, ma'am. So I would say that is undecided at
this point, but every year we have to look--General Murray and
I co-chair one element of the Army's internal budget reviews
and there are always move-arounds to try to make sure that high
priority things are funded as best possible. So a work in
progress, ma'am.
Mrs. Hartzler. All right. So you are saying we won't see a
FYDP for this year?
Mr. Bush. No, ma'am.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Norcross. All right. We now--Ms. Sherrill, you are
recognized.
I skipped Mr. Wittman. Forgive me.
Mr. Wittman. Okay.
Mr. Norcross. All right. Lightning round. Go for it.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back to
Mr. Bush and follow up on a question I asked that Mr. Stefany
answered about what are you all doing to address our small- and
medium-sized companies that are falling into this valley of
death when it comes to their efforts to seek and maintain the
innovative and creative business they want to do with the
Department of Defense?
Mr. Bush. Thank you, sir. So I think I will answer two
ways, and then I would like General Murray, actually, to add
on, something that is good innovation that is happening at
Futures Command with regard to SBIR.
The first thing, sir, it is incumbent upon the government
and the Army to do a better job when communicating with
companies about what if there is another side of the valley, so
to speak, when they bring them in to do work. So that is an
expectation job on our part that we need to do better so the
companies aren't investing their own dollars in something that
may not have a path to actually being fielded.
So, within the Army, that requires connecting
experimentation or smaller efforts in SBIR to actual programs
of record, and there are some good things going on in that
area. One thing I will offer, sir, two countervailing pressures
we have that we are trying to mitigate balance in this area.
One is ensuring that defense companies we are working with have
cybersecurity that is adequate to protect government secrets.
That is a challenge for all companies. It is also a challenge
for small businesses who don't have the resources that some of
the big companies do.
Another thing I would mention is the supply chain risk. So,
again, this is government work to make sure that the companies
we are doing business with, if we are actually going to enter
into some kind of production arrangement, source materials and
supplies from companies in places we trust. So, sir, it is a
balancing act. I can't say we are doing it perfectly right now,
but we are working to balance those risks. And if you wouldn't
mind, I will let General Murray talk about something in
Futures.
Mr. Wittman. Yes, sir.
General Murray. The Army Applications Lab in Austin, Texas,
with us is--and to be honest, we struggled for a long time. But
we may have stumbled onto a way of using SBIR dollars. And so
we have gotten the process down to less than 30 days to award a
contract of SBIR and in the past it was upwards of 200 days,
and we have done that primarily by simplifying the process for
them, and it is not, actually, simplifying the process; it is
almost like providing a Sherpa service to help small companies
that are not familiar with the way the U.S. Government does
business to help them through the process. I think the most
important thing we found is, and Mr. Bush mentioned this, is
starting with a problem upfront with somebody on the other side
that wants to pull them across that valley of death is a key to
getting these programs across that valley of death. So, working
with our program managers, our program executive officers,
finding something that will actually solve a problem that they
are interested in solving, the problem that they have, and then
in getting them involved from the very, very beginning to help
us with this program has been key and instrumental.
Mr. Wittman. Thanks, General. I want to jump in to
something else real quick with you and General Smith.
As we know, the whole issue of optionally manned systems,
unmanned systems, ROGUE [Remotely Operated Ground Unit for
Expeditionary] Fires, or, as my grandson would call it,
``rogoo'' fires, the whole effort is, how do we take base
technology, the technology that control things like the
operations of the systems, the controls of the systems, all
those things are common across those different platforms? What
are each of your service branches doing to look at where we can
learn from common technologies that are either developed on the
private side or that have been developed by another service
branch to use those as we spin up these unmanned or optionally
manned systems quickly?
General Murray. And quickly so my counterpart in the Marine
Corps has time, sir. So there is an autonomy kernel [Remote
Technology Kernel] that we developed at the Ground Vehicles
Systems Support Center in Warren, Michigan, that is the same
technology, the same algorithms that we are using in our
leader/follower technology. So, one, seven or eight trucks
followed by--and it is government IP [intellectual property],
government developed, and I will let General Smith take over
because it is also the same technology they are using in one of
their programs.
General Smith. Thank you, General Murray. Congressman, that
is exactly correct. The same leader/follower technology that is
in use by the ROGUE Fires vehicle, it is the industry standard,
if you will. We have a naval unmanned campaign framework signed
by the SECNAV [Secretary of the Navy], led by Mr. Stefany and
General Kilby and myself, to move forward collectively/jointly
on making sure that the technologies that do exist are used by
all. I would note, sir, that, for example, Google cars have
hundreds of thousands of miles on them. We are a long way from
that. And with that steady R&D [research and development]
funding, we will gain the miles and the hours on both surface-
borne vessels and on ground vehicles, but the challenges we
face in that austere environment where it is not a puddle, it
is a 15-foot-deep hole built by a bomb crater, that technology
is not yet there, sir, and only a kind of a steady R&D funding
will allow us to get Google car, if you will, to a tactical
level for that young soldier, young Marine to be able to
operate a vehicle in really horrible austere conditions that,
as you know, sir, will come to us when war is visited upon us.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. You have got it.
Ms. Sherrill, are you still on?
And I think we are up to Mr. Jackson. You can wrap it up.
Dr. Jackson. I have got all my questions answered. I
appreciate it, though. Thank you.
Mr. Norcross. Terrific. I want to take an opportunity to
thank the witnesses for their service and certainly their
testimony today, but I would like to offer up for any closing
remarks you might have.
Mr. Bush, let's start with you.
Mr. Bush. No closing remarks, sir. Just thank you to the
members for the time and for considering the Army's requests,
and I stand ready to meet with members at any time if they have
questions and work through anything they need so they have all
the information we had when making our judgments.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
General Murray.
General Murray. Nothing more to add, sir, other than thank
you for your time today.
Mr. Norcross. Terrific.
And so, Mr. Stefany.
Mr. Stefany. Besides thanking you for your time, I did want
to follow up a little bit on the industrial base part and the
mention of how they performed in COVID and how authorities like
you have given us to improve cash flow and make [inaudible] in
producing for our sailors and Marines during this past year
[inaudible] on the production front.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
General Smith.
General Smith. Mr. Chairman, not that you need it, but I
honestly and personally do appreciate the courtesy that always
comes with this particular subcommittee. It is always a
privilege to speak to you, and I really do appreciate the
courtesy that comes from you, sir, from Ranking Member
Hartzler, and your members. It is kind of nice to have. Thank
you, sir.
Mr. Norcross. You got it. Vicky, do you have anything?
Mrs. Hartzler. No. Just appreciate everybody's service and
the information we received. Look forward to keep working with
everybody.
Mr. Norcross. Then we are adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:41 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 7, 2021

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 7, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 7, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SHERRILL

Mr. Bush and General Murray. First, the Army is requesting no funds
for anti-personnel land mines in the Fiscal Year 2022 President's
Budget Request. Upon additional research, we found there were no
documented employments of anti-personnel mines in Iraq during Operation
Iraqi Freedom or subsequent Iraqi campaigns. However, the U.S. State
Department reported the operational employment of a single anti-
personnel munition in Afghanistan in 2002 by U.S. military forces.
[See page 23.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 7, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER

Mr. Turner. The Army identified an Unfunded Requirement of $149.5M
for PIM that when coupled with the FY22 PBR would procure up to 36 sets
of equipment but that is still only half of the Full Rate Production
(FRP) volume specified in the DOD approved Acquisition Program Baseline
(APB) of 60 sets per year. This lower volume will still cause
significant unit cost growth and workforce downsizing.
What is the impact on fielding to soldiers and the industrial base
by moving away from the current volumes of 44-48 sets per year?
What analysis did the Army use to determine the UFR funding amount?
Mr. Bush and General Murray. A Field Artillery Battalion consists
of 18 Paladin Integrated Management (PIM) vehicle sets. Due to contract
and production lead times, Fiscal Year 2022 (FY22) funding supports
unit fieldings in FY25. The reduction in FY22 funding to 25 sets would
not impact the number of units fielded in FY25. However, if production
is sustained at a lower rate than 48 per year beyond FY22, unit
fieldings could be impacted in FY26 and beyond. We do not anticipate an
impact to the industrial base. Regarding the amount of funding included
in the Army Chief of Staff's Unfunded Requirements (UFR) list, the
Army's analysis accounts for the total vehicle manufacturing funding,
which includes the Government Furnished Equipment portion ($326.3
million (M)) of the base funding ($446.4M). When combined with the UFR
($149.5M) intended for vehicle manufacturing, the program receives
approximately 17 percent more buying power. This reduces the
manufacturing unit cost from $13.1M to $11.2M. At the $11.2M unit cost,
the Army can afford 18 additional sets (increases total from 25 sets to
43 sets) with the UFR funds allocated for manufacturing.
Mr. Turner. The Army Program Manager in charge of the Extended
Range Cannon Artillery Program recently briefed during an on-line
Conference. He identified a 2-part acquisition strategy for the
program. This included a competition to build and assemble kits for
ERCA and a separate competition to integrate those kits onto a M109A7
Paladin Integrated Management (PIM) chassis.
Does this dual competition create a delay in moving the program
from the initial operational test in FY23 to an operational/deployable
unit by FY25 as previously briefed to this Committee?
I would like a committee briefing on the acquisition strategy.
Mr. Bush and General Murray. The Extended Range Cannon (ERCA) is a
Middle Tier of Acquisition (MTA) Rapid Prototyping (RP) program that is
on schedule to issue 18 prototypes at the end of Fiscal Year 2023
(FY23) for a one-year operational assessment throughout FY24. There is
no delay; the ERCA program is on schedule to transition from MTA Rapid
Prototyping into a Program of Record. The formal Initial Operational
Test and Evaluation for the ERCA Program of Record remains unchanged,
scheduled for FY25. The Army is available to brief the acquisition
strategy at your convenience.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. DESJARLAIS
Dr. DesJarlais. In developing the JLTV recompete strategy did you
consider any alternative strategies besides the ``build to print''
winner take-all construct; such as pursuing a second source or split
buy approach or requiring digital designs and digital engineering
combined with the use of advanced manufacturing as part of the
competition's evaluation criteria, and if not, why not? In your opinion
how important will technology insertions and future capability growth
be for JLTV in the future given evolving threat environments?
Mr. Bush. Yes. The Army conducted market research and considered
multiple strategies that focused on how much industry would be asked to
invest, the capabilities, risk and the life cycle cost implications of
these decisions. The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV) acquisition
strategy was selected to leverage an already capable platform; how to
manage Government rights to the Technical Data Package; and through
focused design upgrades and competition, bring new capabilities to the
Soldiers and Marines. The JLTV follow-on contract is based upon a new
A2 variant of the family of vehicles, which includes several technology
insertions in the areas of powertrain, electrical architecture, noise
reduction, and stowage improvements. The pending competition also
includes significant incentives for competitors to propose additional
technology enhancements in the areas of fuel efficiency, corrosion,
upgraded vehicle architecture, and driver assist capabilities, while
keeping the cost of the JLTV affordable. These technology advances on a
proven system, that currently has growth and modularity capability in
weight, power and available kits, make the JLTV the optimal platform
for the light tactical vehicle mission in a Multi-Domain Operational
environment.
Dr. DesJarlais. I'm concerned that the Army's current approach for
the JLTV recompete without any changes to the current draft request for
proposals you may only get one bid that being from the incumbent. If
this proves to be the case would the Army go forward in awarding the
contract, or would this require a restructure of the JLTV recompete
strategy?
Mr. Bush. The Army believes that it has a strategy that has
welcomed and encouraged competition throughout the Request for Proposal
(RFP) development process. Potential offerors have been provided JLTV
lease vehicles and multiple drafts of the RFP to ensure a thorough
understanding of the design of the vehicle and the structure of the
competition. These offerors have provided feedback to the process over
the last 18 months and have indicated their intent to propose. If the
Army only receives one proposal, we will move forward reviewing that
proposal in accordance with the criteria in sections L&M of the RFP,
ensuring the reasonabilty of the proposal and an award based on the
merits of that proposal.
Dr. DesJarlais. Could you update the subcommittee on the status of
the electric light reconnaissance vehicle (eLRV) prototyping effort. Is
the program fully funded in the FY22 budget request, if not, why not?
Mr. Bush and General Murray. The prototyping effort for the
electric light reconnaissance vehicle (eLRV) continues to move forward.
Necessary requirements documents were not finalized and approved in
time to be incorporated into the President's Fiscal Year 2022 budget
request, so the Chief of Staff, Army, included it in his FY22 unfunded
requirements list. If FY22 funding becomes available, the program is
postured to move out smartly. In the absence of additional funding, the
program will continue to compete within the Department for funding
Dr. DesJarlais. How committed is the Army and Marine Corps in
pursuing electrification of it's combat and tactical vehicle fleets,
and going beyond establishing new start vehicle efforts, are there any
efforts underway to begin modifying current enduring vehicle platforms?
Mr. Bush. See General Murray response.
Dr. DesJarlais. I'm aware of the fact the ISV original equipment
manufacturer has developed an all-electric military concept
demonstrator vehicle based on the ISV platform in just 12 weeks. What
are your thoughts on the potential or possibility to grow the ISV into
a family of vehicles with different configurations, to include electric
powertrains?
Mr. Bush. The ISV was developed to motorize the Infantry Brigade
Combat Teams (IBCTs) under strict Key Performance Parameters (KPPs) and
Key System Attributes (KSAs) to allow for maximum transportability by
rotary aircraft and mobility across the operational mission profile.
The growth of the ISV into other mission roles and configurations would
require identifying the capability gaps and formalizing requirements.
The speed of GM Defense to integrate a commercially available Electric
Powertrain architecture in the ISV continues to support the commercial
readiness to meet validated requirements like the Electric Light
Reconnaissance Vehicle, or ``eLRV.''
Dr. DesJarlais. How committed is the Army and Marine Corps in
pursuing electrification of it's combat and tactical vehicle fleets,
and going beyond establishing new start vehicle efforts, are there any
efforts underway to begin modifying current enduring vehicle platforms?
General Murray. The Army is committed to pursuing electrification
of current and future platforms where it is technologically feasible,
operationally sound, and fiscally affordable. Two emerging capabilities
are serving as our foundation for learning where vehicle
electrification is most appropriate across our fleets.

Tactical and Combat Vehicle-Electrification (TaCV-E).
Requirements documents are still in development, but we expect the
TaCV-E to inform a pathway for electrification, as well as integration
of artificial intelligence and machine learning onto the light and
medium tactical wheeled vehicle (TWV) fleets by 2035 and the heavy TWV
fleet and combat vehicles in the 2036-2050 timeframe.

Electric Light Reconnaissance Vehicle (eLRV). We expect
the eLRV to facilitate rapid prototyping of a non-developmental light
tactical vehicle, leveraging industry's efforts and investments. The
eLRV will be either hybrid or fully electric, seat six Soldiers, and
operate across the mission profile of a mounted scout squad within the
Cavalry Squadron of an Infantry Brigade Combat Team. Market surveys for
eLRV were released to industry in both November 2020 and April of 2021,
culminating in a vehicle electrification demonstration and Soldier
touch point at Fort Benning, Georgia, on 10-14 May 2021, with
participation of more than six vendors and a pathway to fielding in
FY26/27.

Both the TaCV-E and eLRV programs have joint interest
within DOD. The Army is also developing the requirements documents for
a Common Tactical Truck (CTT) to rapidly prototype a heavy tactical
vehicle that integrates commercial industry's best practices and
leverages advanced technologies related to electrification, safety, and
autonomy.
Army science and technology (S&T) organizations are developing
technologies to enable the electrification of the ground vehicle fleet,
with emphasis on improved energy supply and storage, energy efficient
technologies, power management, and improved power transmission and
distribution. Current Army S&T programs are investing in power dense
technologies, efficient power architecture and alternative power
sources (including Advanced Lithium-ion Batteries, Fuel Cells, Diesel
Electric Power Generators, Integrated Starter Generators, and Wide-
Bandgap Power Electronics), more efficient power and thermal
management, anti-idle capabilities, and lighter-weight energyefficient
components. Programs that support these efforts include Platform
Electrification for Mobility (PEM), Enhanced E-Vetronics Technology,
Advanced Mobility Experimental Prototype (AMEP), and Basic Research.
Recent achievements include the demonstration of a Tactical Vehicle
Electrification Kit that included high voltage power electronics,
advanced Lithium-ion batteries, and an anti-idle capability that will
transfer to the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV) program, and the
demonstration of a combat vehicle powertrain that includes an advanced
combat engine, integrated starter-generator, high-speed transmission,
and advanced batteries for improved mobility, power, and efficiency.
The Army Rapid Capabilities and Critical Technologies Office
(RCCTO) is developing a hybrid diesel/electric prototype for the
Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle. Designed to be a surrogate for other
tactical vehicles, its goals are to improve fuel efficiency and
operational endurance, reduce the thermal and acoustic signature, and
provide additional onboard power. The first two prototypes will be
delivered in 3QFY22. RCCTO has also initiated development of hybrid
electric prototypes of both the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled
Vehicle (HMMWV) and JLTV.
To unify future investments, the Army is developing an overarching
Army Ground Vehicle Alternative Energy Strategy that will largely focus
on the pursuit of vehicle electrification and demand reduction (fuel/
maintenance) to be published in 3QFY22
Dr. DesJarlais. I'm aware of the fact the ISV original equipment
manufacturer has developed an all-electric military concept
demonstrator vehicle based on the ISV platform in just 12 weeks. What
are your thoughts on the potential or possibility to grow the ISV into
a family of vehicles with different configurations, to include electric
powertrains?
General Murray. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Dr. DesJarlais. How committed is the Army and Marine Corps in
pursuing electrification of it's combat and tactical vehicle fleets,
and going beyond establishing new start vehicle efforts, are there any
efforts underway to begin modifying current enduring vehicle platforms?
Mr. Stefany. The Marine Corps is actively studying and evaluating
electrification of its combat and tactical vehicle fleets to improve
energy performance and increase the lethality and effectiveness of its
combat formations.
As battery technology matures and becomes increasing energy dense,
new options will become available for ground combat and tactical
vehicles. An electric JLTV is not currently supportable as the required
battery load is too heavy and too large for the JLTV's payload and
cargo capacity. Recent studies indicate that a series hybrid fleet
would perform significantly better than the internal combustion engine
baseline and is a logical intermediate step to full electrification for
combat and tactical vehicle systems that have to negotiate battlefield
terrain and ford up to sixty inches of salt water.
The Marine Corps is working closely with the U.S. Army and
supporting their research. A Marine Corps Medium Tactical Vehicle
Replacement (MTVR) will be part of a Ground Vehicle Support Center
science and technology electrification project.
Additionally, the Marine Corps is in coordination with the Office
of Naval Research to develop an MTVR electrification research project
conducted in conjunction with industry.
Dr. DesJarlais. How does the JLTV factor into the Commandant's
redesign effort in becoming more expeditionary?
General Smith. The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV) is the
Marine Corps' replacement for the legacy High Mobility Multi-Wheeled
Vehicle (HMMWV) and an integral component of its ground combat and
tactical vehicle portfolio. The JLTV provides scalable protection, high
mobility, the capability to ford up to sixty inches of water, and
increased networked capacity on a versatile, reliable, and efficient
platform. In addition to utility and general purpose functions, the
JLTV is the base platform and prime mover for forty other capabilities
ranging from heavy weapons and precision fires to communication systems
and air defense. By building off of the JLTV platform, the Marine Corps
is able to leverage commonality and reduce supply chain and sustainment
challenges.
The JLTV was designed from inception to meet Marine Corps
expeditionary mission profile requirements and be transportable by
naval and organic connectors. It can be internally transported by the
KC-130J, externally lifted by the CH-53K, and fits on Navy amphibious
ships and connectors. Additionally, the Marine Corps is using the JLTV
chassis as the basis for the Remotely Operated Ground Unit for
Expeditionary Fires (ROGUE-Fires), which is an unmanned system to
transport and launch ground based anti-ship missiles.
The Marine Corps will have fielded approximately 2,100 vehicles by
the end of Fiscal Year 2021. The program is on budget and on schedule,
and the Marine Corps is requesting funds to procure 636 vehicles in
Fiscal Year 2022.
Dr. DesJarlais. How committed is the Army and Marine Corps in
pursuing electrification of it's combat and tactical vehicle fleets,
and going beyond establishing new start vehicle efforts, are there any
efforts underway to begin modifying current enduring vehicle platforms?
General Smith. The Marine Corps is actively studying and evaluating
electrification of its combat and tactical vehicle fleets to improve
energy performance and increase the lethality and effectiveness of its
combat formations.
As battery technology matures and becomes increasing energy dense,
new options will become available for ground combat and tactical
vehicles. An electric JLTV is not currently supportable as the required
battery load is too heavy and too large for the JLTV's payload and
cargo capacity. Recent studies indicate that a series hybrid fleet
would perform significantly better than the internal combustion engine
baseline and is a logical intermediate step to full electrification for
combat and tactical vehicle systems that have to negotiate battlefield
terrain and ford up to sixty inches of salt water.
The Marine Corps is working closely with the U.S. Army and
supporting their research. A Marine Corps Medium Tactical Vehicle
Replacement (MTVR) will be part of a Ground Vehicle Support Center
science and technology electrification project.
Additionally, the Marine Corps is in coordination with the Office
of Naval Research to develop an MTVR electrification research project
conducted in conjunction with industry.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. In regards to the acquisition strategy for the Joint
Light Tactical Vehicle, how is the Army ensuring competition in this
phase of the selection process? How will the Army maintain technology
insertions and future capability growth within the build-to-print
strategy?
Mr. Bush. Competition has been a bedrock of the JLTV program since
its inception. The JLTV Follow-On Contract strategy has been designed
with that foundational element in mind. The program conducted market
research, engaged directly with potential offerors, and provided lease
JLTV vehicles as a means to ensure a fair and balanced competition. The
JLTV Follow-On Contract is based upon a new A2 variant of the family of
vehicles, which includes several technology insertions in the areas of
powertrain, electrical architecture, noise reduction, and stowage
improvements. The pending competition also includes significant
incentives for competitors to propose additional technology
enhancements in the areas of fuel efficiency, corrosion, upgrade the
vehicle architecture, and driver assist capabilities, while keeping the
cost of the JLTV affordable.
Mr. Brown. What is the status of the electric light reconnaissance
vehicle (eLRV) prototyping effort and what are the planned funding
levels, both in FY2022 and throughout the typical FYDP timeline? Is
this technology under consideration for application to other tactical
vehicle platforms?
Mr. Bush. The eLRV requirement was not developed and approved in
time to be included in the President's FY22 budget request. However, in
anticipation of funding, the Army has conducted several efforts to
inform the requirement and the program. The Army has issued two market
surveys and supported an Industry Day at Fort Benning, Georgia, that
included ten vendors, and resulting in four follow-on, in-person
demonstrations due to address proprietary concerns. The current draft
acquisition strategy projects costs of about $6M in year one, $10M in
year two, and $10M in year three. The eLRV has the potential to serve
as the foundation of the Army's development of electric platforms,
battlefield power recharge, and development of green technologies. The
eLRV campaign of learning will enable the Army to scale technologies
developed under the program, as well as inform other Army and DOD
efforts
Mr. Brown. The Army and contractor have highlighted significant
investments made for the Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle (AMPV) to
include the first ever use of robotic welding on combat vehicles. What
is the planned rate for Full Rate Production? What is the planned
program of record through FY2026? Will the program plan meet the
recapitalization and modernization requirements of the force?
Mr. Bush. The AMPV Full-Rate Production decision is scheduled for
1st Quarter, Fiscal Year 2023 (FY23) to support an Army Authorized
Objective of 2,897 vehicles, and the Army anticipates synchronizing
production and fielding consistent with other Armored Brigade Combat
Team (ABCT) combat vehicle platforms starting in FY23. The AMPV program
meets the Army's modernization requirements by replacing the M113
Family of Vehicles in ABCTs.
Mr. Brown. In regards to the acquisition strategy for the Joint
Light Tactical Vehicle, how do the current requirements map to the
Commandants redesign effort to become more expeditionary?
General Smith. The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV) is the
Marine Corps' replacement for the legacy High Mobility Multi-Wheeled
Vehicle (HMMWV) and an integral component of its ground combat and
tactical vehicle portfolio. The JLTV provides scalable protection, high
mobility, the capability to ford up to sixty inches of water, and
increased networked capacity on a versatile, reliable, and efficient
platform. In addition to utility and general purpose functions, the
JLTV is the base platform and prime mover for forty other capabilities
ranging from heavy weapons and precision fires to communication systems
and air defense. By building off of the JLTV platform, the Marine Corps
is able to leverage commonality and reduce supply chain and sustainment
challenges.
The JLTV was designed from inception to meet Marine Corps
expeditionary mission profile requirements and be transportable by
naval and organic connectors. It can be internally transported by the
KC-130J, externally lifted by the CH-53K, and fits on Navy amphibious
ships and connectors. Additionally, the Marine Corps is using the JLTV
chassis as the basis for the Remotely Operated Ground Unit for
Expeditionary Fires (ROGUE-Fires), which is an unmanned system to
transport and launch ground based anti-ship missiles.
The Marine Corps will have fielded approximately 2,100 vehicles by
the end of Fiscal Year 2021. The program is on budget and on schedule,
and the Marine Corps is requesting funds to procure 636 vehicles in
Fiscal Year 2022.
